State Of Lunacy In Ireland
============================

Art. YIL?
The Eighth Report of the " District, Criminal, and Private
Lunatic Asylums in Ireland" for 1857, presented by the Com-
missioners to the Houses of Parliament, has been forwarded to
us through the politeness of Dr. Nugent, who, owing to the
illness of his colleague, Dr. White, has almost the sole responsi-
bility of this Report. It is most ably and comprehensively con-
structed, and contains matter of the deepest interest, not only
in relation to the state of lunacy and lunatics in Ireland; but as
suggestive of many valuable considerations in reference to the
relations which unsoundness of mind bears to the administration
of justice in general; as also many other topics bearing directly
upon the great social questions which are now attracting much
attention, chiefly as to criminal responsibility?education, secular
and religious?domestic life, &c. A more favourable contrast
can scarcely be imagined, than is presented between the aspect
of lunacy in general, as treated of in this Report, and that which
has recently excited so much and so indignant comment as exist-
ing in a sister country. We purpose to condense the substance of
this document, so as to give a full view of the important matters
treated upon.
In March, 1855, there were in Ireland of lunatics, idiots, and
epileptics, ] 3,493, of whom 6263 were under official supervision
in asylums, public or private, gaols and poor-houses. In March,
1857, the number was 14,141 altogether; of whom 6520 only
were located in public or private institutions. In both cases,
above half the entire number were at large, and are described
by Dr. Nugent as "being possessed of means of their own, sup-?
ported by their friends, or wandering from place to place, depend-
ing for a precarious subsistence on the charity of individuals/'
This seems to be a considerable proportion of the insane to
be at large. In examining into the causes, it would appear that
NO. VIII.?NEW SERIES. 3 B
^24 STATE OF LUNACY IN IRELAND.
notwithstanding the very large outlay which has been expended
in the erection of district asylums in the various counties, the-
accommodation is still very far below the requirements; and as
will shortly appear, the number confined in private establish-
ments bears an extremely small proportion to the total. Alto-
gether, upwards of 600,0001. has been expended for these pur-
poses, " including land, buildings, furniture, and fittingsyet
there is accommodation in these buildings for only 4337 persons.
In March, 1857, there were 3856 patients in these establish-
ments, leaving only 481 beds unoccupied throughout the country;
not a large margin for contingencies, it must be acknow-
ledged. Some of the largest houses, as that at Richmond, had
only three or four vacant; by no means sufficient for the con-
stantly expected additions, and the uncertain discharges.
Looking at the entire numbers of lunatics, &c., quoted by Dr.
Nugent, as at present existing in Ireland, we are somewhat sur-
prised at the low amount. In England and France the average
number of persons of unsound mind, including epileptics, &c., is
about 2 in every 1000.* If we calculate' upon the same pro-
portion for Ireland, the number of lunatics in 1855 would only
account for a population of 6,746,500?certainly below the real
number. Whether lunacy be actually less in Ireland than in our
own country, or whether there may not be some unexplained
deficiency in the returns, we are not prepared to say. As to the
accuracy of the information, Dr. Nugent observes, speaking of
the lunatics that are not under official surveillance:?
" Of these latter we have again obtained very valuable returns-
through the constabulary, and from the extensive distribution of that
efficient force throughout the country, combined with the careful
manner in which the returns have been prepared, we think the infor-
mation may be relied upon as accurate, the more so as we improved on
the forms previously used, having now got the name, age, address, and
religion, of every individual in Ireland, whether lunatic, idiot, or simply
epileptic."
The number of epileptics is 2171, concerning whom the Report
observes?" We do not mean to say that supervision is generally
required, for save during the temporary attacks of a paroxysm,
they are for the most part perfectly competent to take care
of themselves."
With regard to those under treatment during the two years
embraced in this Report, the recoveries were 17 per cent., and
the relieved 11^ per cent.
"The mortality, 9 per cent., is just one below that of the preceding
biennial period: and when the proportion of unpromising cases brought
* On the authority of MM. Ltlut and Tardieu.
STATE OF LUNACY IN IRELAND. 725
from prisons is taken into account, these facts speak most favourably
of.the successful issue of Irish asylums. No epidemic of any kind has
visited them since June, 1853, when we had occasion to refer to an
increased number of deaths at Belfast and elsewhere from cholera.
The mortality is now, for the most part, referable to affections of the
brain and nervous system, or to diseases associated with organic de-
bility, but particularly of the lungs, and ending in consumption. Two
cases were suicidal; the first occurred at Belfast, in 1856, a male
patient accomplishing his object by suspending himself from the ven-
tilator in one of the single sleeping rooms. The second was at the Rich-
mond, where a patient strangled himself at night with a sheet taken
from his bed, which he tore up for the purpose. The coroner was
called in on both cases, and it appeared on inquiry that neither of the
lunatics had ever evinced dangerous tendencies, nor had the physicians
or immediate attendants any suspicion that they meditated self-
destruction. These, with another instance in which an old man was
suffocated whilst eating, were the only casualties of a fatal nature
which occurred during the period embraced in this Report."
As to the treatment generally adopted in the district asylums,
it does not appear that there is any special course adopted,
except in recent cases, or when marked symptoms require it
in those of older standing. "Air, regimen, exercise, with the
removal of causes leading to excitement, being more favourably
regarded as tending to a beneficial result, in the alleviation of a
malady, as yet but imperfectly understood/'
On the subject of mechanical restraint, queries were addressed
to the managers of the district asylums, and the result is as
follows:?
" With reference to physical coercion, or mechanical restraint, in the
majority of asylums it is employed in a mitigated form, in the others
it is seldom or never had recourse to. On this mooted subject we do
not interfere, unless, as has occasionally happened on inspection, we
considered that the appliances might be partially if not altogether
discontinued. The question is one more properly for the judgment of
the local medical superintendents, and as we believe they are alike
influenced by the most humane motives and a desire to do what is
best for the safety of their patients, we would deem it unadvisable on
our part to lay down any fixed rule on a system which is at issue be-
tween enlightened practitioners, and which, further, there is no
authority to enforce. In our opinion, however, one most urgent and
almost insurmountable objection exists to mechanical restraint, and
which arises from the contingency of its being surreptitiously employed
by attendants, to avoid trouble, unless due precautions are taken by
the resident physician or manager."
The remarks upon religious ministrations and education appear
to us of sufficient importance to quote at length:?
" With reference to religious ministrations?a subject which, unfor-
tunately, has given rise, within the last three or four years, to a marked
3 B 2
726 STATE OF LUNACY IN IRELAND.
difference of opinion between the executive and the governors of a
northern asylum, the majority of whom, actuated, no doubt, by the
sincerest motives, successfully opposed the admission of officially ap-
pointed chaplains?our sentiments, far from undergoing any change,
have been strengthened by daily experience. We have specially
directed ourselves to the points at issue, personally attending in
asylums, at the respective hours of public worship, questioning patients
themselves, inquiring both of officers and attendants, and noting the
results at the moment; and we cannot arrive at any other conclusion,
than that the regular visitations of chaplains, and the due performance
of divine worship, should not be denied to the inmates of public insti-
tutions for the insane; for apart from other and higher considerations,
the soothing influence of religion, as tending to the establishment of a
self-control, however temporary in its nature, cannot but be valuable
in a curative point of view; and it should not be forgotten that, though
in one individual the reasoning powers are normally affected, the senti-
ments may remain unchanged, whilst in another, the moral feelings
may be deranged, at the same time that the intellectual faculties are
comparatively unimpaired?both cases being alike susceptible of the
benefits of religion.
"We have made an analysis of the state of education of the insane
in poorhouses and asylums. In the former, it appears there are 323
more or less educated, and 1476 illiterate ; in the latter, the numbers
are 2353 with some degree of education, against 1505 totally ignorant.
The proportion of literate to illiterate in the general population of
this country is fifty-three per cent. If we restrict the comparison to
those in asylums, omitting the inmates in poorhouses, of whom a large
majority are idiots, it would appear that education is in a much higher
ratio among lunatics than in the community at large?a circumstance
indicative of the fact that insanity, even among the humbler classes,
is connected with intellectual development. At the Richmond, a school
was established about six years ago, principally for females of weak
mind, and though not likely to be followed by any permanent result,
has at least the merit of a benevolent intention, and tends to vary the
daily occupations. We would therefore wish to see the example of the
Richmond governors adopted in other establishments, and also a more
liberal supply of some cheap periodicals afforded."
With reference to the opinion here expressed, that insanity is
connected with intellectual development, it may be well to
examine with some care into the statistics, though this is not the
place to enter into the question fully. Out of 3856 patients
under treatment in the district asylums in March, 1857, 236 are
reported as " well educated;" 516 can read and write " well;"
821 can read and write "indifferently;" 778 can read only;
]505 cannot read. It may be urged and granted that intel-
lectual development is not always in strict proportion with
education; but if we judge from these figures alone, they would
scarcely appear to support very strongly the view here taken.
STATE OF LUNACY IN IRELAND. 727
On the causes of insanity, Dr. Nugent tlius writes:?
" Hereditary predisposition and intemperance would seem, to be the
two great feeders, if the term may be used, to lunatic asylums. In an
aggregate of 3856 individuals, on the 31st March, we find of the 2146,
where causes are assigned, no less than 997 under these denominations,
506 of the former, 491 of the latter, or forty-six per cent. As regards
the cases where we had no definite information?and these are consti-
tuted, for the most part, of transferences from gaols?it is legitimate
to conclude that the same proportion as in the assignable exists.
Hence of the whole population in asylums, 1790 come within the two
categories. This fact alone, pregnant of serious considerations, speaks
for itself, and needs no comment on our part.
" Under the head of exciting causes to insanity, religion is enume-
rated ; but considering the great influence which it exercises over the
conduct of mankind, not alone for good, but unfortunately too, from a
misconception of its true spirit, imbuing whole communities occasion-
ally with a disposition to commit the wildest acts from the most
unreasonable motives, it does not seem to be so powerful an agent in
producing individual mental derangement as might be at first supposed.
Lunatics will, no doubt, readily adopt, and as quickly abandon, extra-
vagant ideas on religious as on other subjects, whilst the really
exciting causes will be found totally unconnected with them. "VVe find
among clergymen and the members of pious associations more perhaps
than an average per centage of lunacy; but their delusions rarely refer
to their previous avocations, an observation alike pertinent to the
insane members of other professions. Love, from misplaced affections
and disappointed hopes, is a much more fertile source of the disease,
particularly among the female sex, who, from their habits and sensi-
bilities, are more susceptible than men of those influences recognised
under the designation of moral."
On the increase of insanity, Dr. Nugent makes allowance for
the increased facilities for detection and enumeration as aug-
menting the annual returns; but at the same time?
"The important truth must not be overlooked, that from each
individual case of lunacy, germs of disease, to be developed at a future
period, possibly in a third or fourth generation, may be produced; for
such is our organization, that the mind no less than the body partakes
of inherent and hereditary peculiarities, which, as your Excellency is
aware, rendering nations at large distinguishable by corporeal prowess,
valour, progression in the arts, &c., or the reverse, first find their way
into the smaller circles of which those nations are composed.
" ' Quia multa modis primordia multis
Mista suo celant in corpore ssepe parentes
Quae patribus patres tradunt a stirpe profecta.' "
The Commissioners consider that on the whole the district
asylums of Ireland have been successful, both in a curative and
protective point of view; that they are well managed, and that
the domestic arrangements are generally good, though perhaps
728 STATE OF LUNACY IN IRELAND.
inferior to many of the English, still more to some of the French
asylums.
" Generally speaking, a deficiency of furniture, and with it a certain
air of discomfort, is noticeable in Irish institutions for the insane, a '
want which Ave trust, with the advancing prosperity of the country,
will be gradually obviated; yet, when your Excellency, so long and
thoroughly cognizant of the social condition of the population, recals
to mind what on your frequent visits to District Asylums you could
not fail to remark, and reflects that a large proportion of their inmates
whilst possessed of reason, had been strangers to the personal comforts
of life, and, we regret to add, in many instances, from their abject state
of destitution, to the decencies of civilization, but still protected by an
innate sense of virtue and decorum?huddled together in those miser-
able abodes which present themselves in quick succession along our
public thoroughfares, on the .edge of bogs and sides of mountains?
without adequate food or raiment?whole families frequently occupants
of a single apartment, perhaps of a common bed?that the same indi-
viduals placed in asylums, labouring under madness in all its varied
forms, are educated for the first time to habits of order and cleanliness,
have servants at all hours to minister to their personal wants?their
dress and bedding duly attended to, meals served regularly with a
liberal allowance of animal food, a luxury before almost untasted by
them?we may, as tending to social advancement no less than for
curative objects, so far regard our public establishments for the insane
with unmixed satisfaction."
The Commissioners find much fault with the system of com-
mitting " dangerous lunatics" to gaols ; the law in Ireland being
essentially different from that in our own country. The magis-
trates are empowered to imprison persons "discovered under
circumstances denoting a derangement of mind, and a purpose
of committing an indictable offence;" and from prison they may
be transferred to the district hmatic asylum by a warrant of the
Lord Lieutenant The number so committed during the last two
years amounted to 1296.
The objections are, that gaols become thereby only " so many
channels of transmission to lunatic asylums, whereby a serious
derangement " of prison discipline and considerable additional
expense to the public are produced." The Commissioners have
before commented upon this; but the abuse seems to have in-
creased. It operates unfavourably in another respect, that in
this manner families get rid of their troublesome insane members
in a summary manner. They scarcely think it worth while to
apply for an admission to the asylum in the ordinary manner,
but they " depose to the existence of violent tendencies, the
result too often of premeditated irritation." Under the guard
* 1 Vict. cap. 27.
STATE OF LUNACY IN IRELAND. 729
of the police, the unfortunate individual is conveyed away to the
?county prison, and " with this act the curtain drops between the
parties."
" The usual form of admission into a District Asylum requires an
attestation as to the residence, birth-place, and social state of the
person desired to be admitted ; also an engagement on the part of some
responsible party to take back the patient when called upon to do so.
A committal obviates all this responsibility, and we have frequently
known of applicants who were refused admission by the local board
on sufficient grounds?such as not being natives of, or in any way
connected with the district?having been sent to gaol as dangerously
insane, and in this manner ultimately forced on the institution. Thus,
while admitting that the Act was in some measure necessary, we
cannot shut our eyes to the many and glaring abuses which have arisen
from it.
" Of the conduct of the class in question, we find that the great
majority, far from exhibiting any of the dangerous tendencies attri-
buted to them, are tranquil and amenable from the very moment they
are placed in confinement; and, generally speaking, this character
attaches to them afterwards when transferred to asylums?the so-called
' dangerous,' however troublesome, evincing as little propensity to
violence as ordinary lunatics."
Very few instances appear to have occurred of anything
approaching to cruelty in the treatment of those thus committed;
and Dr. Nugent even considers that as to recovery, there are
elements of success met with in gaols, which are not found to the
same extent in the asylums; such as more frequent association
with the sane, and the fact that if thus committed, it is generally
in the earlier stages, and therefore the affection is more amenable
to treatment.
The notice of the Central Criminal Asylum at Dundrum is
especially interesting from the nature of its cases, and from the
reflections on the subject of criminal responsibility which it
suggests. The number of criminal lunatics remain exactly the
same as at the last report?82 males and 44< females. In the
two years 26 have been discharged or died. Of these?
14 cured?7 liberated by order of the Lord Lieutenant.
3 sent back for trial.
3 sent back to gaol.
1 sent to a county gaol.
1 removed to a private asylum.
11 died.
With reference to insane convicts, the Report speaks as
follows:?
" The greatest, indeed the sole, difficulty to be dealt with at the
Central Asylum arises from the occasional residence in it of culprits
730 STATE OF LUNACY IN IEELAND.
who either feign insanity or whose claim to the designation of lunatic
is at best but doubtful. There are persons transferred from gaols
subsequent to conviction, and at whose trial the question of insanity
was never entertained. Some of these may be faithfully described as
naving set discipline at defiance. Indifferent alike to remonstrance
and to punishment?influenced, as it were, by a determination not to
yield till their object was attained?intractable in prison?their con-
duct uncertain and unaccountable?the authorities there report to the
Executive that they have no appliances for their treatment; that the
establishment is kept in turmoil and confusion by such characters ; and
submitting their removal to the Criminal Asylum, to which they are
accordingly drafted as vacancies occur.
" The air of Dundrum, the situation, remarkable for its cheerfulness
and salubrity?transition from close confinement, and the restraint and
regimen of a prison, to comparative freedom and a better diet, produce
in a short time a change in their demeanour; they still, however, con-
sider themselves entitled to be supported by Government; and that
being recognised as lunatics, they should not be required to work."
A considerable number of the committals to Dundrum appear
to the Commissioners to be of questionable propriety, as may be
observed in the following passages:?
" The question hence arises, are persons to be recognised as lunatics
by law, who, thoroughly cognizant of right and wrong, having come
mitted offences against public order, and whilst undergoing the
punishment consequent thereon, set authority and discipline at nought
by their insubordination and perversity of temper ? For if, after con-
viction, these traits of character protect from the penalties attached to
crime, they should, a fortiori, at trial, when duly established, procure
acquittal on the plea of mental incapacity, although the parties may
be competent to distinguish good from evil. The solution of this
point is a matter of great importance, not alone to the criminal code of
this country, but likewise to that of the sister kingdom
" During the last ten years we have had a tolerably large experience
in lunacy, feigned as well as real, and in aiding the prosecution of
certain capital cases to conviction, have, with local physicians, been
instrumental in checking it as a plea; to those cases we have cursorily
referred in previous Reports. The benevolence certainly?possibly, it
may be, the superior knowledge?of some would associate crime with
insanity; we do not, however coincide in the view, that a disregard of
moral perceptions can qualify deeds, the results as well as the respon-
sibilities of which are perfectly well understood beforehand by the
perpetrators of them; at the same time we cannot but consider it a
misfortune to the insane to be acquitted on the plea of lunacy, without
that special statement of every circumstance which might tend to
establish their irresponsibility, or mitigate the character of their
offence; in either case, acquittal often tells against the parties them-
selves, changing a definite to an indefinite period of confinement, a
fact most justly suggested as a precaution to counsel, we believe, by
the late Baron Alderson : but it is not with the legal so much as the
STATE OF LUNACY IN IRELAND. 731
social point we have to deal; for in the asylum at present there are
two or three inmates confined as lunatics, who never evinced a symp-
tom of insanity to our knowledge; one of whom particularly inveighs
against having been transformed into a lunatic in the dock by counsel,
to his great dismay and surprise at the moment, and to his continued
discontent for a period of over eight years, during which he has been
in confinement."
The Commissioners speak in very high terms of the judicious
and benevolent management of Dr. Corbet, the resident physi-
cian, under whose government, without mechanical restraint,
and without punishment of any kind, violence is almost unknown
and the transgressions are rarely more serious than the breaking
of a pane of glass. The patients are generally occupied, either
in their previous trades, in the farm, or in some other appro-
priate employment.
In the private asylums the number of patients is 462?252
males and 210 females: 91 have been discharged, 47 cured, and
44 " very much improved."
The sanitary condition of these private establishments is said
to be excellent, the mortality being only about 4 per cent, on the
entire number. This compared with the estimate given by the
authorities on the statistics of insanity would appear to be re-
markably low. Dr. Thurnam says that whilst a mortality of
more than 9 or 10 per cent, must be considered high, one less
than 7 per cent, is highly favourable.
Concerning mechanical restraint there is the same variation
as in the public institutions?in all cases, however, it is very
slight, in some it is entirely relinquished under all circumstances.
The Commissioners, after relating one or two cases illustrative of
the various views and requirements, add:?
" On this subject we may observe, that the total abolition of
mechanical restraint has been strongly advocated by some of the most
eminent physicians both in England and in this country; while, as we
have already stated, others of great practical experience, contend that
there are cases, such as the above, in which it cannot be wholly dis-
pensed with, without imminent risk to the patient, and possible injury
to the attendants. We cannot but think that, at least, the discussion
of the question, and the support given to the non-restraint system,
have been of incalculable advantage, inasmuch as it is now acknow-
ledged, that on most occasions where recourse would heretofore have
been had to mechanical appliances?perhaps in a severe form?they
can now, with safety, be entirely dispensed with; and that only in
extreme cases, where the physician must be left to the free exercise of
his own discretion, should restraint of any kind be resorted to."
The following remarks on Moral Insanity and on Hereditary
Transmission are interesting and instructive :?
732 STATE OF LUNACY IN IRELAND.
" As formerly, so within the past year, cases of moral madness,
originating in drink and dissipation, have been frequently admitted
into private licensed houses. Some of them, discharged after a few
months' confinement, were not since re-admitted, whilst others have
been brought back. These latter cases are most perplexing: even after
the lapse of a few days the salutary effects of control are visible in
their regard; once free, however, they become the mere children of
impulse, reckless of personal respect, regardless of the value of money,
and scorning even decency itself. Rational in conversation, and most
plausible in manner, within the asylum, their conduct is displayed out
of doors in a series of the most irrational actions. It is painful to keep
such parties confined, but still more so to let them run at large to
certain destruction. As an illustration, we may adduce the case of a
lady, at present in confinement in a private licensed house, who has
been admitted and discharged four or five times within our knowledge,
and who, when at liberty, and mistress of her allowance, spends it in
one continued orgie of drink and dissipation. We may here observe,
that a characteristic of this class is, at all times, an utter disregard of
truth, together with an unceasing desire to impose upon the credulity
of their hearers by the most specious pretensions to sense and wisdom,
and the most solemn promises that a future morality would efface the
errors of their past life.
" In the course of the year just elapsed, we have observed some
instances strongly illustrative of the hereditary transmission of lunacy,
and the extent to which it runs in families, so many as four relatives,
in the degree of parent and child, having been confined in an asylum
together?a fact fraught with serious consideration, and involving even
the prospective position of the unborn themselves. Two, and even
three members of the same immediate family labouring under symp-
toms of insanity is, to our knowledge, a matter of common occurrence.
At Swift's Hospital, for example, now in existence for more than a
century, we find, since its foundation, the same stock to have been
continuously represented by its insane members."
We give the general summary of the Commissioners, with their
recommendations, entire :?
" Summing up the results of our progressive experience from year to
year, on the state and bearing of lunacy in this country, and on the
organization of establishments generally for the insane, we would
recommend that the existing asylums, repaired fully where repairs are
needed, and supplied with the appurtenances of judiciously constructed
establishments, such as lavatories, baths, workshops, water-closets, &c.
&c., should be constituted hospitals for the treatment of mental dis-
ease in its early and more curable stages, as well as receptacles for
lunatics, no matter how hopeless their recovery, but who, for their
own or public safety, require a constant and careful supervision. For
these two legitimate objects, we think, with similar establishments in
Donegal and Wexford, and certain enlargements at Clonmel and
Armagh, the present asylums could be rendered amply sufficient for
the exigencies of the country. Most of the original institutions re-
STATE OF LUNACY IN IRELAND. 733
quire to "be partially remodelled, to secure a better classification of
patients; and as they are, with one or two exceptions, deficient in in-
firmaries, chapels, laundry accommodation, and in large halls or dining-
rooms, suitable provision under these heads should not be overlooked.
We would disembarrass poorhouses of all lunatic inmates, and existing
asylums of the idiotic and epileptic classes, who are at present supported
therein at a large expense and without any commensurate hope of
benefit, by allocating them in plain structures, but still well devised
for the object, where quiet and chronic patients might find a refuge,
placed under the same central control as the acute and dangerous just
referred to, with a scale of dietary and social comforts beyond what
are conceded to the ordinary paupers of a union, having ground for
exercise and employment, and their support provided for as in tho
primitive houses by quarterly advances from the Treasury. For this
object we do not thinlc that provincial depots would be successful: the
number of counties attached to each would cause much embarrassment
in their working?and the unavoidable expense and inconvenience con-
sequent upon the conveyance of patients from remote localities consti-
tute serious objections. It appears to us more feasible, that each dis-
trict requiring one should have a chronic hospital for itself; and if the
area was extensive, such as that connected with the Ballinasloe Asylum,
it might be matter for consideration whether it would be more judi-
cious and beneficial to the counties to have the buildings in question
at a distance from, or adjoining the parent establishment.
" Of the present system of management through Governors, subject
to certain modifications, on the whole, we cordially approve; believing
that gentlemen of education, rank, and position, whose acquaintance
with fiscal affairs, and personal interest in the well-being of the country,
afford the best guarantee for the due and economical expenditure of its
rates, are the most suitable persons to appreciate the peculiar claims of
the insane on the benevolence and liberality of the public; as well as
from the fact, to which we can personally bear the most gratifying
evidence, that a question of party or religion was never mooted within
the walls of an Irish Asylum."
In the copious Appendices to this Report there is a vast mass
of statistics, from which we extract a few details.
The total number of patients that had been treated in the
district asylums during the year 1856-7, from March to March,
was 4888. Out of this number 542 had been cured, 149 "im-
proved," 45 discharged " not cured," 1 " incurable," 4 had
escaped?whilst 3856 remained under treatment. The deaths
amounted to 291, of which 290 were from " natural causes," one
only accidental (suicidal).
The causes of death are worthy of note, consumption being
by far the most frequent. For the two years' ending March,
1856 and 1857, there were 559 deaths, the chief cause as
follows:?
734 STATE OF LUNACY IN IKELAND.
Consumption
General debility and old age
Paralysis .
Epilepsy .
Dysentery
Marasmus
Apoplexy
Pulmonary and bronchial affections
Dropsy ,
M. F. Total.
48
41
40
34
21
16
20
12
1
69 .. 117
49 ... 90
13 ... 53
10 ... 44
14 ... 35
15 ... 31
10 ... 30
19 ... 31
9 ... 10
It will be remarked how very disproportionate are the male
and female deaths from apoplexy, epilepsy, and paralysis ; the
balance being kept up by the greater number of deaths from
consumption and all other pulmonary affections ; also in dropsy
The other causes of death are comparatively unimportant.
An investigation of the trades, &c., of the inhabitants of the
public asylums gives curious results. Out of the 3856 under
care in March, 1857, no less than 1465 were connected with agri-
culture ; 367 were domestic servants, only 42 of them males;
88 were dressmakers; 58 shoemakers; the other handicrafts
about 40 each.
Under the head of " miscellaneous occupation" are found 239,
only 21 being male ;?" unknown" are 273 male and 638 female.
The forms of disease are thus given
Mania
Monomania
Dementia
Melancholia
Imbecility and epilepsy
Idiocy
2102
208
574
580
216
176
Total . . 3856
The causes are classed as?
M. F.
Moral . . . . 692 ... 245 447
Physical .... 948 ... 614 334
Hereditary . . . 506 ... 231 275
Not known . . . 1710 ... 879 831
Amongst the moral or mental causes, grief (210) and reverse
of fortune (184) are much the most frequent. Love and jealousy
furnish 97 cases, of which 70 are females; terror 79, of which
53 are females; religious excitement 70, 48 being females;
domestic quarrels 15, J 2 being females.
Of the physical causes, intemperance (491) and epilepsy (150)
represent above two-thirds of the cases ; after these, fever and
bodily injury are the most frequent. Injury of the head is only
36 times the cause.
PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF. *735
Dr. Nugent gives a table indicating the probability of cure as
applied to these 3856. He supposes 1187 to be curable, 2222
to be probably incurable; 194? are idiots, and 253 are lunatic
epileptics.
There is something instructive in examining the account of the
previous occupations of the upper classes of the insane, those,
viz., who are confined in private establishments. The entire
number amounts to 462, out of which 253 had no occupation.
The remainder were thus divided : army 23, navy 5, church 24,
law 20, medicine 7, students 14, trade 37, farmers 29, other
occupations 50.
With the exception of monetary matters, we have now passed
in review all the most important subjects treated upon in this
very valuable Report, which, however, will well repay a detailed
perusal.
