The Mission of the Psychologist
=================================

THE JOURNAL
OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND
MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
OCTOBER 1, 1857.
i ;
Art. I.?
TSeing the Address delivered by Dr. Forbes Winst.ow, on Ms taking the chair as President
of the Association of Medical Officers of Asylums and Hospitals for the Insane,
at the Animal Meeting, held in London, July 2nd, 1857.
Gentlemen,?I have the honour of occupying on this occasion
the distinguished position of your President, and in that capacity
it is now my privilege and pleasure to appear before you.
Addressing myself to a body of gentlemen distinguished for
their ability, experience, and knowledge of the morbid pheno-
mena of mind, as well as practical acquaintance with the treat-
ment of the insane, I ask, is it possible for me to give you any
information you are not already fully in possession of; is it in
my power to impress upon your mind a higher appreciation of
the noble and honourable vocation in which we are all engaged
than that which I believe you have already formed ? I despair
of bringing before this association any novel facts in pathology
or therapeutics?any startling deductions calculated to excite
your interest, attract your attention, or instruct your understand-
ings. However, I will, notwithstanding the obvious disadvan-
tages under which I labour,?with, I trust, an unostentatious
distrust in my own capacity either to inform or please?venture
to address to my fellow-labourers in the great work of love and
Christian philanthropy a few words in relation to the anxious,
onerous, and often painful duties which devolve upon all engaged
in the treatment of the insane. It is well that we should, from
time to time, whilst occupied in life's pilgrimage, lean upon our
staff, pause, and seriously consider the position it has pleased the
will of Providence that we should occupy. It is right and be-
fitting that we should occasionally solemnly reflect upon the
Past, dwell with earnestness upon the Present, and seriously
ponder over the Future. In commercial phraseology, it is right
that we should occasionally take stock, examine carefully our
NO. VIII.?NEW SERIES. S S
612 THE mission of the psychologist.
ledger, ascertain with accuracy tlie balance at the banker's, and
consider with business-like precision and exactitude our credit
and debtor account. The process of mental retrospection cannot
be otherwise than beneficial to us all. It is well that the man
occupied in the higher spheres of usefulness, who is cultivating
the more abstruse and philosophical departments of the science
and art of medicine, that he who is entrusted by the legislature
with the care and treatment of the insane, should frequently ask
himself the questions?What are the functions delegated to me ?
Do I entertain a right appreciation of my important duties, and
am I so discharging them that at the great and final day of
judgment I shall be in a position to give a good and faithful
account of my stewardship ?
Considering our vocation in its strictly scientific relations, need
I observe, when comparing it with other branches of our noble
profession of which it forms a part, that the practical psychologist
occupies high and honourable vantage ground.
It is not my intention to breathe a word in disparagement of
other sections of the medical profession. Each class holds an
honourable rank in the great circle of science ; each division has
allotted to it its own anxious and specific duties; and whatever
position the practitioner of medicine may fill, whether it be that
of a surgeon, a general or special physician, all in their separate
.and respective spheres of duty have responsible functions de-
volving upon them. But in what respect do we differ from
other departments of the medical profession ? what particular
and specific functions are assigned to those engaged in the treat-
ment of the insane 1 Whilst the physician devoted to general
practice is administering to the physical state of the system?in
healing abnormal conditions of matter interfering with the vital
manifestations?we, as psychologists, take a more exalted flight
into the regions of science. It is our enviable privilege to deal
with the human mind to study its healthy as well as disordered
state, to investigate that spiritual aura, that Divine essence
which is so mysteriously interwoven and associated with the
grosser particles of the material fabric.
How noble is the study in which we are engaged ! how impor-
tant the duties that devolve upon us ! how solemnly respon-
sible is our position ! Is it possible to exaggerate or over-esti-
mate our character, influence, importance, and dignity ! What
profound and accurate knowledge of the mind in its normal state
do we not require before we are fitted successfully to investigate,
unravel, and treat remedially its deviations from a healthy stan-
dard ! How intimate must be our acquaintance with the phe-
nomena of thought, and with the nature and operations of the
THE MISSION OF THE PSYCHOLOGIST. 613
passions ! How exact should be our notions of tlie instinctive
and perceptive faculties before we are fully qualified to appre-
ciate subtle, morbid, psychical conditions !
We should entertain right notions of our duty and position;
we should encourage elevated, lofty thoughts and grand concep-
tions of our honourable vocation ; we should impress repeatedly,
earnestly, and emphatically upon our own understandings and
the minds of all engaged in the same holy work the significant .
fact, that we are occupied in the study and treatment of a class
of diseases affecting the very source, spring, and fountain of that
principle which in its healthy operations alone can bring us into
remote proximity to Deity?that we have to deal with the
spiritual part of man's complex nature, with that which elevates
him in the scale of created excellences, and places him high on the
pedestal among the great, the good, and the wise. But our
solemn functions expand in interest, gravity, and importance, as
we reflect that it is mind prostrated, perverted, and often crushed
by disease with which we, as practical physicians, have to deal;
that we have placed under our care a class of the afflicted human
family, reduced by the inscrutable decrees of Providence to the
most humiliating, degrading, and helpless position to which poor
human nature can fall; that it is our duty to witness the sad
wreck of great and noble minds, and the decay of exalted genius.
Like the historian and antiquarian wandering with a sad heart
over ground made classical and memorable in the story of great
men, and in the annals of heroic deeds?surveying with painful
interest the crumbling ruins of ancient temples?viewing with
subdued emotion the almost extinguished remains of proud im-
perial cities, consecrated by the genius of men renowned in the
world's history as scholars, artists, philosophers, and poets, so it
is our duty to wander through the sad ruins of still greater
temples than any that were in ancient days raised to the honour
of an unseen Deity. Yes, it is our distressing province to wit-
ness great and good intellects, and proud understandings, levelled
to the earth and crumbled like dust in the balance, under the dire
influence of disease. Survey that old man crouched in the
corner, with his face buried in his hands. He is indifferent to
all that is passing around him?he heeds not the voice of man
nor of woman?he delights not in the carolling of birds nor in
the sweet music of the rippling brooks. The gentle wind of
heaven, playing its sweetest melody as it rushes through the
greenwood, awakens no] consciousness of nature's charms. Ap-
proach and speak to him. Address him in terms of endearment
and affection?bring before him the glowing images of the past.
Be elevates his head, gazes listlessly and mechanically at you,
s s 2
614 THE MISSION OF THE PSYCHOLOGIST.
makes no sign," and, dropping his poor liead, buries it in his
bosom,and sinks into his former moody state of melancholy abstrac-
tion. This man's oratory charmed the senate?the magic of his
eloquence held thousands in a state of breathless admiration ; his
influence was commanding, his sagacity and judgment eminently
.acute and profound. View him as he is fallen from his high and
honourable estate. Listen to the sweet and gentle voice of
yonder woman, upon whose head scarcely eighteen summer suns
have shed their genial warmth and influence. How merrily she
dances over the greensward ! How touchingly she warbles, like
poor Ophelia, sweet snatches of song ! What a pitiful spectacle
of a sweet mind lying in fragments before us ! Look, she has
decked herself with a spring garland. Now she holds herself
perfectly erect, and walks with queenly majesty. Approach her
side, accost her, she exclaims, " Yes, he will come ; he promised
to be here ; where are the guests ? where's the ring ? where's
my wedding dress?my orange flowers 1" Suddenly her mind is
over-shadowed, and her face assumes an expression of deep
choking and bitter anguish?she alternately sobs and laughs?is
gay, sad, cheerful, and melancholy?
"Thought and affliction, passion, liell itself,
She turns to favour and to prettiness."
'Speak again to her, and another change takes place in the spirit
of her dream. Like her sad prototype, the sweetest creation of
Shakspeare's immortal genius, she plaintively sings?
" He is dead and gone, lady,
He is dead and gone;
At his head a green grass turf,
At his heels a stone."
Her history is soon told. Deep and absorbing passion, elevated
hopes, bright and fanciful dreams of the future?DEATH with all
its sad trappings and solemn mockery?seared affections, a
broken heart, and a disordered brain ! In its sad ruin her mind
retains much of its native purity, innocence, and sweetness.
It is not my object to bring before you painful, fanciful, and
imaginative sketches.
The two illustrations I have cited are faithful and truthful
outlines of cases that must have come under the notice of us all.
How keenly cases like these tear the heartstrings asunder and
call into active operation all the kindly sympathies of our nature.
Having considered thus briefly the character of our vocation
and the grave responsibilities of our position, I would with great
submission to the members of this association dwell shortly on
the present state of that section of psychological science more
immediately connected with the practical pursuits in which we
THE MISSION OF THE PSYCHOLOGIST. 615
are in common engaged?viz., that of the care and treatment of.
the insane.
At the onset I would premise that, as a body of men engaged
ln a holy and sacred office, we must not close our eyes to the fact
that our position is not what we have a right to expect or are
entitled to claim. Our studies, beyond a doubt, are ennobling
and elevating?our duties, if conscientiously discharged, excite
into action the tenderest feelings of the heart, and the highest
capacities of the intellect. To an intimate knowledge of the
general characteristics of disease, and the sciences of pathology
and therapeutics, which we possess in common with other sections
of our profession, the psychological physician must unite a pro-
found knowledge, not only of the mind, but of mind as manifest-
ing itself in character and human nature, in the most enlarged
acceptation of these terms. He has to battle with the intellect
in a condition of aberration; he has to combat with passions in
a state of morbid exaltation ; he has to administer to the feelings",
affections, and appetites in a deranged or perverted condition.
He has, in the exhibition of his moral remedial agents, emphati-
cally to act upon mind as well as upon matter; and if lie be
unqualified by natural aptitude, education, habits of thought,
and careful study of the higher branches of philosophy, to per-
form such duties, he is obviously unfit for the post he is called
upon to occupy. If such are the recognised characteristics of the
psychological physician, why is he considered by the public, to a
certain extent, as a man engaged in the pursuits of commerce
and trade ? How is it that a psychological expert, when in the
witness-box, is so often snubbed and browbeaten ? Why should
we, when engaged in the practical execution of our duties, be
viewed and estimated as persons pursuing a degrading and dis-
honourable calling ? Why should the finger of derision and scorn
be pointed at us ? Why should we be singled out from the
crowd, and have flung in our faces the odious, offensive, and
repulsive designation of "mad doctor," when called upon as
experts to assist in the solemn administration of justice ? I ask,
why such a state of things should exist ? why men engaged in so
honourable, sacred, and dignified a pursuit should occasionally
find themselves in a position so false, painful, and humiliating ?
In justice to ourselves, as well as to those unhappy persons con-
fided to our care, we are bound to consider this matter with
becoming seriousness. The question cannot be ignored. There
must be something " rotten in the state" to justify such a sad
condition of things. We do not occupy our legitimate position
in public estimation, and it is our duty to ask why such should
be the case ? Having given this question much anxious conside-
616 THE MISSION" OF THE PSYCHOLOGIST.
ration and thought, I have come to the following conclusions:?
According to my apprehension, there are THREE modes of
atecounting for our present status. In the first place, I attribute
much of the existing evil to the conduct of a few narrow-minded
and ignorant men, who have improperly had the care of the
insane, and who have by their very questionable proceedings in a
measure degraded us all to their own ignoble level. Have we
been true to ourselves ? Is it necessary that we should look
much away from home to find the adverse causes that have been
operating to our degradation and disparagement ? Have we not
made merchandize of the insane, considering their care and
treatment more as a question of commerce than of science ? Gentle-
men, I am occasionally overpowered with feelings of deep humi-
liation and shame, when I take up the advertisement sheet of
the daily newspapers, and see to what measures men will resort
to bring themselves, their houses, and their asylums prominently
before the public, with a view to their personal aggrandizement.
Not satisfied with advertising their establishments in the glowing,
fanciful, poetical, and flowery language of the auctioneer, they go
a step in advance, and offer liberal per centages and bonuses to
all medical men patronizing their institutions. Again, how often
we see asylums and their unhappy inmates brought into the market
and offered for sale like a flock of sheep to the highest bidder, in a
manner calculated to destroy all public confidence and trust in the
honesty, integrity, and even common respectability of those con-
nected with similar institutions. Consider for a moment the prac-
tical effect upon the 'public mind, and by reflex action upon the
position of the psychological physician, of the following advertise-
ment, which has been the round of the medical journals:
" Insanity.?Twenty per cent, annually on the receipts will
be guaranteed to any Medical Man recommending a quiet Patient,
of either sex, to a First-Class Asylum, with the highest testi-
monials. Address
This is not an isolated illustration. No number of the Times
appears without containing announcements of a similar cha-
racter. Thank God 1 the great body of men engaged in the
treatment of the insane would sooner permit themselves to be
reduced to the lowest depths of poverty and distress than resort
to such unprofessional means to advance their pecuniary interests
in life.
If we desire to elevate ourselves in the estimation of good
men, if it be our object to secure for our specialty a legitimate
position in public opinion, it behoves us to enter our firm protest
against disgraceful proceedings like these; to hold no converse,
companionship, or communion with men who thus degrade them-
selves to the condition of the common trader and shopkeeper, with-
THE MISSION OF THE PSYCHOLOGIST. 617
out any portion of the respectability, honesty, and worth which so
commonly distinguish men engaged in the legitimate pursuits
of commerce.
To remedy this great and growing evil we must in the first
place put our own houses in order?-
" Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie
Which we ascribe to Heaven; the fated sky
Gives us free scope; only doth backward pull
Our slow designs, when we ourselves are dull."
It is now my duty to consider the second cause operating
to our disadvantage?viz., the effect of legislative enactments
upon the character of the psychologists and the condition of the
insane.
The legislature has never fully recognised or admitted the im-
portant principle that insanity is a 'pathological condition; in
other words, that it is a type of diseased manifestation. This
great first principle should be prominently recorded in the pre-
amble of every parliamentary enactment relating to the treat-
ment of the insane, and all legislation should be based upon the
full and liberal recognition of the fact that insanity, lunacy,
unsoundness of mind, idiotcy, imbecility?to use the common
legal phraseology?are curable states of bodily and brain disease,
disordering the manifestations of the mind; and that in the
organization of all institutions for the care and treatment of the
insane, as well as in the distribution of licences to persons willing
to undertake the management of this class of affections, the first
question to be considered is, whether the party is fitted by educa-
tion, knowledge, and experience for the performance of his
responsible duties. I would permit no one to have the legal
charge and treatment of either an acute or chronic case of mental
aberration who was not a qualified medical man. As long as
licences are granted to non-professional persons, as well as to
women, the public will be indisposed to believe that insanity is
the result of a physical morbid condition of the brain, or of some
organ in close sympathy with it; or that the disease is one
amenable to remedial medical treatment. The non-recognition
of this important elementary principle in the past legislation on
this subject of lunacy has undoubtedly had the effect, not only
of encouraging in the public mind erroneous views of the nature
and treatment of insanity, but of placing the psychological phy-
sician in a false commercial position. And why should such be
the case ? The qualified and educated medical practitioner who
has an asylum for the treatment of his own patients finds him-
self placed in the same category with non-professional men and
women, into whose hands are entrusted the legal custody and,
618 THE MISSION OF THE PSYCHOLOGIST.
treatment of the insane. It is obvious that this course of pro-
cedure must inevitably tend to depreciate the character of all
connected Avith asylums, lower the psychologist in public estima-
tion, and tend to discountenance all remedial treatment.
What has been the natural consequence of permitting non-
professional persons to have the care of the insane ? Persons
palpably unfitted for the right and humane performance of so
solemn a trust have been discovered seriously and wilfully
neglecting the interest of those entrusted to their legal guar-
dianship. The evil lias been fully recognised by the State, and
from time to time various legislative enactments for the pro-
tection of the insane have become part of the statute law of the
land, so constructed as to meet the exigencies of the case, and,
if possible, avert a recurrence of these evils. Stringent legal
clauses have found their way into these various lunacy enact-
ments, until we may be said to act under the authority of a bill
of pains ancl penalties. I do not complain of the operation of
these measures; I refer to the fact simply with a view of esta-
blishing my position, that owing to the character of a few of
those who have in former years had the care and treatment of
the insane, such stringent laws have been deemed essentially
necessary for their safety and protection.
It is not my intention to consider in detail the various exist-
ing lunacy bills for the purpose of satisfying you that the pro-
visions of the present law operate prejudicially to the interests
of psychology, and are seriously detrimental to those connected
with the care of the insane. I will cite but one illustration of
the fact.
Agreeably to the provisions of a former enactment, no medical
man was held to be legally qualified for the post of a Commis-
sioner in Lunacy who had any interest, direct or indirect, in the
confinement of the insane for one year previously. This clause
was altered in the last Act of Parliament, the one now in opera-
tion ; and in conformity with the amended bill, no medical man
is statutorily eligible for the office of Commissioner in Lunacy who
has had for two years an interest, direct or indirect, in the con-
finement of the insane ; in other words, the candidate must have
been disconnected with a private asylum for a period of two
years, the legislature not considering one year a sufficient time
to restore the mind of the psychological physician to a state of
judicial purity!
So great is the contamination and degradation incidental to a
connexion with the treatment of the insane and the management
of an asylum, that the legislature in its profound wisdom and
extraordinary sagacity, considers two years' purgation?two years
of psychological quarantine necessary before the medical man
THE MISSION OF THE PSYCHOLOGIST. 619
can be viewed as qualified to present a clean bill of health, and
thereby fitted to sit at the Board of Commissioners, and assist
in the administration of the law! Upon what principle was
such a clause introduced into the Lunacy Bill ?
I fully admit that no person appointed to so important an
office should have the most remote interest, direct or indirect, in
the care and treatment of the insane, and that before accepting
an appointment of the kind, and prior to his taking the oaths of
office,he should be in a position to say that he has entirely ceased
to have the slightest or faintest shadow of interest in the confine-
ment of any one insane individual; but it puzzles my simple
understanding to comprehend why the law should require two
years of cleansing and purification on the part of gentlemen
engaged in the solemn and faithful discharge of the highest
class of professional duties before they can be considered fitted
for such an appointment.
I should be insulting the understanding of those I have the
honour to address if I were to occupy any time in attempting to
demonstrate the practically injurious effect of such a provision of
the law upon the character and position of all engaged in the
study of psychology, and in the care and treatment of the insane.
Whatever tends to lower in public estimation the psychological
physician, whether connected or unconnected with a private
asylum, must materially, and without doubt, injuriously affect
also those connected with our public institutions, and at the
same time damage seriously the vital interests of the insane.
Apart from the mischief such a state of the law must inflict upon
the great body of psychological physicians, consider for one
moment the serious injustice it does to a number of physicians
engaged in private practice, and who, in a measure, are compelled
to be .interested in and associated with private asylums. These
men are disfranchised, virtually excluded from the office of com-
missioner. Irrespectively of a man's reputation, character, and ex-
perience, he is legally disqualified if he retains any interest in
the confinement of a single insane person. Destroy by legislative
enactments the social position of the physician engaged in this
branch of practice, and you immediately cripple his resources,
and very much circumscribe his sphere of usefulness.
I have no hesitation in asserting that this is an unjust, a
mischievous, and an iniquitous enactment. I can conceive a
man of European reputation, of great practical knowledge, of
unbounded experience, of profound sagacity, of high and unim-
peachable honour and character, looking forward at the close of
a brilliant and useful career to an appointment of this nature, as
one of the prizes which should be awarded to professional men
whose great public services and talents were entitled to some
620 THE MISSION OF THE PSYCHOLOGIST.
slight recognition. This man would be ineligible for the office
the duties of which he was admirably fitted to discharge, unless
for two years he had ceased to have any interest in the confine-
ment of the insane ! Profound legislators ! Wise statesmen !
Eminent and sagacious senators I to have conceived so enlight-
ened and benevolent an enactment.
In considering the third cause which has operated to the dis-
advantage of the psychologist I must be brief. The ignorance
exhibited by the public of the real characteristics of insanity and
of the treatment necessary for its cure is certainly great. Poets,
dramatists, and novelists have materially aided in promulgating
fictitious, imaginative, and consequently erroneous notions of
insanity.
From this imputation I, of course, except our own immortal
Shakspeare, that great magician whose colossal genius, pro-
found wisdom and subtlety,?whose playful fancy, brilliant wit,
extraordinary and intimate insight into the secret workings of
the human mind and heart, and whose universal knowledge, shed
a brilliant flood of light upon every subject to which he directed
the powers of his noble and transcendant intellect. His delinea-
tions of insanity must ever be viewed as master creations?as
imperishable monuments of grandeur, purity, beauty, grace,
loveliness, and truth. He was pre-eminently the great and gifted
psychologist of his epoch, and no man (and we have had great
giants since his day) has yet been able distantly to approach him
in his knowledge of healthy or morbid mental phenomena.
In conclusion, I would again repeat that we must look faith-
fully at our own hearts, honestly analyse our own motives,
and conscientiously scrutinise our own conduct, if we desire to
discover the true cause of the present unsatisfactory status of
the psychological physician, and are anxious to elevate our body
in the social scale.
Having said so much about ourselves, let me finally add a few
words respecting those sad cases placed under our special care
and protection. We cannot too frequently allow our minds
to dwell upon the peculiar state of those reduced by insanity to a
condition of utter and childish helplessness. In other classes of
disease, in which the functions of the brain remain intact, the
invalid, even while suffering the most acute and agonizing pain,
bodily distress, and physical prostration, is in g, state to appre-
ciate his actual relations with those around him?he feels sen-
sitively the exhibition of tender sympathy?he properly estimates
the care and attention bestowed upon his case, and recognises
the skill of his faithful medical adviser. Alas! how different
are the feelings and thoughts of many of the insane ! In this
class of affections the kindness, sympathy, skill, unremitting
THE MISSION OF THE PSYCHOLOGIST. 621
assiduity, and attention of the physician are often not outwardly
or manifestly appreciated. He has, in many cases, to pursue his
holy work without the exhibition of the slightest apparent con-
sciousness, on the part of the patient, of his efforts to assuage his
anguish and mitigate his condition of mental disease and bodily
suffering. Nevertheless, it is our sacred duty, even where, as is
occasionally the case, our actions are greatly misconstrued and
perverted by those to whose relief we are administering, to un-
flaggingly persevere in our efforts to carry out our curative pro-
cess of treatment. Our poor, unhappy invalid may believe that
we are acting the part of his bitterest foe. This ought not to
excite in our mind any feeling but that of the most profound
love and sympathy. If his language be offensive and repulsive
?if he be guilty of any acts of violence towards those in atten-
dance upon him?let us never for a moment lose sight of the
fact, that his unhappy affliction has, to a degree, destroyed his
free will, and that he, for a time, lias ceased to be a responsible
being. It would be cruel, whilst such a condition of mind exists,
to treat such a patient otherwise than as a person deprived by
disease of the power of complete self-government and moral
control. I feel how unnecessary it is for me to urge upon those
connected with this association, as well as to all engaged in the
treatment of the insane, the importance of never losing sight of
the fact, that even in the worst form of mental disease there are
some salient and bright spots upon which we may act, and
against which we may direct our most potent curative agents.
How true it is that
" There is some soul of goodness in things evil,
Would men observingly distil it out."
The more formidable, and apparently hopelessly incurable types
of mental derangement admit, if not of cure, at least of con-
siderable alleviation and mitigation. It is always in our power
to materially add to the physical comforts of even the worst class
of patients; and when a cure is impracticable, it is our duty by
every means in our power to ease the passage to the tomb.
Again, we should never say of a case of insanity that it is in-
curable, or that it baffles our skill. We undoubtedly possess the
power of materially modifying (if we cannot entirely re-establish
the mental equilibrium) the most unfavourable and distressing
forms of insanity?rendering the violent, and turbulent, tractable
and amenable to discipline?the dangerous, harmless?the noisy,
quiet?the dirty, cleanly in their habits, and the melancholy,
cheerful. It is possible by a careful study of the bodily and
mental idiosyncrasy of each individual case, and by an unremitting
attention to dietetic and hygienic regimen, as well as by a per-
622 ON THE INSANITY OF EARLY LIFE.
severing, unflagging, and assiduous administration of physical
and moral remedies for their relief, to
" Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow;
Haze out the written troubles of the brain,
And with some sweet oblivious antidote
Cleanse the foul bosom of that perilous stuff
Which weighs upon the heart."
The spirit of love, tender sympathy, Christian benevolence,
unwearying kindness, and warm affection, should influence our
every thought, look, and action, when engaged in the treatment
of the sad and distressing cases entrusted to our care. We should
never forget that it is the special province of the psychological
physician to
" Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
Charm ache with air, and agony with words."
Oh ! what a holy, honourable, and sacred occupation is that in
which we all have the privilege to be engaged ! The angels in
heaven might well envy us the ennobling and exalted pleasures
incidental to our mission of love and charity.
