Philosophical Progress
========================

671
Art. IV.? *
Mr. Lewes is an accomplished man and a brilliant writer. The
charm of his st}de always makes a pleasing subject still more
pleasing to his readers. But while we admire the great talent
with which he writes, the clearness with which he expounds, and
the vigour with which he argues, we are unable to keep on
friendly terms with him for many consecutive pages.
Mr. Lewes is a determined unbeliever in philosophy, and points
to its unprogressive character as evidence of its aiming at im-
possibilities. Every attempt of the giant intellects of the past to
scale the heaven of ontology by heaping mountain upon moun-
tain, has been defeated by some redoubtable Hercules mighty in
the art of destruction; and so it will ever be, Mr. Lewes would
say, when mortals presume to arrogate the prerogative of gods.
But in an age when mortals have surpassed the divinities of the
ancient world?in an age when many alleged impossibilities have
been accomplished, and many wonders have become common
things in less than a quarter of a century, we, with good reason,
prefer regarding the circular movement which our author ascribes
to philosophy as a spiral movement, forced indeed to return
towards the point from which it originates, but always receding
from it in some slight degree, and always tending to an apex,
from which, with great force, it will eventually start in a direct
line to form the science of sciences.
Now, it seems to us that philosophy has described a circular
course, not because it attempts impossibilities, but because on
each departure from nature it had not made its basis firm and
ample by rigid induction. In consequence of this defective
beginning, scepticism has invariably overthrown its conclusions ;
this necessitated a fresh return to nature, when a new foundation
would be laid, free from the most obvious defects of the preceding
one, but still faulty, and destined again to be more carefullv
examined and improved. The repetition of this course again and
again amounts, as Mr. Lewes thinks, to the condemnation of
philosophy. But had not astronomy and chemistry to describe a
devious course in the wilderness of empiricism before they
reached the promised land of science ?
" If no attempts were made to draw a conclusion, and see what use
could be made of it, till grounds formally complete were before us,
conclusions would never be drawn. The certainties by which the
chemist, the astronomer, the geologist, conducts his operations with
* The Biographical History of Philosophy, from its Origin in Greece down to
the Present Day. By George Henry Lewes. Library Edition, much enlarged
and thoroughly revised. London; John W. Parker and Son, West Strand. 1857.
672 PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS.
composure and success, were once bare possibilities, which after being
handed back and forward, between Induction and Deduction, turned
out to be truths."*
Is not this just what has been taking place in philosophy ?
Absurd and monstrous conclusions have invariably driven men
back to nature, to repeat the inductive process, and their success
has been commensurate with the knowledge they possessed, or
gained, of the laws of inductive reasoning ; deduction being sure
to develope any imperfection in such knowledge.
If we regard scepticism, to use an anatomical term, as the
pylorus that will not allow crude and indigested matter to enter
the temple of science?as the disposition to admit no proposition
to be true without the assent of reason?we must confess that, so
far as scepticism has been satisfied, philosophy has described a
linear,movement. Even Mr. Lewes himself chronicles the fact
that from Pyrrho to the New Academy some advance had been
made, but without intending to do so, we imagine. " Ethics had
become elevated to the rank of a science." (?)f Every fresh
return to the fountain-head of nature, after scepticism had
destroyed the incredible systems of philosophers, was a sort of
moral recoil from the offensive conclusion that absolute certainty
was unattainable. Socrates and Reid, each in a remarkable
manner, initiated a reactionary movement of this moral character.
From the New Academy to Hume the linear movement has
been considerable. While the Pyrrhonists and the New
Academy proclaimed scepticism as the final result of all inquiry,
Hume only doubted the existence of noumena?phenomena were
beyond the reach of his scepticism. He says : " Whoever has
taken the pains to refute the cavils of this total scepticism has
really disputed without an antagonist.'"! Here, then, is some
ground gained. Whether it has been so 'positively secured as is
commonly believed, remains to be seen. For instance, what are
we to think of Reid's repeated attempts to convince his readers
that Hume was inconsistent in being only half a sceptic. Thus
in one place he says :?
" The author of ' The Treatise of Human Nature' appears to me to
be but half a sceptic. He hath not followed his principles so far as
they lead him; but after having with unparalleled intrepidity and
success, combated vulgar prejudices, when he had but one blow to
strike, his courage fails him, he fairly lays down his arms, and yields
himself a captive to the most common of all vulgar prejudices?I
mean the belief of the existence of his own impressions and ideas."?
Sir William Hamilton is at variance with Reid on this point:
* Outlines of the Law of Thought, by W. Thompson; p. 313.
f Page 284. + Human Nature, p. 250.
? Inquiry, Hamilton's Edition, p. 129.
PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS. 673
" In Reid's strictures upon Hume," he says, " he confounds two
opposite things. He reproaches that philosopher with inconsequence
in holding to ' the belief of the existence of his own impressions and
ideas.' Now if, by the existence of impressions and ideas, Reid meant
their existence as mere phenomena of consciousness, his criticism is
inept; for a disbelief of their existence, as such phenomena, would have
been a suicidal act in the sceptic."*
In Note A,f Sir William Hamilton enters more fullyinto this dis-
tinction. There he declares himself to be a demonstrator in rela-
tion to the facts of consciousness, but in relation to the veracity of
consciousness, a dogmatist. Now, Reid was a dogmatist in both
respects, and he could not see what ground there was for doubting
the existence of external objects, any more than the existence of
consciousness and its phenomena. Referring to the fact of
Hume's not calling into question the existence of impressions
and ideas, he asserts :?" I am persuaded that there is no prin-
ciple of his philosophy that obliged him to make this conces-
sion."]: This is a confusion and inaccuracy, according to Hamil-
ton. Mr. Lewes takes virtually the same view of this point, and
evidently entertains a very mean opinion of Reid's penetration.
Now, as far as we have been able to perceive, the common-sense phi-
losopher has more truth on his side than his more demonstratory
critic ; our reason for making this assertion we shall here append.
Every perception has two elements?a subjective and an ob-
jective?the object perceived, and the apprehension of that
object. Now, there is a perception which enables us to become
speculatively assured of the trustworthiness of perceptive acts in
general. The objective element of this perception is, :the pri-
mariness of the veracity of consciousness?the subjective element,
the apprehension of this fact. In the order of nature the ob-
jective element is first. In the order of knowledge, the subjec-
tive. That is, the veracity of consciousness exists as a funda-
mental fact before we can possibly be aware of it; but, on
the other hand, till we become thoroughly aware of it, that is, till
we acquire the perception we have just mentioned, it is not only
possible, but unavoidable that reason (to which faculty we are
indebted for the perception) should be undecided on this point.?
* Inquiry, Hamilton's Edition, p. 129, note.
+ Hamilton s Edition of Reid s W orks, p. 142. + Inquiry, &c. p. 130.
? It is necessary to be precise on this head, because there are those who will
argue that reason must start from data which do not admit of being proved,
being self-evident; and that consequently there is a source of truth, the veracity of
which does not allow of demonstration, because all reasoning must suppose it vera-
cious; but that is practically, and as a matter of faith. But the data from which
reason draws conclusions are not necessary and universal propositions: all such
propositions, as we shall show in the sequel, are inferred from elementary facts.
Now the statement that the veracity of consciousness is the fundamental fact is
necessary and universal, it is not immediately perceived, but is acquired by reason.
Although, then, the knowledge that the veracity of consciousness is the fundamental
674) PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS.
But once tliis knowledge is gained, reason is forced to be acqui-
escent for ever afterwards. For let it after this endeavour to prove
the veracity of consciousness?that having been demonstrated to
be the fundamental fact of consciousness?a pet'dio principii
excludes any such attempt; or let it try to disprove it, and it
finds the disproof to be impossible, for a subversion of the prin-
cipium would be the consequence.
Now this line of argument, though bearing a strong similarity
to that carried on by Reid and Stewart, differs from it in this:?
Their argument was, that the veracity of consciousness being a
fundamental fact, it must be accepted as a self-evident truth.
Ours is, that reason perceives that it is a fundamental fact,
and that it consequently cannot be proved or disproved. They
were pure dogmatists. We endeavour to be pure demonstrators.
"We believe, as they did, that consciousness is equally credible in
all its deliverances. But we believe, differently from them, that
since reason seeks to be satisfied on this head, it ought to be
supplied with its own special evidence, instead of being silenced
by the taunts and vociferations of dogmatism.
Sir William Hamilton holds a position midway between these
two. He holds that if we doubt the existence of consciousness
and its phenomena, the doubt refutes itself; but that if we
doubt the truth of the testimony of consciousness to aught
beyond its own ideal existence, it does not refute itself. The
principle which we have stated above, warrants us in asserting
that it does. Let us enter more fully into Hamilton's reasoning
on this subject.
He lays great stress on the fact that the data or deliverances
of consciousness, considered simply in themselves as apprehended
facts or actual manifestations, are above all scepticism :?
" For as doubt is itself only a manifestation of consciousness, it is
impossible to doubt that what consciousness manifests?ifc does mani-
fest, without in thus doubting-, doubting that we actually doubt, that
is, without the doubt contradicting and therefore annihilating itself."*
Now, this argument leaves the vital point still open to the
assaults of scepticism. Your argument is valid, the sceptic might
say, but it evidently involves a principle which, if unsound,
causes it to partake of all the imperfections of a vitiated source :
that principle is the veracity of the faculties which afford you
fact is the primary fact for us?this knowledge is not obtained by means of a
primary cognition. The veracity of consciousness does not exist for us as a cer-
tainty till it becomes the objective element of the perception in which it is revealed,
to us, and of every perception the subjective element is first in the order of know-
ledge, while the objective is first in the order of existence. Vide this Journal for
Jan. 1857, Art. II., On the New Scottish Philosophy.
* Note A, p. 744.
PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS. 675
your argument. Simply so far as it is a trustworthy discloser of
objects can consciousness be a voucher, not only for the existence
of aught distinct from itself, but even for its own existence. Is
consciousness trustworthy ?
" A mere disposition to believe, even if supposed instinctive, is no
guarantee for the truth of the thing believed. If indeed the belief
ever amounted to an irresistible necessity, there would then be no use
in appealing from it, because there would be no possibility of altering it.
But even then the truth of the belief would not follow; it would only
follow that mankind were under a permanent necessity of believing
what possibly might not be true; just as they were under a temporary
necessity (quite as irresistible while it lasted) of believing that the
heavens moved and the earth stood still."*
When the sceptic asks, therefore, is consciousness a faithful
guarantee for the truth of all its declarations ? it is no answer to
liis question to insist upon the impossibility of altering some of
our beliefs, even when this impossibility is of an absolute, and
not of an accidental nature. It is impossible to be cognizant of
an object without believing in its existence ; to be conscious of
an object, and to believe in the existence of that object, are in-
separable acts. " All consciousness is realised in the enuncia-
tion?That is there (or this is here)."f
" If we attend," says Reid, "to that act of our mind which we call
the perception of an external object of sense, we shall find in it these
three things:?First, some conception or notion of the object per-
ceived ; secondly, a strong and irresistible conviction and belief of its
present existence; and, thirdly, that this conviction and belief are
immediate, and not the effect of reasoning.''^
Abstract from an act of consciousness belief in the existence
of its object, therefore, and you destroy it as effectually as you
would destroy water by talcing away its oxygen. This accounts
for the impossibility of practical scepticism. Try your utmost to
believe yourself non-existent?make every effort you can to
believe that a tree is part of your own being, and you never
can succeed, for success in such an attempt would be the annihi-
lation of the sane mind.? This is primitive belief, arising merely
from the presentation of the object to the immediate perceptive
power of the mind; that is, it does not depend on any previous
act of thought, but is itself an element essential to that act of
consciousness which every other supposes. Now, human thought
* Mill's System of Logic, Third Ed. vol. ii. p. 95.
?j* Sir "William Hamilton, Note D*, p. 878.
J Essays on the Intellectual Powers, Hamilton's Ed. p. 258.
? " Nature, says Hume, by an absolute and uncontrollable necessity, hag
determined us to judge as well as to breathe and feel; nor can we any more for-
bear viewing certain objects in a stronger and fuller light upon account of their
customary connexion with a present impression, than we can hinder ourselves from
thinking as long as we are awake, or seeing the surrounding bodies when we turn
our eyes towards them in broad sunshine. ?Hutikxii nvc, p. 250.
NO. VIII.?NEW SERIES. Y Y
676 PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS.
is composed of many beliefs besides these, but none of them is
fundamental; as mere beliefs or opinions, their negation is quite
conceivable, because it does not involve, as in the case of our
primitive beliefs, the annihilation of all consciousness. They
rest on evidence, and, unless the evidence is conclusive,* it
matters not how intense or persistent they be, they are all liable
to be proved erroneous. From not seeing the distinction which
exists between primitive belief, and belief resting on incomplete
evidence, no less a writer than Mr. J. S. Mill has been led into
error and confusion on this subject.
" There is no proposition of which it can be asserted that every
human mind must eternally and irrevocably believe it. Man}' of the
propositions of which this is most confidently asserted great numbers
of human beings have disbelieved. The things which it has been sup-
posed that nobody could possibly help believing, are innumerable;
but 110 two'generations would make out the same catalogue of them.
One nation or age believes implicitly what to another seems incredible
and inconceivable ; one individual has not a vestige of a belief which
another holds to be inherent in humanity. There is not one of these
supposed instinctive beliefs which is really universal."f
Now, does Mr. Mill mean to maintain that there are no in-
stinctive beliefs whatever ? Scarcely. In charging the enemy
he has gone too far, and exposed himself in flank and rear.
Because many of the beliefs which men held to be instinctive
?were afterwards proved to be not universal, it does not follow
that there are no beliefs co-extensive with human thought in every
age of the world. Wherever a human mind exists, there exists
perception, and of perception belief in the present existence of
an object is an inseparable element.
But although we are so constituted that it is impossible for us
to have a perception without our having, too, as one of its
elements, a conviction that its object exists as it appears to us to
exist, there is nevertheless something in us which desires satis-
faction on this point, such as instinctive belief does not afford
it; and whenever this something becomes active in a man's
mind, although he is practically constrained to act and think
as the sane portion of mankind, and would confess himself
demented were he conscious of doing otherwise, still specula-
tively?in that region of the mind which judges from the com-
parison of propositions, that is, through evidence?he will be all
in amaze, wondering if it be possible ever to discover a reason for
the faith that is in him. Now this is philosophical scepticism, and
is the furthest extent to which doubt can reach while the mind
* When evidence is conclusive?when a proposition is proved?practical scepti-
cism is also impossible in regard to it. The onty doubt then admissible is that
touching the veracity of the faculties which declare that a proposition must be true
when it is proved, + Mill's System of Logic, vol. ii. &c. p. 3G.
, PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS. 677
retains its sanity. It arises from reason's* having a strong desire
to be possessed of its special evidence?evidence which instinc-
tive belief does not afford it; and until this is supplied the doubt
cannot be suppressed, especially when, as it was in the time of
Hume, " we are necessitated by reasoning to contradict the
primary instincts of nature, and to embrace a new system with
regard to the evidence of our senses " and no dogmatism, how-
ever well grounded and however ably and forcibly expressed,
suffices to quiet reason's restless longings. To call such a spirit
of inquiry metaphysical lunacy, as Re id did, evinces that he
had confounded a possible doubt with an impossible?the
doubt of reason in search of its proper evidence with the
withdrawal of that fundamental belief which inseparably accom-
panies an immediate, and indeed a mediate perception, which
is an impossibility?an impossibility which proves that all the
ridiculous actions attributed to Pyrrho were fabrications of an
opponent who was illogical in his conclusions. A man is not
impelled to commit all sorts of ridiculous actions, because specu-
latively he cannot satisfy his mind concerning the integrity of
consciousness, and does not choose to live in this respect a life
of faith?except it be provisionally.
But while speculative doubt does not involve practical doubt,
it is quite as possible to be sceptical in regard to the facts of
consciousness as it is to be regarding the truthfulness of its testi-
mony; for the argument which Sir William Hamilton, and
according to him, Cousin, look upon as placing the phenomena
of consciousness high above the reach of scepticism, can only be
regarded as decisive, so far forth as the faculties from which it
proceeds are trustworthy. As long therefore as the principle of
veracity receives nought but dogmatic support, so long will it
be legitimate for the restless reason of man to ask?Do my
faculties deceive me, or do they not ? Since, then, the principle
of veracity underlies even the existence of consciousness itself, it
is manifest that the phenomena of consciousness are not a whit
less open to question than the truthfulness of the same when it
attests the existence of external objects. If Eeid erred, therefore,
in making no distinction between speculative and practical
doubt, he nevertheless saw more clearly than his critic seems to
have done,* that both the facts and the testimony of conscious-
ness involved, in an equal degree, the principle of veracity; that
if the one were doubted, so ought the other; but that if the
one were taken on trust, so ought the other. Thus in his stric-
tures on Descartes, he asks why that philosopher did not prove
* "NVe believe that we are amply justified in rejecting the distinction that has been
made since Reid's time between reason and reasoning. Reasoning we consider to
be the operation of the faculty of reason. .
Y Y 2
678 PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS.
the existence of his thought. " Consciousness, it may he said,
vouches that. But who is voucher for consciousness ? Can any
man prove that his consciousness may not deceive him ?"* And
again, when criticising Hume, he asks,?
" What is there in impressions and ideas so formidable, that this all
conquering philosophy, after triumphing over every other existence,
should pay homage to them ? Besides, the concession is dangerous ;
for belief is of such a nature that, if you leave any root, it will
spread, &c. A thorough and consistent sceptic will never, therefore,
yield this point; and while he holds it, you can never oblige him to
yield anything else. To such a sceptic I have nothing to say; but of
the semi-sceptics I should beg to know, why they believe the existence
of their impressions and ideas. The true reason I take to be, because
they cannot help it; and the same reason will lead them to believe
many other things." t
Reid, then, had more than an obscure view of the principle of
veracity; he saw it clearly as a dogmatist, but would not see it,
nor permit any one else to see it, in any other way. He assayed
to erect dogmatism into a final instead of a provisional system,
which is an insult to reason.
We believe that Sir William Hamilton is wrong, then, in his
estimate of the difference between rational and irrational scepti-
cism, and in his criticism on Reid's mistake in this respect ; and
also when he thinks that the facts of consciousness are radically
less open to question than the testimony of the same, seeing that
the principle of veracity underlies both, seeing that in this case
we have no stronger evidence for the existence of the traveller
than that he declares positively, and to the satisfaction of reason,
that he does exist, which is the same evidence that we have for
the truth of what he narrates.
The tenor of our remarks is, that scepticism has yet a reserve
to bring up against its elated opponents, and an invincible one.
But we are not sceptics without also being dogmatists, and we
are neither one nor the other by choice; what we aim at is
demonstration; we desire to satisfy the legitimate demands of
reason.;}; As sceptics, we think sensationalism has yet to re-
examine its foundation ; as dogmatists, we think that most of the
* Inquiry, &c. p. 100. -f- Ibid. p. 130.
% When these are satisfied, and not before, we shall be in possession of the long
and passionately desired Criterium of Truth. It is reason alone that asks for this
Criterium, and when reason has obtained it, we may rest assured there will no such
absurd question be repeated as that which Mr. Lewes puts in the mouth of the
ancient Sceptics:?"Very well," reply the Sceptics; "Reason is your Criterium.
But what proof have you that this Criterium itself distinguishes truly ? You must
not return to sense, that has been already given tip, you must rely upon reason;
and we ask you what proof have you that your reason never errs??what proof
have you that it is ever correct ? A Criterium is wanted for your Criterium; and
so on ad infinitum." (p- 227.) The obvious answer to this objection is, that when
reason is supplied with its special evidence it is convinced, and becomes acquiescent.
To ask for proof that reason, when supplied with proof of the veracity of conscious-
ness, decides truly, is to suppose reason behind reason, of which we have no evidence.
PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS. 679
mighty and all-absorbing questions of all the past are yet in the
Avomb of dogmatism, which is the real pioneer of intellectual and
moral progress, and at the same time the great conservative power
that has upheld many a dominant principle which sensationalism
attempted to refute and condemn, and that such questions demand
for their solution a more advanced method than the " positive/'?
than that which has no place for universals, and pronounces
essences and causes to be unknowable and problematical entities.
Having now characterized what seems to us the real state of
philosophy at the present moment, we are able to point out more
clearly than we otherwise should have been, the position which
Mr. Lewes and the school he represents hold among the different
systems which are in repute.
Sensationalism, for we must so term a system which has no
recognised place for the superior faculties, is, as to phenomena,
demonstratory: as to the disclosures of consciousness touching
aught beyond the limits of the ego?sceptical. Now, in this its
sceptical phase, it manifests a spirit of finality very unwise, and
a contractedness certainly pernicious. Scepticism, to be of any
value, must be negative demonstration. Prove that essences and
causes cannot be known, that universals are unattainable, and we
bow at once to such a decision. You think you do prove all this,
but what is it you ground your conclusions upon'( The circular
movement of philosophy; the impossibility of sensations existing
out of sentient beings?the impossibility of obtaining ideas
from any other sources than sensation and reflection. Now, as
to the first objection, it amounts to the fallacy of limiting what
will be to what has been, and would not, we believe, have been
urged had it not been deducible from the supposed impossibility
of philosophy. As to the second, no one ever dreams that a
sensation can have any existence out of a sentient being, but
consciousness declares that certain of the objects which it appre-
hends are not sensations. For instance, the primary qualities of
bodies are as different from feeling of any kind as it is possible
to conceive anything to be. Indeed light and sound are not
feelings, otherwise they could not be apprehended as distant
objects. The very perfection of the organs of sight and hearing
is that they cause us to be aware of the existence of distant
objects by means of manifestations apprehended as out of our
organism, and in the case of sight as possessing a degree of ex-
tension vastly exceeding that of the whole organic unity. How,
then, can we regard visible objects as feelings,?or affections of the
organism as animated, when to be apprehended as external to
that organism,* and as extended over a surface vastly greater
* The mere visible object, e.g., considered aloof from the inferences connected
with it, is apprehended as out of the organism. That which in the case of sight is
first in the order of knowledge is cognised as external, and if it were not, if it were
680 PHILOSOPHICAL PEOGEESS.
than its own is felt to be, is contrary to all we know of feeling ?
We consider, therefore, that consciousness reveals three main
classes of objects.
1st. Internal objects, modifications of self as animated.
2nd. Internal objects, not felt, but apprehended as external,
and only inferred to be internal from comparing together the
primary data of such objects.
3rd. External objects, apprehended as external, and which,
when their primary data are compared, cannot be inferred to be
aught else; and to deny the externality of which amounts to a
denial of the veracity of consciousness.
Here then is one class of objects which we cannot bring our-
selves, either by effort or by argument, to regard as_ sensations,
modifications of consciousness, or anything of that kind. That
when we cognise tangible qualities we are also conscious of a
sensation in the nerves of touch we freely confess, but this most
assuredly is not all that we are conscious of the sensation is
accompanied with an object which is not a sensation?not a
modification of the feeling, or of the thinking subject; so con-
sciousness declares. And since consciousness knows itself, it
knows that the object is not a part of itself; and since it knows
all manifestations of feeling, per se, it knows that the object is
not like them, and consequently pronounces it (from a know-
ledge of it, per se, and from a knowledge of all internal objects,
per se) to be a non ego.
Now, to deny that consciousness is veracious in this deliver-
ance involves us in inextricable confusion. We imply thereby
that it cannot discriminate its objects accurately, that it pro-
nounces some of them to be out of us when they are really
within us; and if it cannot distinguish between object and
object, it may not be capable of distinguishing between itself
and its objects; so that reason becomes tossed to and fro upon a
stormy sea of doubt without chart and compass. Now, out of
this confusion the only way to escape is to become dogmatists,
and believe " that we are (not) created capable of intelligence,
in order to be made the victims of delusion " that God is (not)
a deceiver," " and the root of our nature (not) a lieor if dis-
satisfied with mere belief on this point, we must endeavour to
23rocure such evidence as will convince reason that consciousness
is not mendacious.
cognised as a feeling, how could we regard it as out of the ego by means of an asso-
ciation or an inference ? A feeling out of the sentient unity ! It is a contradiction
in terms. Is it supposed that colour is literally a sensation, like pain, in the eye-
ball, and that we associate an external object with it ? In that case it would be
impossible for us to cognise a visual object as occupying the same place as that
object considered as tangible, which we clearly do.
* Indeed this sensation is rarely attended to, attention being fixed upon the
object, not upon the sensation.
PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS. 681
As to the third head, the impossibility of obtaining propositions
rigidly universal, because experience is finite, we must beg the
reader to wait till we get further on.
Now, although we condemn the sensationalists for their con-
tracted and unbelieving spirit, our opposition to them is not of.
an a priori, but an a posteriori nature ; starting from the same,
point, and following the same direction, we believe that the road
does not close where they so loudly protest that it does. That
the sensational method is the true one, so far as it goes, let the
grand and rapid march of the physical sciences proclaim. But
the time has evidently arrived when the extension of that method,
so as to gain the adherence of more idealistic thinkers has
become a great social necessity. The philosophical dogmatists,
no less than those who have hit upon processes of investigation
without perceiving them to be laws demanding to be expressed
in general terms, have undoubtedly prepared material, which it
now becomes the duty of the demonstrators to test and define, in
order to make the true method adequate to the moral and social
requirements of this, in these respects, doubting and unsettled
age. And it is only by taking possession of the material thus
waiting for their appropriation that they can accomplish so
desirable an end.
Now the course for the demonstrators to follow is to abstain
from the suicidal act of doubting the truth of the testimony,
while they hold the facts of consciousness, by which they lay
themselves open to defeat from scepticism; and to satisfy the
legitimate demands of reason as to the truthfulness of our facul-
ties, in order to do which we must have recourse to that operation
of the mind which infers that certain truths must be universal.
Now, such a power is denied the mind by the sensationalists ;
they incapacitate themselves, therefore, for securing their ground
against scepticism. To the task of describing how we perceive
that certain propositions must be universal, we now address our-
selves.
Mr. J. S. Mill defines reasoning, in the fullest sense, to be in-
ference from particulars to particulars. "All inference," he
writes, " is from particulars to particulars. General propositions
are merely registers of such inferences already made, and short
formulae for making more."715 But how can we conclude from
particulars to particulars with absolute certainty? That all
rigid deduction is from universals we cannot for a moment
doubt. The dictum de omni et nullo we consider to be as
firmly grounded as it is possible for a principle to be. How can
you know that your particular applies to every case that you
may have occasion to bring under it? You cannot\ for then it
* System of Logic, &c. vol. i. p. 216.
682 PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS.
-would be 110 longer a particular, but a universal, a proposition
that did not admit of an exception ; and until you know that it
applies to every possible case, you can only draw probable con-
clusions from it. This truth will become so evident, we trust,
as we proceed, that it becomes unnecessary in this place to dwell
any longer upon it; let us proceed, then.
If we observe but a single fact we cannot know that another
is connected with it, except it be connected with it in the mind.
It is by means of a mental nexus, therefore, that we know that
one thing is connected with another when only one of them is
observed. And now this nexus must be either .a universal, or a
particular proposition ; or a proposition the quantity of which is
indetermined. If it be the first, we infer without hesitation,
that the unobserved fact is connected with the observed ; if it
be the second, we infer that it may or may not be ; if it be the
third, we infer that the unobserved fact is connected with the
observed, but whether necessarily or contingently we cannot tell.
As far as experience extends, one fact may be invariably joined
to another, as that the feet of all horned animals are cloven, and
we may deduce from such a proposition, and perhaps never find
ourselves wrong; but evidently uniform experience?inductio
per enumerationem simplicem?does not enable us to decide
whether the conjunction, between two facts be necessary, or
whether contingent merely, but uniform, as when two distinct
phenomena are invariably found together, but are both effects of
some known cause or joint causes. Thus there is an invariable
connexion between the angles of a triangle, but no one angle is
the cause of another angle. ,
Again, two facts being observed joined together, we have but
an indefinite notion of the nature of the junction which exists be-
tween them, unless it happen that we know the nature of it pre-
viously. This previous knowledge is the mental nexus by means
of which we determine the nature of the junction which subsists
between the two facts. If the nexus is a universal, the junction
between the two facts is necessary ; if merely a contingent pro-
position, their junction is contingent; if an indefinite proposition,
their junction is indefinite. To know in this manner by means
of a mental nexus is deduction ; and the only rigid deduction,
such, for instance, as science demands, is that which proceeds
from universals.
To illustrate this process of reasoning more fully, let us quote
the following passage from the chapter on Reason in Locke's
Essay, and briefly comment upon it.
" Tell a country gentlewoman that the wind is south-west, and the
weather louring and like to rain, and she will easily understand it is not
safe for her to go abroad thin clad in such a day, after a fever: she
clearly sees the probable connexion of all these?viz., south-west wind,
PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS. 683
and clouds, rain, wetting, talcing cold, relapse, and danger of death,
without tying them together in those artificial and cumbersome fetters
of several syllogisms that clog and hinder the mind, which proceeds
from one part to another quicker and clearer without them."*
Now, without agreeingwith Locke in his wholesale condemna-
tion of the syllogism, we think that the mind perceives the con-
nexion between one of these terms and the next to it by deduc-
tive reasoning, and that consequently there is a simpler form of
ratiocination than that to which the syllogism gives expression.
The fact of the gentlewoman's uniting each of these facts with
the one immediately following, proves that she thought of them
as so connected ; that is, each pair of terms, the first and second,
the second and third, &c., came as a subaltern under its contain-
ing proposition in her mind; and according as the containing
proposition was universal, contingent (mostly or commonly true);
or indefinite, so would her conclusion be necessary, contingent,
or indefinite in the junction of its terms. It rains, some one
tells me: rain is contained in the proposition : all rain wets:
therefore I conclude that this rain wets, though I do not observe
it. The whole process when expressed assumes this form.
J st. Where only one fact is observed or stated.
It rains,
All rain wets,
Therefore, this rain wets.
2nd. "Where two facts are observed or stated to be joined,
but the senses are not able to determine the nature of their
conjunction.
The cow ruminates,
All cows must ruminate,
Therefore, this cow must
The first premise suggests the second?the second enables us
to infer the third.
Now, the ordinary opinion is, that deductive reasoning consists
primarily in proving that one term is connected with another by
means of a middle term, which must be distributed in one of the
premises at least.f Thus in homo, animal, vivens?homo is con-
nected with vivens by means of animal, as in a chain of three
links, the first is united to the third by means of the second ;
consequently the syllogism proves mediate junction between the
two terms of the conclusion. This junction is enough to ex-
onerate it from the charge of inutility so frequently brought
against it; for mediate junction, if it has to be deduced, must be
deduced according to the syllogism implied or expressed. We
* Essay, b. iv. c. xvii. sect. iv. p. 513.
f We omit the mention of ai-guments with a negative premise for the sake of
brevity.
684f PHILOSOPHICAL PEOGEESS.
think, tlien, that the first step of deductive reasoning is that
given by us above ; and that the syllogism is the second step,
that it is, in fact, the first step of the Sorites.
Having shown that the simplest form of ratiocination is deter-
mining the necessary, contingent, or indefinite?immediate con-
nexion of facts by means of universal, contingent, or indefinite
propositions, we have next to point out how these are obtained.
Necessity and contingency are related notions, the first being
the positive, the other the negative. The onlyidea of conjunction
derivable from simple observation is what must be called inde-
finite or undetermined. Unvarying experience can only afford a
strong presumption that two facts are necessarily connected : yet
association has frequently fastened the connexion between two
facts which have been invariably observed together, or between
two ideas which have been always thought of together, so firmly
that it was found impossible to undo it when it was afterwards
proved contingent. In consequence of the difficulty experienced
in destroying a long-standing association, some believe that the
notion of necessity can be thus accounted for. If our experience
all tends in one direction, and affords us no model or analogy to
facilitate our conceiving two facts apart, then say they, we find it
necessary to think of such facts always as they are presented to
our experience, and the only necessity in the connexion of facts
is this. Now, what clearly proves the erroneousness of this view
is, first, that invariable co-existence or succession of phenomena,
and association arising therefrom, are not always present where
the notion of necessity is caused. One instance of what is
required to prove necessary connexion does as well as a million ;
secondly, the notion of necessary conjunction is caused where
there are facilities afforded of framing a different notion, where
there are not wanting analogies or models to assist us in ima-
gining the two facts apart, and where it is indispensable to
ascertain that such a conception of them is absolutely excluded.*
* The man who is said to have seen a French baby with a long nose (page 55S
of our author's work) was under no necessity of thinking of all French babies under
this type for ever afterwards. Yet it is possible that by continuing for a long
period without attempting to think of them as differing from this specimen, an
inveterate association might grow up in his mind between French babies and long
noses. But not necessarily. The thought ought naturally to occur to a thinking
mind that some French babies had short noses. For it is only when the supposi-
tion of a different combination of facts (such a supposition in the majority of in-
stances being easily framed and readily suggested) is excluded by our knowledge
that we are forced always to think of the unknown as precisely similar to the
known. The ancients might have thought that there were black swans?for the con-
nexion between swans and whiteness being to them a mere indefinite one, it did
not exclude the conjecture that swans might vary in colour. Even where we have
no means of imagining an object different from the model we possess of it, we can
only say, we cannot picture it otherwise?not that it cannot exist otherwise, which
is the character of a necessary connexion : when we perceive that the supposition of
its being different is incompatible with our knowledge of it, then it is that we con-
clude that it cannot exist otherwise.
PHILOSOPHICAL PHOGEESS. 685
It is quite possible to conceive that oxygen and nitrogen might
unite in other than definite proportions to form air till the sup-
position is precluded by accurate knowledge of its nature.
Now let us proceed to show that the notion of necessity enters
as largely into the composition of thought as the commonest
facts of mere sense-apprehension; for sense-apprehension is
always attended with an inference of the following kind. When,
for example, we see a stone, the mind runs through the form of
deductive reasoning given above, implicitly and instantaneously.
I see a stone : all stones are hard : therefore this stone is hard ;
and now this inference is not conclusive unless hardness and
stones are necessarily connected in the mind. But let us state
another example better calculated to lead us towards the point at
which we are aiming. The statue is placed on a pedestal: all
that is evident here to the senses is the relation in place which
the statue and the pedestal bear to each other. But we assert
with undoubting confidence that the statue depends upon the
pedestal for retaining the place it does. How do we obtain this
notion of dependency ? By deducing it from a universal. But
how was this universal first obtained ? The relation which the
two objects bear to each other in place certainly does not afford
it. Let us search for it then in some other quarter. We observe
that if an object placed under another, as a pedestal under a
statue, is removed, the upper falls. Does this fact alone afford
us the notion of dependency? No : for here all that is obvious
to the senses is that one event is followed by another?mere ante-
cedence and consequence?which Hume very justly maintained
cannot originate the notion of a causal nexus. And which Reid
clearly proved to be quite incapable of begetting the idea of
necessity, seeing that then day must be considered as the cause
of night, or night of day.
Mr. J. S. Mill endeavours to rescue the sensational theory of
causation, thus overthrown, by adding that invariable sequence is
not synonymous with causation, unless the sequence, besides
being invariable, is unconditional. But here the word uncon-
ditional is intended to express more than the advocates of the
sensational theory have a right to, exhibiting how difficult it is
to keep within prescribed bounds, when those bounds are an
arbitrary limit to the real powers of the mind, and how those who
deny any of the faculties are forced to imply the very faculties
they deny ;??or it expresses merely one of the facts connected
with causation, of which the senses alone are competent to take
cognizance. But all that is manifest to the senses in an act of
causation is, as we have seen, insufficient to account for the
existence of the notions whose origin we are in quest of. But it
is an undoubted fact that all men, implicitly or dogmatically,
686 PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS.
hold certain connexions to be absolutely necessary and universal,
as that two added to two must always make four.
We could not wish for a better specimen of the mind's being
compelled to entertain the notion of necessity than Mr. Lewes
exhibits, in his own case, in his criticism on " Hume's Theory of
Causation," and on the "Fundamental Principles of Kant."
"While he labours hard to prove that there is no origin of ideas
but what is denoted by the term " experience," he is all the
while reminding us of Zeno in motion, when he denied the
possibility of motion. Mr. Lewes maintains that there is some-
thing more in causation than antecedence and consequence, there
is a causal nexus.
" It must be maintained tliat between those two events (cause and
effect) there is a specific relation, a something which makes the one
succeed the other, causing this particular effect rather than another;
and this subtle link it is which is the nexus contended for ; this
relation it is which distinguishes a causal act from one of accidental
sequence."
And " this subtle link," our author says, is apprehended by
experience. Now here Mr. Lewes is actually preparing for taking
his flight out of the confined nest of sensationalism, and does rise
out of it a little, although he is careful to drop into it again.
Mr. Lewes says that we have a tendency to think that two
parallel lines will meet at some remote point, but that we
correct this tendency by recurring to our experience. Now
experience, which only enables us to obtain an indefinite notion
of connexion, permits such a tendency, and when Mr. Lewes says
that it is to be corrected by recurring to our experience, he is
implying the faculty that does perform this office. Mr. Lewes
affirms that all truths are necessarily true. If they are, it is
assuredly not experience that informs us of the fact. Indeed the
statement that all truths are necessary, is only another way of
expressing what we have dwelt upon at a considerable length
above, namely, that consciousness is veracious. Experience can
only detect an indetermined conjunction between consciousness
and veracity. The fact of our being constrained to confide in
consciousness as veracious is no sufficient guarantee to reason
that it is such : reason must know that the veracity we ascribe
to it is necessary to the attainment of any certainty on this or
any other point.*
* It may be observed that we have avoided the use of the phrase, "necessary
truth," and substituted for it "necessary conjunction, or connexion of facts." If
consciousness is veracious in its deliverances?its demands being complied with?
all truths are necessarily true, not true to-day, but false to-morrow; but all con-
junctions of facts are not necessary, for some are contingent. It is owing to this
ambiguity in the phrase that we find Mr. Morell (Hist, of Modern Philosophy,
2nd Ed. vol. i. p. 298) stating that, according to sensational principles, "there can
PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS. 687
Having attempted to prove that experience is not able to
supply us with the notion of necessity, it may be thought that
we claim for it an a ?priori origin?but we do not. We think,
with Locke, that the mind is at first a tabula rasa in all respects,
excepting, of course, its faculties; in short, that we possess no
intuitions. We allow that such notions as goodness and badness,
beauty and deformity, &c., have their origin in our emotional
nature, but that the intellect has to discover what are the legiti-
mate objects to which our emotions should be directed. For
example, what is the true to the intellect, should be the good to
the emotional nature ; but to acquire the true there is no need of
intuitions. We take our departure from the same point as Locke
does, and follow the same method or way of transit, but we pur-
sue it further than he does. We find within our mind notions
which we cannot derive from our elementary faculties, at the
same time we discover that without them they could not exist ;
and the manner in which we are conscious of obtaining them is
this:?The elementary faculties provide the data: reason per-
ceives the conclusion, which is a new truth, wholly distinct from
any truth expressed by the data individually. Certain elementary
cognitions plus the faculty of reason necessitate what otherwise
could not possibly be known ; and although Ave trace the depen-
dence of the inferred truth upon the premises we can no more
detect it in them severally (as we detect the particular in the
universal) than we can detect water in oxygen and hydrogen.
This.intellectual procedure we call inductive reasoning.
It is commonly supposed that all reasoning is deductive, and
since this kind of reasoning when conclusive starts from uni-
versal, that these are not established by reasoning. " Conse-
quents cannot by an infinite regress be evolved out of antecedents
which are themselves only consequents. Demonstration, if proof
be no such thing as truth which may not at some time prove error." That rain
fell to-day can never by any possibility turn out to be an untruth. What, then,
does Mr. Morell mean ? tie evidently intends to express, that according to sensa-
tional principles, there are no facts conjoined which may not at some time be dis-
joined. The same ambiguity has led Mr. Lewes, in his strictures on Dr. Whewell's
theory of necessity, to state " I conceive that no such distinction whatever can
be made out between truths which are necessary and truths which are contingent.
All truth is necessary truth." If we substitute the word conjunction for the
word truth in this quotation, it will be easily perceived that Mr. Lewes misappre-
hends W liewell s doctiine, and ^ confounds necessary and contingent connexion
between facts with a proposition s being clearly ascertained to be true, or not yet
positively ascertained to be true, and so possibly untrue. The possibility of our
being in error is a very different thing indeed from contingency in the connexion
of facts, for about the existence on every hand of such contingency there is no mis-
take: every conjunction which is not necessary is contingent?thus there is a con-
nexion between the word man and a certain being; take away the word man,
and that being still exists: therefore the connexion between them is contingent.
Contingency therefore equals non-necessity.
688 PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS.
/
be possible, behoves to repose at last on. propositions which
carrying their own evidence, necessitate their own admission."
True, but the primary data need not be necessary and universal.
The premises of inductive reasoning are particular propositions,
or facts of mere observation. We hold, then, that induction
precedes deduction. Reason pre-eminently we regard as that
faculty by which we obtain universals for the purpose of scientific
deduction ; and without such universals we cannot conceive how
we can arrive at other than probable conclusions.
Now having so far made ready the way for a formal enounce-
ment of the process of inductive reasoning, we shall state what,
after long, severe, and impartial testing, we deem the formula of
such reasoning. But here we would call upon the reader to
reflect that this formula is likely to be correct, exactly in pro-
portion as it has already won a partial recognition ; and that if
we had to propound a principle which had previously gained no
amount of acceptance, we might be certain that it was a mere
invention of our own; for such truths do not grow up at once,
like ephemeral insects, but slowly and for ages, like the oak.
The formula is that implied by Sir John Herschel in his first two
rules for finding out causes, that is, between them ; but more
nearly approached to by Mr. J. S. Mill in his second Canon, and
called the Method of Difference. Our contribution to this prin-
ciple will be perceived, if it be not already perceived, as we
advance. The way in which we obtain the formula is this :?We
perceive a connexion between A and B : of the intrinsic nature
of this we have at first no knowledge, and so relatively to our-
selves call it indetermined or indefinite connexion; and mere
experience we contend cannot enlarge our knowledge in this
respect. But we observe that if A be removed, B disappears.
In this again, all that is obvious to experience is, that one event
follows another, which, it has been ably contested, is no proof of
causation. How then do we obtain such a notion ? By com-
paring together,
A is connected with B,
and
When this A is not, this B is not:
which being done, reason perceives that A is necessary to the
existence of B. Now, without these premises, and a faculty to
draw a conclusion from them, we cannot conceive that the human
mind could ever be in possession of such notions as causation,
necessity, dependence, essentiality, &c.
This formula admits of two variations, as follows :?
1st. A plus B,
Minus this A minus this B.
Therefore A is the cause of B.
PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS. 689
2nd. Minus A minus B,
Produce this A you produce this B,
Therefore A is the cause of B.*
The first is the form of reasoning when we observe the sup-
posed cause or causes, or presupposed entity in connexion with
the effect or supposing or involving entity, and ascertain the
negative premise in order to prove our previous belief. The
second, which is substantially the same as the first (for we
only start with the negative instead of the positive premise)
is the form of reasoning when we search for effects instead of
causes.
Time and space will not permit us now to point out how the
premises of inductive reasoning are to be arrived at when the
cause is concealed, as it generally is, by unessential concomitants;
how we may know what is not the cause ; and what affords 'prima,
facie evidence of being such, before we obtain all that is requi-
site to prove it to be the cause; and how the cause is frequently
to be ascertained by deduction from the universal, every change
has a cause or its equivalent?all that cannot be the cause being
previously abstracted.
We have now shown how necessary conjunctions are appre-
hended : how are these converted into universal propositions ?
Curiously enough this remaining part is accomplished according
to the law of contradiction, which would be rightly termed
universalization. For example, when we have ascertained that
arsenic causes death by an induction in the second form, thus,
before this man took arsenic he was quite well, when he took
* By A is to be understood whatever is necessary to produce B ; and we believe
that an effect is produced by the junction of two elements at least, as one added to
one makes two; and that one of the elements at least must be modified by the other:
they may modify each other, and that to such a degree as to become completely
changed, as in chemical combinations. The word this in the second premise of
these- forms is to insure against a different A and B being meant in the second
premise from what are contained in the first: thus, this man is a good mathema-
tician, and he is a good reasoner : that man is not a mathematician, and he is
not a good reasoner: therefore, &c., is a fallacious induction, because the negative
premise is not negative to the positive, but is quite independent of it. The judge,
who Mr. Macaulay relates, ' was in the habit of jocosely propounding, after dinner,
a theory, that the cause of the prevalence of Jacobinism was the practice of bearing
three names," would have lost his fan had he been aware of this law. Perhaps the
best way of stating the formula would be thus : ?
1st. This A is B and it is C.
The same A is not B and it is not C.
Therefore B is the cause of C.
2nd. This A is not B and it is not C.
The same A is B and it is C.
Therefore B is the cause of C.
Here we regard B and C as attributes of the same substratum A: in the text they
are regarded, under the titles of A and B, as abstracted from any substratum. The
latter plan allows the formula to be stated more neatly than the former, which never-
theless answered more fully the purposes of our exposition.
690 PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS.
it lie died, &c., we also conclude that arsenic would kill any one
to whom it was administered in sufficient quantity, and after-
wards deduce from this universal. But how do we become con-
vinced that it must be universal ? If we suppose that arsenic
some time or other may not cause death, we are supposing that
there is only a contingent connexion between its being taken
and the event which follows its being taken; that is, in stating
the supposition we are forced to predicate contingency or non-
necessity of necessity?supposed contingency of demonstrated
necessity, which clearly shows that the supposition is not tenable.
A triangle is a figure which must have three sides (the must
would be here implicitly inferred), but a triangle may not always
have three sides, are propositions which cannot both be true, but
the first is proved true ; consequently it is true beyond dispute
that all triangles have three sides.
Here we must be looking out for the end ; but before we con-
clude, it behoves us to inform the reader that, although we
firmly believe that every man reasons inductively according to
the formula we have propounded, we do not mean to assert that
valid inductive reasoning always supposes the knowledge of it.
"VYe reason in accordance with it implicitly, long before we do
so explicitly. Every mental operation takes place spontaneously
before we become aware of its character. The knowledge of an
intellectual process supposes that process, as the science of optics
supposes the existence of sight. So far, we think, that Mr.
Macaulay is correct in saying " that the inductive method has
been practised from the beginning of the world by every human
being.* But we cannot agree with him when he says, "We
think it is quite possible to lay down accurate rules .... for the
performing of that part of the inductive process which all men
perform alike, but that these rules, though accurate, are not
wanted, because in truth they only tell us what we are all doing."
We must lay particular emphasis on the fact that implicit induc-
tion only sufficed for establishing the data of our earliest deduc-
tions, f and those of the elementary sciences. When data
* Essay on Bacon.
1' It is surprising how different facts are made to appear according to the theory
which is brought to bear upon them. Mr. Mill (System of Logic, &c. i. p. 210) writes :
?" Not only may we reason from particulars to particulars without passing through
generals, but we perpetually do so reason. All our earliest inferences are of this
nature. From the first dawn of intelligence we draw inferences, but years elapse
before we learn the use of general language. The child, who, having burnt his
fingers, avoids to thrust them again into the fire, has reasoned or inferred, though he
has never thought of the general maxim?fire burns. He knows from memory
that he has been burnt, and on this evidence believes when he sees a candle, that
if he puts his finger into the flame of it, lie will be burnt again. He believes this
in every cise which happens to arise; but without looking in each instance, be-
yond the present case. He is not generalizing; he is inferring a particular from
PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS. 691
pertaining to subjects of a more advanced and less accessible and
intelligible nature had to be obtained, the implicit process failed.
While men were scientific in geometry, they were romancers as
to the stars; and now that they have won its secret from the
heavens, and can sail round the world by the light of science,
they still trust to empiricism for navigating the ship of state.
When facts were obtruded upon the mind, and were possessed,
so to speak, of a perfectly transparent aspect, or admitted of
being painted on the imagination with the vividness of reality,
universals would follow as naturally from them as talking from
the possession of the faculty of language and a vocal apparatus.
But where facts did not come unsought into the mind, and when
they were not distinctly and clearly possessed, there would be no
implicit induction. For unless the premises of inductive reason-
ing had that character which, in concert with reason, constitutes
them causes of universals, no universals would follow. But for
the premises to be of this lucid nature, and for us to be aware of
the form they should assume, are two very different things, as
different as trusting entirely to nature for the supply of our
wants, and supplying them artificially. And thus it is that we pos-
sess some data so fully, but cannot account for their genesis, and
consequently call them self-ewident. But there are some who,
in attempting to account for their origin, deny their universality,
and call them mere generalizations from experience. There is
truth on both sides, but error also. Truth is generally brought
to light by conflict between those who ask too much and those
who grant too little?between the dogmatists and empirics on
the one side, and the sceptics or critics on the other. Men, how-
ever, must begin by being dogmatists; they must learn the
alphabet of science, and spell out its easier parts before they
become proficient enough to undertake more recondite researches ;
and their reasoning at first would consist in drawing conclusions
from universals implicitly obtained. This method of reasoning
deductively from data spontaneously supplied would naturally
be imitated wherever it was found that unaided efforts were not
equal to the task of clearing up the mysteries of being. But its
use would be limited in such cases to the knowledge they had
of it, to the extent to which it had become explicit. Axioms
particulars. Mr. Mill here very clearly describes wliat is explicit in. our earliest
inferences ; but what really does take place in the unexplored recesses of the mind
.we believe to be that process which we have attempted to explain?namely, to take
the example given by Mr. Mill, an induction in the second form, thus Before
the child touches the fire he is nut burnt: but when he does touch it he is burnt;
therefore the child concludes implicitly that touching the fire is the cause of his
being burnt: which conclusion he implicitly universalizes into All fire burns :
from which universal he ever afterwards implicitly deduces, that if he puts his
finger in the fire it is sure to be burnt.
NO. VIII.?NEW SERIES. Z Z
692 PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS.
and definitions being considered se?/-evident, attention would be
centred, as a matter of course, on deduction, hence the develop-
ment of this portion of reasoning long before the other, and the
almost universal application of the deductive method to all
branches of knowledge. Where implicit induction accomplished
all that was needed, several sciences were established with small
reflective knowledge of the processes of reasoning ; but where
this spontaneous procedure was checked by increasing turbidness
and depth in the widening river of knowledge, men endeavoured
to supply its place as best they could, and this would be at first
by a very crude imitation. In room of universals supplied spon-
taneously by Nature's bounty, they would invent what they
thought the most reasonable principles, imagining, as they at
first could not avoid doing, that all first principles must be
educed from the mind. The consequence was " the multiplication
of systems in every conceivable aberration from the unity of
truth," teaching men the salutary lesson that they must learn
before they can teach. Bacon rightly describes this era in reason-
ing, it seems to us, therefore, when he says, that men have
sought to make a world of their own conceptions, and to draw
from their own minds all the materials which they employed.
It was inevitable that they should; this was the provisional
step which prepared the way for the scientific period. It
was imitating the model they possessed as far as they under-
stood it. But even this primitive method, when applied to less
accessible phenomena, involved some degree of observation, for
without that it would be impossible to invent a theory bearing
any relation to the facts; and thus would be partly laid the
foundation of the explicit development of inductive reasoning.
But a great forerunner of scientific induction was that spon-
taneous generalization from experience, which resulted from man's
being placed amidst those numerous uniformities of nature which
every moment of his waking life could not otherwise than attract
his notice. These spontaneous generalizations would be so many
data from which men could reason deductively. But how many of
them would be legitimate data, and how many not ? Such of them
as were simple enough to permit of implicit induction taking
place would be established universals; but such of them as did
not admit this would be no better than indetermined conjunc-
tions, and any conclusions drawn from them might be true?
might be not. Now it was only in the former of these instances
?that in which implicit induction took place, that the idea of
causation would be arrived at. In the latter, where inductio
jpev eniimerationem simplicem was all that occurred, the idea
of causation was unattainable, for here only one of the premises
of inductive reasoning was to be met with: whereas both are
PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS. 693
essential to our acquiring the notion of one thing being necessary
to the existence of another. When Mr. J. S. Mill, therefore
states that,
" As all rigorous processes of induction presuppose the general uni-
formity, our knowledge of the particular uniformities from which it
was first inferred was not of course derived from rigid induction, hut
from the loose and uncertain mode of induction per enumerationem
simplicem: and the law of universal causation, being collected from
results so obtained, cannot itself rest on any better foundation."*
"When he states this he is clearly in error: causation can only be
inferred from rigid induction; and the law of causation is an
universal, which the mind cannot help acquiring by implicitly
abstracting from specific universals spontaneously obtained that
in which they all agree, thus resting in the generic universal?
the axiom of induction, namely, Every thing which does not exist
<per se exists per aliud ; that is, it is either primordial and pre-
supposes nothing, or it is not primordial and supposes an ante-
cedent.
But in the latter of the instances mentioned above, namely,
where merely inductio per enumerationem simplicem took
place, many of the principles of physical science would be gained,
because this loose and unscientific method would be applied in
cases where the use of the complete method would have been
rewarded with successful results. As objects requiring the use of
the inductive method came to be seriously inquired after, in the
same degree there grew a demand for its further explicit deve-
lopement. So while the study of natural philosophy created a
demand for the inductive method?that method by this means,
first empirically, and then scientifically, disclosing itself would
facilitate the solution of more abstruse problems, by turning mere
forest tracts into broad and level roads, and superseding the
picturesque, but unsafe, stepping-stones of a ruder period by
bridges finely constructed.
Taking the view that we do of the value of a clear knowledge
of the laws of reasoning, the question?what is the use of logic ?
is easily answered by replying, that it cannot be dispensed with.
When this question has had to be answered by some of our
most eminent logicians, after they had made the admission that
logic could merely tell us what we were all doing admirably well
already, it required no small amount of ingenuity and enthusiasm
to plead on behalf of the study of this science, for there were
persons always ready to object that the knowledge of the pro-
cesses of reasoning aids us no more in the practice of it than an
acquaintance with anatomy enables a man to walk any better
* System of Logic, ii. p. 97.
z z 2
694 PHILOSOPHICAL PROGRESS.
than one profoundly ignorant of that science. But this remark
applies solely to implicit reasoning, which we have shown
does not go with us much beyond the confines of the region
we have to explore. That we need an explicit statement of
the laws of thought from first to last, let the battle that is
raging between Positivists, Individualists, and Traditionalists,
assure us. We feel convinced that nothing but the general
recognition of the One True Method will dispel the anarchy
which now exists in matters of a social and moral kind. Because
we can reason implicitly on questions demanding little exertion of
intellect to comprehend them, and indeed on abstruser subjects
when we devote so much attention to them as to make them
thoroughly our own,* it does not follow that we can reason on all
sorts of intricate questions?beheld, too, through the obscuring
Gehenna atmosphere of self-interest and prejudice, any more
than the earth is able of itself to supply all that an advanced agri-
cultural skill can win from it, because in the first place it yielded
sustenance spontaneously to its rational inhabitant?man. We
think that the minds of individual men (none of them harmo-
niously developed, but full here, defective there) in exploring
the vast unknown need help; and that this help is to be derived
from a reflective knowledge of the mind's own laws, those fun-
damental facts, varying in degree, but never in kind, which un-
derlie the more variable attributes of thought, and which cannot
be absent without the mind's being dethroned thereby. The in-
dividual mind is not self-sufficient: it must be consciously en-
deavouring to obey the Laws of human thought. Bacon, says
Coleridge, " supposes that the Intellect of the individual or
homme particulier, may be refined by the Intellect of the Ideal
Man, or homme general/'f And it is superfluous to state who
it was that said?" The real cause and root of almost all the
evils in science is this, that falsely magnifying and extolling
the powers of the mind, we seek not its real helps."
" Though various foes against the truth combine,
Pride, above all, opposes her desigu."
* This is what Dr. "YVhewell seems to have in his mind when he says, " I must ex-
plain, that I do not by any means assert that those truths which I regard as necessary
sire all equally evident to common thinkers, or evident to persons in all stayes of
intellectual development. I niay even say, that some of those truths which I regard
as necessary, and the necessity of which I believe the human mind to be capable
of seeing, by due preparation and thought, are still such, that this amount of pre-
paration is rare and peculiar; and I will willingly grant, that to attain to and
preserve such a clearness and subtlety of mind as this intuition requires is a task of
no ordinary difficulty and labour."?Letter to the Author of "The Prolegomena
Logica."
t Treatise on Method, sect. ii. p. 52. Encyc. Met.
