Autobiography of the Insane
=============================

In continuance of our series of papers illustrative of the phe-
nomena of insanity, as delineated by those who have suffered
from the effects of alienation of mind, we reprint, with much
pleasure, an interesting paper which appeared in the July
number of the " American Journal of Insanity." It is written
by a young gentleman of talent and literary pursuits, who was a
patient in the New York State Lunatic Asylum. He suffered
from an attack of acute mania, attended by considerable physical
prostration, following a protracted attendance upon religious
exercises. The disease was of live months' duration when he
was discharged recovered.

Man, the most perfect and complicated in structure of all
God's workmanship, is at the same time subject to the greatest
number and variety of injurious agencies. This liability is,
indeed, a natural consequence of the complexity of his orgauiza-
tion. Possessed of a composite nature, in which the material
and spiritual elements are strangely interblended and har-
monized, he is at once subject to the imperfections and evils
incident to both. Add to this the effect of highly artificial
modes of life, by which nature seems crossed and thwarted at
every turn, and of unnatural habits voluntarily contracted, which
add insult to her injuries, and the passage from the cradle to the
grave is like running a gauntlet of perils, from which it is really
wonderful that so many escape unharmed.

" The ills which flesh is heir to " may be classified under three
general heads : those diseases which attack the body exclusively ;
those which affect the mind exclusively; those which impair the
connexion between the mind and boily, and hence are commonly
called nervous. The first of these classes has occupied the atten-
tion of men from a very early period in the world's history, and
the treatment of it belongs entirely to the science of medicine in
its various branches. It is of the second class that I wish to
speak.

That species of disease which attacks the mind, producing
insanity in its various forms, though it has always been pre-
valent in the human family, and is often more dreadful in its
results than any other, has, till within a comparatively recent
period, received but little medical attention, probably because it
has been thought incurable. The ancients considered insanity
as a direct visitation from the gods, and the famed hellebore,
which grew in the island of Anticyra, was supposed to be a cure
for it. In the New Testament the insane are spoken of as those
possessed with devils, and the miracle of casting out devils is now
supposed to have been the restoring the lunatic to reason. Her-
man Melville, in " Typee," tells us that in the South Sea Islands
lunatics are revered as a kind of inspired or sacred personages,
and accordingly allowed the largest liberty. It is only in the
most enlightened countries and in modern times that asylums
have been founded, and systematic efforts made in the treatment
of this formidable and mysterious disease. France, foremost in
the pursuit of science, and at the head of all modern nations in
works of public benevolence, has led the way in this also. There
commenced that course of treatment now universally practised,
by which such great advances have been made in the art of
ministeiing to a mind diseased." Instead of chains and brutal
cruelty, which only serve to madden still more hopelessly the un-
fortunate wretch, kindness and sympathy have been substituted ;
and it has been found that these would often illumine, and some-
times entirely dispel, the Cimmerian night in which many a noble
spirit lay enshrouded.

Ihis was a great forward step in tho management of insanity,
but it was only the beginning ; the business of accurately classi-
fying and scientifically treating the various forms of mental
derangement has yet to be accomplished. Its types are so
numerous and peculiar, that it would be almost impossible ever
to arrive at an accurate analysis of all of them. The most com-
prehensive classification, including all the varieties of mental
imperfection and disease by which man is unfitted for the exercise
of his powers as a rational being, would seem to be something
thus: radical deficiency of intellect, which constitutes idiotcy;
total derangement of all the faculties of the mind, by which
the mental equilibrium is entirely overthrown, and the intellect,
moral sentiments, passions, and appetites, are thrown into a
complete chaos of elements, of which the primal chaos of the
material world was but a feeble type ; excessive activity or pre-
dominance of some particular faculty, sentiment, or propensity,
or the entire occupation of the mind by some leading subject of
thought, till the perceptive powers become distorted with regard
to all objects connected with that object, while they remain
correct on all others?this is insanity; disordered state of the
nervous system, or the connecting medium between mind and
body, which gives rise to hypochondria, optical illusion, and to
which spectral appearances and ghost stories are said to owe
their paternity.

All these forms of mental disease are complex in their cha-
racter, or at least in their first symptoms, and require to be
considered under two aspects, physical or physiological, and
metaphysical. Since the causes of insanity are usually of a
mixed character, and the disease itself almost always so, the
treatment should be addressed both to the material and spiritual
nature of the patient. This is what renders it difficult. Ordi-
nary insanity often arises from excessive mental activity, by
which the nervous energy is withdrawn from the general system
and concentrated in the brain. Of the efficient causes ot this
species of insanity it is not necessary to speak. They are
numerous, and will be found enumerated in the journals of
insanity; but of the proximate causes or symptoms, wrant 'of
sleep is the most common and obvious. When a man's " soul
gets into his head," to the extent that he cannot sleep, lie is in
a bad way, and had better speedily adopt some means ot driving
it out again.

People with large, active brains and comparatively small vital
powers are peculiarly liable to mental derangement, while, on
the other hand, persons of predominant vital temperament have
comparatively little to fear from it, for if there is a temporary
excess of cerebral action, the heart, lungs, and stomach soon re-
assert their supremacy. A scrupulous attention to the laws of
health, in relation to free, pure air, abundant exercise, suitable
diet, cheerful employments, an abstinence from all exciting
agencies, and an habitual exercise of calmness and self-control,
will generally suffice, even with persons of high nervous tempe-
rament, to keep the vital powers in vigorous action, and hold
the mind within the traces. A man should never become so
scientific, so sentimental, or so religious, as to forget his dinner;
for it is far better to vegetate, or lead a meroly inert, animal
life, than, like a comet, to " shoot madly from our spheres to
affright the world."

With regard to the treatment of insanity, as has already been
observed, it involves a course physiological and metaphysical.
The body is first to be attended to, the nervous equilibrium
restored, so that the patient shall eat and sleep well. When
proper means are used at the commencement, while the patient
is still rational enough to co-operate with the means, no doubt
the symptoms might often be averted ; but when the mind
becomes completely disorganized, and the brain has'begun to
boil and seethe in good earnest, it is not easy to reduce it again
by any material remedies. Narcotics and stimulants have
but little effect at this stage of derangement, for the whole
system seems to adapt itself readily to this new order of things ;
so that while the exciting causes may have long been removed,
and the scathing billows of fire have retired, in some measure,
within their original limits, the once stately edifice they have
assailed remains a chaired and desolate ruin, which no skill 011
the part of the apothecary can reconstruct.

The patient may eat and sleep Avith tolerable regularity again,
while the mind is entirely unsettled. There only remains, then,
a resort to the other method of treatment, and here a wide and
unmapped region is laid open to the humane and skilful physi-
cian. He will here find that more depends upon his native good
sense, knowledge of human nature, and natural sympathy, than
upon his medical education. The forms of mental hallucination
are so numerous and so subtle, that it is very difficult to unravel
the tangled mass, and dissect out a single straight thread of
thought, by the skiltul management of which reason may be
restored. 1 here is usually some leading idea, some ruling fantasy
in the mind ot an insane man, which is the cause of all his
trouble. I his becomes, in the hands of a skilful physician, a
decoy duck, by the successful management of which the whole
nock may be secured; or, to use a still bettor figure, this ic/nis
fatuus, which leads the poor benighted traveller through bog
and briar, and hopelessly bewilders him in pathless solitudes, may
become, when caught and guided by a kind and skilful hand, the
beacon-light of his salvation, by which ho may bo softly guided
Lack to the old highway of reason and happiness. It is not by
flat contradiction and coercion that the deranged mind is set
right: this at once provokes enmity, and the lunatic meets it
with a total scepticism, which converts his best friends into liars
and demons plotting his destruction.

Some one has very shrewdly remarked, that the difference
between an idiot and a lunatic was simply this?that the former
reasons falsely from correct premises, and the latter reasons
correctly from false premises. With regard to the lunatic this is
undoubtedly true in many cases. He is the most skilful of
sophists; every minute and casual circumstance is turned to
account in supporting his false theory ; he weaves a chain of the
most subtle and elaborate error, which requires the utmost
gentleness and caution to untwist. He must be headed off by
strategy, and led, for he cannot be driven, out of his delusion.
He must be managed like Dominie Samson, in Guy Mannering,
who had a soul so much above buttons that he could not be per-
suaded to put on a new suit of clothes; and the only means by
which a change could be effected, when his old ones became too
much worn, was by stealing into his room at night, while the worthy
Dominie was asleep, taking away the old ones and hanging the
new garments on the chair; so that when he arose and dressed
himself in the morning, he incontinently put on the new breeches,
without discovering the change till they were fairly buttoned, or
rather not discovering it at all. Let some one correct, rational idea
be substituted in the place of a false one, and that, too, without
sensibly disturbing the superstructure, like putting a new sill in
a building, and it often paves the way for a gradual and com-
plete recovery. It becomes, as it were, a nucleus or centre of
attraction, round which all the rest will slowly cluster in regular
order, and thus a new, and sometimes more beautiful, creation
emerge from the chaos. To accomplish this successfully, indirect
methods are generally the best. For example, it is quite a com-
mon delusion with the insane that he is in the supernatural
world ; he loses all cognizance of time, and supposes eternity has
commenced. In such a case there is but little use in denying
this before him. He will believe you to be an emissary of
Satan, sent to mislead and ruin his soul; but leave in his way
a daily paper of a late date, or, if he be of a literary turn, a
new book, by some favourite author, and the error will correct
itself.

It would be a curious and interesting speculation to inquire a
little into the pathology of insanity, with a view of arriving at a
metaphysical analysis of it, so as to ascertain, if possible, in pre-
cisely what psychological change it consists. The error would
probably bo found not in the reflective or reasoning faculty so
much as in the perceptive or seeing faculties, by which all ex
ternal objects and their relations are viewed throug 1 ? nfr:_
medium, and distorted into unnatural shapes; hence 1 ?
nation, which draws upon the perceptive powers tor is <
rials, becomes filled with wild and delusive images. n
cases of total insanity personal identity or consciousne.
lost, or merged in the general chaos ; and hence also 1 is, 1
the lunatic believes himself to be some other person-?a iei ,
prince, sometimes the devil, and sometimes the Dei y ?
Without dipping too deeply into metaphysics, we mig i X1',
to suggest that the human mind, in a healthy state, is nei <
simple unity nor a plurality, but rather a confederation o po\ ,
and that consciousness is the quintessence or produc o
combined and harmonious action ; just as the governmen o
United States is the product of the combined governmen
the several States, so that " plurlbus unurii wou ( no
less appropriate term as applied to the mind than to our conn y.
In this consciousness we may suppose the soul resides in
normal state. The perceptive faculties are to the sou w ia
police is to a city?by them all passports must be visacc , so
in the rational mind 110 ideas of external things or their re a '
are allowed to enter which do not correspond with rui 1 ?
thus truth and reason are maintained. But when insani > ,<l,
place, this harmonious confederation is broken up, an cac 1 > -
comes a petty sovereignty, independent within its<*lf. un,, ^
of action is lost, the perceptive faculties become caie ess, 1
gates are thrown open, and any gigantic fantasy may wa v >o ? y
in and usurp the seat of government! At the same time > ie
spontaneous action of particular faculties may be unimpairec ,
the memory may be perfect, the moral sentiments collect, an
the affections and sensibilities active; but all legitimate cointnu
nication is cut off, unity is destroyed, reason is deposed, and
soul is a wreck :

" Ever drifting, drifting, drifting t
O'ur the shifting currents of the restless main.'
The ideas of space and time, which are tho fundamental con-
ditions ot all thought in rational minds, become contused, 01
wholly lost
A tew facts from my own experience may illustrate this point
more clearly. The first symptom of insanity in my own case
was want of sleep. I was myself conscious of this need of natural
slumber as well as my friends, and tried in vain to obtain it from
narcotics. The very consciousness of tho fact that L needed
repose, and my efforts to obtain it, only aggravated my excite-
ment, and my brain grew every day more and more disturbed.
At last I began to imagine that the final dissolution of all things
was coming on, thus transferring the tumult in my own mind to
external nature. I was removed from the place where I was
then residing, to be conveyed home in a carriage, a distance of
some thirty or forty miles. It was on the Sabbath, in the month
of October, and one of the most lovely days of " Indian summer."
A golden haze overspread the earth, through which the blue
peaks of the Catskills loomed softly 011 the southern horizon.
Had I been well, I should have enjoyed the ride, for Autumn is
my favourite season of the year ; and as it was, the exceeding
loveliness of the season stole in upon my fevered brain with
something of its old effect. I imagined that it was my last look
upon that earth that had once contained for me so much glad-
ness and beauty. The rustling of the dead and dying leaves,
and the smoking light that lay over all the landscape, confirmed
the impression:

" The sun's eye had a sickly glare,
The earth with age was dim."

The houses as we passed seemed empty and desolate (which
was, indeed, true, since the people were all gone to church) ;
scarcely a living object met my eye, except a few people that
were passing 011 foot or in carriages, and even they seemed more
dead than alive ; their faces wore a semi-inanimate, unearthly
expression. As I gazed with weary, half-shut eye down the long
valley, and across the brown woods that stretched away to the
base of the distant mountains, there came into my mind, with
sublime and soothing effect, and with all the force of reality, this
fine sentence, which I believe to be found somewhere in Holy
Writ?" And I saw all the kingdoms of the earth in a vision."
The roads were smooth, the horses sped along briskly, and I
believed this prophetic utterance was to be literally accomplished
in my own case, and that I was thus, amid the profound stillness
of universal nature, to ride over the whole earth, now fading
with its last autumn. During the ride I struggled once to escape
from the man who held me by his side, and displaced a bandage
011 my arm, where I had been recently bled. The blood flowed
again copiously before it could be bound up, and this, together
with the fatigue of my efforts, so exhausted me, that, when at
evening we reached a small town 011 the banks of the river, my
vital strength was nearly spent. I lay faint and weary, and gazed
dimly upon the water while waiting for the ferry-boat The bells
were ringing for the evening service, and the streets were filled
with people flocking to church. The full moon was rising in
mild splendour over the eastern hills beyond the river, and the
evening wind was just curling the water into a ripple. 1 thought
46 autobiography of the insane.

the river was no other than the Jordan of Death, across which
I was about to pass into the happy country beyond, and that the
whole world was following me to judgment. While crossing, I
turned my eye up the stream, and as the soft light lay upon the
water, and the white sails of the sloops dotted the long vista, a
sense of unutterable beauty filled my soul. When Ave were on
the other side, and had nearly reached home, we passed through
another village, where the bells were again ringing, and a stream
of people passing along to church. I recognised every familiar
object, but the same idea continued in my mind, and it seemed
the bells were tolling, and the nations coming up to judgment.
After I reached home I must have slept for some time, for when
I next woke to consciousness I cannot precisely determine, but
it seemed that the demons of madness were pursuing me again.
I fled back into the scenes of the Jewish dispensation for repose.
I found myself transferred into the early history of the world.
About this time the fall rains set in, and I supposed myself in
the ark, flying through the stormy waters. I was lying in an
upper room in the house of my brother-in-law, and as I looked
out at the dreary leather, everything conspired to favour this
delusion. The winuow-curtains were parted so that the space
through which the light came in, was in the form of a steep
lattice-roof, such as I remember in the old pictures of the ark.
Here I obtained a short repose, but the pursuing fiend found me
again, and drove me abroad through boundless space. Then
every muscle and nerve seemed wrought to the utmost tension,
and I imagined that the world was again dissolved into chaos,
and that all living things had perished, but that I bad. found out
the great secret of Nature, and through me the universe was to
be reconstructed. I thought that I was the living, intelligent
principle of electricity, and that I had power to call into my own
person all the electric fluid in the world; and thus J was to give
life again to my friends and others. My father hud lately arrived,
and he made a remark in my hearing which partially gave rise to
this idea. He said he heard the wires of the electric telegraph ring
as he passed .along the road. I thought all the telegraph wires in
the United States were employed in conducting the fluid into my
body; and this gave me unnatural strength. I thought [ was
moving by some attraction towards the sun, and that there, in
the opaque centre of the great luminary, I. should at last find an
eternal rest, and rejoin my friends and kindred. But these
penods of intense excitement were followed by great nervous
prostration, and then 1 would seem to lose again all my powers,
the e ectnc luid was dispersed, the spirits of my friends were
scattered again, and I seemed to bo sinking through immeasu-
rable depths of space, when I was just on the point of achieving
immortal happiness. Again, as I had almost gathered in the
scattered spirits, and the new earth was about complete, a comet
struck us, and we were dashed into numerous fragments, upon
which we were hurled flaming through the universe. Then
there was a great battle in the sky, among hostile powers; some
of my friends were upon separate fragments, and vast gulfs of
fire yawned between us. I was left upon one small piece, with
only two persons with me (these were two men who sat up with
me through the night). A lurid light surrounded us, and these
were enemies witli whom my father, upon another fragment, and
with a large squadron of my friends, was about to do battle for
my recovery. I must have slept very little during this time,
which was only a week, though it seemed to me a century.

The familiar faces of my friends, as they came into the room,
would seem for a time to partially restore me to reason* and
bring me back to the earth again. Then I heard sounds of har-
mony, and a noise of chains, and the voices of men outside the
house, and I imagined they were trying to bind me to the earth,
and attaching all the oxen and horses in the world to draw me back
when I was endeavouring to fly away. Again, I would seem to rise
in the air, and the house became a balloon, floating above the
town in the-gaze of assembled thousands. At last, failing to
find rest for my soul, I fled still farther back into the past his-
tory of the world, for the purpose of reaching a period in the
human race as remote as possible, or even anterior to the exist-
ence of men, so as to include all that had ever lived in the new
creation, and thus reconcile all hostility among contending spirits.
X betook myself to Grecian mythology, and became Apollo, or
the sun himself, the source of all life.

When I was removed from the house to be conveyed to the
Asylum, I suspected there was some design upon me, and
resisted ; but when I got into the carriage, and two of the
gentlemen who accompanied me sat with me, while the third
mounted the box and drove, I thought he was Phaeton, driving
the horses of the sun, and that I ought to be doing it myself;
and then the men by my side kept saying to me, " Never mind,
sit still; he don't know the team, he don't understand the
horses." Whether anything of this kind was actually said I
know not, but it confirmed my impression ; and though I felt
personally secure from harm, I feared he would destroy himself,
and produce universal ruin again, by driving my coursers. When
Ave drove up to the Asylum, its imposing front made quite an
impression upon me. I had some idea of the true character of
the building, but the predominant fancy overruled it, and the
building became the temple of Apollo, into the possession o
which 1 was about to enter, as my rightful residence.

Then followed a period of unconsciousness, broken liere and
there only by impressions vivid enough to be recalled to memory.
Heathen mythology became mixed with modern astronomy, and
I was transferred from Apollo to Mars, and became the god of
war. At this time I was very violent, and struggled fiercely
with my attendants ; finally, getting no repose, and finding that
I saw my friends no more, I despaired of getting back again, and
thought myself a comet?the living intelligent head of a comet
.?flying through space with inconceivable velocity, and passing
far beyond the confines of the habitable universe, thus leaving
my friends hopelessly behind me. I lost all sense of time and space.
A whizzing and careering through trackless solitudes, a sense of
rapid and lonely motion at an incalculable rate, and a sinking of
the heart in utter despair, are all I can recollect. But at length
I began to notice the succession of day and night, and observe
things about me ; then, to be sensible of hunger and thirst and
clothing. This checked my career, and I now believed my
friends, with the other inhabitants of the earth, were in the
planet Jupiter, and that a cable had been passed over to me, by
which I was moored alongside, or rather, held attached, though
still at a great distance. Along this rope they passed me food
and drink and clean clothes, and the spirits of my nearest friends
came across, and entered the bodies of those whom I saw around
me. One of the attendants I took to be my brother, though he
resembled him but slightly ; another was an intimate friend,
while another was my implacable enemy.

I began gradually to realize my situation?to feel that I was
confined within stone walls. I tried to escape from the window,
and should have precipitated myself boldly from any height, for
I had no doubt whatever that I should fly direct to Jupiter,
could I get into free air. An ethereal lightness seemed to per-
vade my whole frame, and the great stone edifice itself appeared
to be sustained in mid-air. It was a long time after I began to
recover and walked out before the earth seemed firm and resisting
under my feet. During the day I enjoyed myself tolerably well,
while I was permitted to walk the hall; and tho sight of tho
sun, when he occasionally appeared during tho cloudy days of
mid-winter, rejoiced me greatly ; but at tho approach of night I
fancied that I was falling into the power of evil again, and tho
lighting of the gas was very obnoxious to mo. 1 tried to blow
ou e ight, and once pulled down one of tho gas-pipes, sup-
posing that thereby I could hide the darkness aid restore tho
dominion of the sun again. At last
" All these sharp fancies by down-lapsing thought
Streamed onwards, lost their edges ami did cvq,,
tolled on each other, rounded, smoothed, and brought
Into the gulfs of sleep." B
From the time I began to sleep soundly, my recovery was
sure. But every night I visited Jupiter, and had entrancing
visions of loveliness spread before me. I could see the convexity of
the planet rising slowly before me, but yei swaying to and fro as if
in uncertain equilibrium; and heaving and tossing like a balloon,
or a ship at sea. From this delightful abode, 1 was invariably
driven by my pursuing demon, and brought back to my prison
again, notwithstanding the superhuman efforts of my friends to
save me. About this time the news of the death of Daniel Webster,
and the result of the presidential election, in which I had been
considerably interested, began to make some impression upon
me. At length, one day, 1 happened to see a new book by Ik.

Marvel, and a January number of the Opal, and this established
a correct idea of time. Then I enquired the day of the month,
and began to keep that, as also the days of the week. Still there
was a vast chasm behind me, and I thought I had been here
millions of years. I was astonished to find, upon inquiry, that
it had been but little more than two months. From this time
forth I recovered rapidly. My delusive fancies broke up, and
began to recede from my mind like the figures in a dissolving
view. I adopted the State Lunatic Asylum as a fixed fact, and
beg an to accommodate myself to my situation.

Such are some of the facts in my own experience of insanity.
It will be seen from this, that the first step towards recover}' is
to correct the perceptions, so as to make things seem what they
are, or what they seem to rational people?in nautical phrase, to
take an observation, ascertain bearings and distances, and write
up the log. After once recovering the ideas of time and space,
and firmly fixing them, consciousness will come back to its original
seat,'and adapt itself again to realities. Thus the great material
universe will finally swing round again to the senses, and the old
order become re-established. Sometimes a sudden surprise, such
as the appearance of a long-absent friend, the news of the death
of a beloved one, or some other remarkable occurrence, will
Accomplish this at once, and restore reason instantaneously. In
such cases there seems to be a powerful reaction, as if the mind
were jerked back into its socket, like a dislocated shoulder-blade.
I have no doubt the sudden appearance of valued friends, a few
weeks after I was brought here, would havehad this effect upon me.
When public benevolence reaches such a height, or the means
of patients aro so ample, as to induce the medical faculty to
investigate the subject more thoroughly, so that scientific prin-
ciples can be more generally carried into effect in the treat-
ment of insanity, much greater success may bo looked for, and,
doubtless, many cases now regarded hopeless would be found
not incurable.

NO. V.?NEW SEIUES.
