Capital Punishment for Murder Scripturally Considered
======================================================

Akt. III.?.
BY THE BEV. J. F. DENHAM, M.A., F.B.S., ETC.
We believe that there is a great and increasing repugnance to
the infliction of the extreme penalty of the law, even in the case
of murder, among intelligent and reflecting members of the
community. The considerate observer of passing events remarks,
that so far from that penalty seeming to act as a prevention of
the crime, it is common to find unusually numerous instances of
it occurring even during the trial or just after the execution of
some homicide whose enormous or repeated guilt, and whose
dreadful fate, are fully known to the entire population. The
psychologist suspects that there is something dangerously sug-
gestive of the act of murder (or, at least, promotive of indifference
to human life) in every public execution for it; and, not only
as actually witnessed, but as even read of, in the minute details
of the scene furnished by the newspapers, &c.; he accordingly
receives with dismay the information certified by the Times,
October 23rd, 1856, that " there were sold of the last dying-
speech, confession, and behaviour of Good, 1,650,000 copies ;
of Courvoisier, 1,666,000 ; of the Mannings, 2,000,000 ; of Rush,
2,500,000; of Greenacre, 2,666,000; and that the trash sold
with reference to Palmer's case must have greatly exceeded any
of the above sales." The student in moral and political science,
whom we will take to be represented by Paley,* lays down the
principle that " the proper end of human jjunishment is not the
satisfaction of justice, but the prevention of crimes?meaning
* Moral and Political Philosophy. Book VI. c. ix. Of Crimes and Punishments.
248 CAPITAL PUNISHMENT FOR MURDER
by the satisfaction of justice the retribution of so much pain for
so much guilt; which is the dispensation we expect at the hand
of God, and which we are accustomed to consider as the order of
things that perfect justice dictates or requires. In what sense,
or whether with truth in any sense, justice may be said to
demand the punishment of offenders, he does not inquire ; but
he asserts that this demand is not the motive or occasion of
human punishments. The fear lest the escape of the criminal
should encourage him, or others by his example, to repeat the
same crime, or to commit different crimes, is the sole considera-
tion which authorises the infliction of punishment by human
laws. Now, that, whatever it be, which is the cause and end of
the punishment ought, undoubtedly, to regulate the measure of
its severity. But this cause appears to be founded, not in the
guilt of the offender, but in the necessity of preventing the
repetition of the offence. The crimes must be prevented by
some means or other ; and, consequently, whatever means appear
necessary to this end, whether they be proportionable to the
guilt of the criminal or not, are adopted rightly, because they
are adopted upon the principle which alone justifies the inflic-
tion of punishment at all. From the same consideration it also
follows, that punishment ought not to be employed, much less
rendered severe, when the crime can be prevented by any other
means. Punishment is an evil to which the magistrate resorts
only from its being necessary to the prevention of a greater.
This necessity does not exist when the end may be attained, that
is, when the public may be defended from the effects of the
crime, by any other expedient. The right of punishment results
from the necessity of preventing the crime." It follows, conse-
quently, from the principles of moral and political philosophy,
that if capital punishment for murder fails as a preventive of
the crime, it ought to be abolished, and some more effectual pre-
ventive be substituted for it; and that certain popular modes of
thinking and speaking are inadmissible, derived from the prin-
ciple of retaliation, such as " the satisfaction of a natural instinct,"
" public indignation," against the offender and his offence, &c.
The social economist doubts the expediency of capital punish-
ment for murder, upon observing the conduct, language, &c., of by
far the greatest proportion of persons assembled to witness the
spectacle, evidently attracted thither only for the sake of grati-
fying certain pernicious emotions ; and arguing from even his
own consciousness, he doubts the possible beneficial connexion
between a remote, transient, and exciting scene, and the disposi-
tions and principles of any man about to commit murder. The
respectable jirovincial citizen deplores the desecration of public
decency and tranquillity occasioned in every county town by the
SCRIPTURALLY CONSIDERED. 249
invariable collection of the dissolute and abandoned from all
quarters, around tlie gallows. The London tradesman or manu-
facturer is disgusted, and his affairs are frequently deranged by
the irrepressible desire of his apprentices and workmen to go to
"hang fair," as an "execution morning" has been called, for
many years at least, among certain working classes of the metro-
polis. He hears with regret of boys from parochial schools and
other children, and even female children, forming a portion of
" the crowd," and of some of them being elevated on the shoulders
of adult spectators to witness the fall of the criminal.* Reli-
gious persons, of various communions, lament the degradation
inflicted on our common nature by the public destruction of
human life by the hangman. All rigid-minded persons would
confess, we presume, that could capital punishment for murder
be legitimately abandoned, great relief would be afforded to
their feelings, which, though not now, as in past years, harrowed
up by reading or hearing of the bi-weekly execution of several
fellow-creatures at a time for forging a twenty-shilling note, or
for purloining to that amount from a dwelling-house, or for
stealing a sheep, or a horse, or for some other of the 159 offences
besides murder, formerly declared, by the statutes, to be capital,t
are still shocked at intervals by hearing or reading of the public
extinction of the convicted murderer's life. But persons belonging
to the foregoing classes are generally overawed by the well-
known precept delivered by God to Noah and his sons just after
the deluge, "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his
blood be shed : for in the image of God made he man."! This
precept, or rather the popular interpretation of it is, we believe,
the chief obstacle to the abolition of capital punishment for
murder. Accordingly it is sometimes urged by religious persons
in respectable society, &c., that if capital punishment for murder
were to be discontinued the word of God would be disobeyed,
and the nation at large would set itself in direct and wilful
opposition to a plain command of revelation. This passage is
even quoted by Blackstone in his Commentaries, as the Scrip-
tural command for putting the murderer to death. No one goes
to the Levitical law for a command to this effect, because all per-
sons are aware of the inconsistency of "picking and choosing"
from that law, and that a full compliance with it would necessi-
tate the introduction of some new modes of capital punishment
* The well-known appetite of the lower orders for "the horrible and awful" was
last year pandered to most effectually by the histrionic representation of Palmer's
execution, in effigy, " in the same clothes," with "the face taken from a cast," and
enactcd by "the same hangman from Dudley," got up by a publican in his grounds,
in Staffordshire, for the amusement of his customers, twice a day, at sixpence each.
?Globe Newspaper.
+ Ruff'head's Index to the Statutes (tit. Felony), and the acts since made,
t Genesis ix. (j.
250 CAPITAL PUNISHMENT FOR MURDER
among us, or revive the use of others long ago discontinued.
No one, we presume, wishes to see "stoning" introduced, or
" burning" restored. All persons, we believe, would revolt from
the infliction of death on the man who should gather sticks on
the Sabbath,* or, that should curse or smite his father or his
mother,f or on the adulterer or adulteress,J the worshipper of
false gods,? 011 the manstealer,|| and for numerous other offences,
not now capital in this country. Nor can any other than an in-
ferential, indirect and defective argument for capital punishment,
even in the case of murder, be derived from Christianity,If which
in its original constitution as represented in the New Testament
" is not a kingdom of this world," and at its first propagation did
not, for reasons derived from its circumstances as well as its
constitution, interfere with the legal code of heathen nations,
but wisely, if not necessarily, enjoined only on its disciples to be
subject to the existing higher powers ; but yet most certainly
does not forbid Christian legislators and subjects in Christian
countries to endeavour to assimilate the public laws to the
rational and humane genius of their religion.
That one precept then, given by God to Noah and his sons,
when they " went forth of the Ark," is commonly supposed to
contain the entire Scriptural authority and command for the
infliction of death upon the murderer by Christian nations at the
present hour. " It is," said the John Bull newspaper last year,
"the only and all-sufficient answer to the various fallacies put
forth by those who would expunge capital punishment from our
penal code." We presume, however, that 110 dispassioned person
would object to consider any reasoning that might be offered
with a view to ascertain the real import and proper application
* Num. xv. 32. + Lev. xx. 9.; Ex. xxi. 15.
J Lev. xx. 10. ? Deut. xiii. 6, &c. || Ex. xxi. 16.
Thus, because St. Paul enjoins 011 the Roman and foreign Christians living
under the pagan empire, in the time of Nero, "to he subject unto the higher
powers," and remarks, "if thou do that which is evil, be afraid, for he beareth not
the sword in vain and because it is also taken for granted that " the sword" here
means the power of life and death, it in inferred that the apostle sanctions capital
puuishmeut as a principle. But he partly explains his meaning by simply saying
"a revenger to execute wrath upon him that doeth evil." It should also be
remembered, that all crimes against the ancient Roman power were not capital.
This inferential argument would, however, in all fairness lead to the conclusion
that all the crimes that were so punished by the Roman power should be similarly
punished in Christian England; and that not the sceptre but the sword should
accordingly be the emblem of British monarchy. The sword, pugio, as worn by
Roman emperors, was simply the emblem of imperatorial power in general; adopted,
naturally, by a military nation. Nor does St. Paul represent the Roman " power"
merely as an executioner, but as "the minister of God for the good of the people."
No authority for capital punishment can be inferred, therefore, from this symbol,
any more than from the sword carried at this day before our chief civic authorities,
&c. Nor should the distinction pointed out by Paley be overlooked, that "what
St. Paul designates 'the ordinance of God' is, without any real repugnancy, by
St. Peter denominated ' the ordinance of man.' "
SCRIPTURALLY CONSIDERED. 251
of that precept; bscause there is absolutely no other mode
whereby the true sense and proper use of any passage of Scrip-
ture whatever can be ascertained ; nor is there any medium
between the willingness to investigate the meaning and inten-
tion of any portion of Holy Writ with candour and patience,
and a blind superstition that is liable to be misled by the sound
of words into any possible absurdity of belief and conduct. We
now then invite the careful and unbiassed attention of the reader
to some observations sanctioned, as will be seen, by eminent
Biblical scholars, upon the precept in question, and respecting
the obligation it is commonly considered to impose absolutely,
on Christian legislators to put the murderer to death. First.
Our attention will be directed to the words of the precept, which,
with its context, reads as follows :?" Aud surely your blood of
your lives will I require; at the hand of every beast, or rather soul,*
will I require it, and at the hand of man ; at the hand of every
man's brother will I require the life of man." Then comes the
recapitulation of the subject previously enunciated, so frequent
in the book of Genesis?" Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed ; for in the image of God made he man."f
Now there is, we think, something that must strike every
attentive reader of even the English version of this passage, as
remarkable in the introduction into it of the word brother ; " at
the hand of every man's brother will I require the life of man"?
literally, and at the hand of the man, at the hand of a man his
brother will I require the life of man. Dr. Boothroyd translates?
" from every man's own brother will I demand an account of the
life of man."j Dr. Geddes?"from a man's; own brotlier."?
The Samaritan copy and eight manuscripts, as also the Syriac
and Vulgate all read?of a man and of his brother. " The com-
mon Greek text,"as Dr. Geddes observes, "is corrupted and un-
intelligible ; nor do the manuscripts afford anything like a decent
correction. The comma is admirably well rendered by the Greek
of Venice 7Tjoog civSpog rov acs\(pov avrov," literally?from
or by the hand of a man and his brother, or of a man the brother
of him. Now we cannot allow ourselves to depart from the letter
of this divine enactment; and we, therefore, reject the interpre-
tation which would generalize this word "brother" into the
* "According to tradition the first part of this text prohibits suicide, and the
second half homicide. Where no adjunct is coupled with rrrr, that word invariably
relates to the soul of man. The rule holds good here. Hence then we have the
satisfaction to find in the Sacred Scriptures this early and perfect indication of a
punishment to the soul after death, and the necessary sequitur?its immortality."
New Translation, by the Rev. D. A. De Sola, and the Rev. Morris J. RaplialL
Vol. L pp. 34, 52. London. 1844.
+ Genesis, ix. 5, G. ? Family Bible in loc.
? Critical Remarks on the Hebrew Scriptures.
252 CAPITAL PUNISHMENT FOE MURDER
sense of "brother man," or would gloss as follows, "though
the murderer be as nearly related as a brother, he shall be
punished." Nor do we see any assistance given to the inter-
pretation of this precept in the marginal references appended
to it in the English version, one of which is to Acts xvii. 26?
" God hath made of one blood all nations " two, consist of pre-
dictions, that " they that take the sword shall perish with the
sword" (Matt. xxvi. 52). " He that killeth with the sword must
be killed with the sword" (Rev. xiii. 10); and the rest are to the
incorporation of the precept in the Levitical law. We adhere
strictly to the terms of the enactment, and Ave plead that such
an adherence is essential to the legitimate and safe use of all
enactments, human and divine. We are, indeed, willing to
allow that the word here translated brother includes kinsmen of
various degrees of consanguinity (comp.Gen. xiii. 8 QTIN
clansmen (] Chron. vi. 39, &c.) ; but we say that this precept
delegates the infliction of death upon the murderer, either by
the hand of the " brother" literally, or by some other nearest
kinsman of the murdered man. In short, we believe the import
of the precept to be conveyed in the literal sense of it, and that
it contains the appointment of " the ancient and universal law
of BLOOD revenge," called by the Hebrews mrr goel-
hadam ; whereby, as Jalin observes on this precept, " the punish-
ment of homicide devolved on the brother or other nearest
relation of the person whose life had been taken away. In case
he did not slay the guilty he was considered infamous. Hence
the application of the Hebrew God?i. c., spotted or contami-
nated, which he bore till the murder was revenged." He adds.
" To change a law, however, or practice of long standing, is a
matter of no little difficulty. Moses, therefore, left it as he
found it; but he endeavoured, nevertheless, to prevent its abuses
by the appointment of cities of refuge (Num. xxxv. 9?29 ;
Deut. xix. G ; and Josh. xx. 3), to one of which all persons who
had been the cause of death to another might flee and be pro-
tected until the case was investigated ; and if found, according
to the laws, guilty of homicide, the manslayer was delivered up
to the avenger of blood, who was always supposed to be both
prosecutor and executioner."*
Secondly. We now pause for a time to remind the reader of
the universal prevalence of this law of Blood revenge in the
earliest times, and among most eastern nations down to the
present hour. The action of this law is first met with in the
history of Abraham, where Esau, having been overheard jnur-
posing to kill Jacob his brother, Rebekah sent Jacob away to
Haran, saying?" Why should I be deprived of you both in one
* Archaol. II. ii. 372 ff.
SCRIPTURALLY CONSIDERED. 253
day/' plainly intimating that the next of kin, which, in this case,
would have been the eldest son of Ishmael, would have been
bound to kill Esau, had he effected his purpose. This law
appears again in the fiction practised upon David by the woman
of Tekoah, where, however, it was overruled in her favour by
the dictum of the king (2 Sam. xiv. 2, &c). Josephus relates the
continuance of it among the inhabitants of Trachonitis.* Goguet
thus describes its prevalence among the ancient Greeks :?" They
liad no public officer charged to look after murderers. The
relations of the deceased alone had the right to pursue revenge.
Homer shows it clearly (II. 9, lin. 628, &c). We may add to
the testimony of this poet that of Pausanias, who speaks in many
places of this ancient usage (lib. v. c. 1, p. 376 ; lib. viii. c. 34,
p. 669) ; an usage that appears to have always subsisted in
Greece. (See Plat, de Leg. 1. 9, p. 930, 931, and 933. Demosth
in Aristocrat, p. 736. Pollux, lib. viii. c. 10, segra. llS)."f
Mahomet, like Moses, did not abolish, but modify the law of
Blood-revenge, by allowing of the acceptance of money for the
forfeited life of the murderer, and at the worst by forbidding
the infliction of any painful or cruel death.]; It exists to this
day among the Arabs, the peasantry of Egypt,? the Persians,
Abyssinians, Druses, Circassians, and Tartars. || In Corsica and
Sardinia this law is still in action, and known by the name of
vendetta traversa, or mutual vengeance, having withstood all
the efforts of the celebrated General Paoli to eradicate it. It is
executed by even females.U "The law of Thar, or blood aveng-
ing," says Kitto, " existed from the earliest ages, and still by its
action upon the fears of the wild tribes of the desert, and indeed
of all the less civilized tribes of Western Asia, from the shores of
the Red Sea to the Caucasian mountains, keeps in check their
fiercer passions, and makes them backward to shed blood. By
this law, the nearest relation of the slain party is bound to pursue
the slayer, and to rest not?never to let his purpose sleep?till
he has exacted life for life, and blood for blood." Now, this
early and extensive prevalence of the law of blood revenge, is
only explicable by the interpretation we have given of the pre-
cept to Noah and his sons, or rather by the literal rendering of
that precept. The various gentile nations could only have thus
pervasively derived it from some common origin of it; and no
other such origin is assignable, except in the renewal of the
* Ant. iv. 7, 4.
+ Origin of Laws, &c. Part II. Book I. Art. viii. Vol. ii. p. 71.
Edinburgh.
i Koran, c. ii. iv. v. 17- 22. Sale's "Preliminary Discourse. " Sec. G.
? Laue's " Modern Egyptians," c. iii.
I! Winer's '' Biblisclies Realw. Art. Blutraclier."
"Ii Simonot's "Lettres sur la Corse." p. 314.
254 CAPITAL PUNISHMENT FOR MURDER
human race in the Noachidoe?and the subsequent dispersion of
their descendants, according to their families, to all parts of the
earth at the Tower of Babel?and we consider the high anti-
quity and universality of this law to be perfectly confirmatory
of our interpretation of the precept. As given "to Noah and
his sons," it might have originated partly in the intention of
God to express his regard of human life?notwithstanding the
late immense destruction of it by the deluge : or it might have
been called forth by the " violence" that had " filled the earth"
in the anarchical and depraved state of mankind for some ages
anterior to the deluge. Many commentators remark that the
precept was suited to an infantine state of society, in all respects.
It might have been well adapted then, as it is even now, in im-
perfect states of society, to prevent bloodshed, by committing the
revenge of it to the next of kin ; but in proportion as mankind
became more numerous, and society more humanized and rational,
the execution of this ancient law would be liable to many incon-
veniences?as is still the case where it prevails?calling for
some such regulations and adjustment of it as were made by
Moses and Mahomet; but that it was merely a positive precept,
an especial enactment arising out of circumstances, like the law
of quarantine, or laws of excise, or particular taxes, and not a
moral law, or a law founded upon the moral nature of actions
and the propriety of relations, and therefore unalterable, will be
shown subsequently in our observations upon the divine pro-
cedure in the case of Cain.
Thirdly. If, indeed, any authority for capital punishment in
the case of murder is derivable from this precept, it can only in
fairness be taken from the later and improved form of it pre-
scribed by the Levitical law ; but, as already observed, such a
derivation would, in all fairness, involve the adoption of the
whole of that law ; and it may be remarked, that the adoption
of this particular joart of it, with all its adjuncts, would be im-
practicable in this age and country. This part of the Levitical
law was doubtless well adapted to the circumstances of the Jews
when they received it, who were then a merely nomadic people?
a nation of recently emancipated slaves, to whom a reformatory
discipline would have been inconvenient, and who, as many of
the enactments of that law clearly show, were not elevated in
morals above their late heathen masters, the Egyptians, or their
heathen neighbours while in the wilderness, and who were
peculiarly intractable; and both then and during some later
ages were placed under what Joseph us terms a theocracy,* and
could instantly consult the supreme lawgiver as to the propriety
of inflicting death in any particular instance ; and which lawgiver
Contr. Apion. Book II. c. xvii.
SCRIPTURALLY CONSIDERED. 255
himself was ever supposed to be present at the execution of the
sentence. Nor can we forget that the Levitical law was pro-
nounced imperfect, at least in one point, by the Saviour himself?
namely, in regard of the provision it made for divorces, of which
point, he says, " Moses suffered/' or allowed it, " because of the
hardness of your hearts;" and it is most worthy of notice that
our Lord corrects that enactment by an argument taken from
the state of things, " when God made man," and " at the begin-
ningIt is also remarkable that no enactment against suicide
occurs in the Levitical code, although, as we have already seen,
it was probably forbidden in the precept delivered to Noah.
Fourthly. It is, however, sometimes urged that because the
reason of the precept given to Noah is general?namely, "for
in the image of God made he man"?therefore the punishment
of the murderer with death ought also to be general, since every
man that is now murdered was " made in the image of God."
Now, we might with perfect satisfaction to ourselves reply to this
argument by simply protesting, along with Michaelis, against in-
ferential laws derived from the ancient laws of the Scriptures.
AVe well know the dangers attending such an arbitrary exercise
of human judgment on the divine statutes. We give, as an
illustration of that danger, the following comment, on the pre-
cept in question, by the venerable Bp. Patrick :?" By parity
of reason, what was ordained against murder was to be executed
against other great offences ; there being some things which
are no less dear to us than life, as virginal chastity and matri-
monial fidelity, &c." This " parity of reason" will, of course, seem
more or less clear, and more or less extensive to different minds,
and, consequently, punishments based upon such an inferential
interpretation might extend, especially if various minds were
consulted, to an amount, all included within the Bishop s ct cetera,
that would exceed the demands of the most Draconian legisla-
tors of modern ages. But, waiving for a moment, both our
protest and all that has been already advanced respecting this
precept, it may be remarked, in passing on to our more conclusive
reply to the inferential use of " the reason for this precept," that
some dubiety hangs about the genuine reading, if not even about
the genuineness of this part of the precept itself. In the in-
verted form, " for in the image of God made he man," in which
that " reason" appears stated in the English version and in the
printed Hebrew text and copies, it looks like a quotation from
Gen. i. 27, "So God created man in his own image." But we
can hardly conceive of God speaking of himself in this manner.
And it would seem that there is something dubious about this
part of the text, since the Septuagint renders the words ev uxovi
* Compare Matt. xix. 3, 7, with Deut. xxiv. 1.
NO. VI.?NEW SERIES. S
256 CAPITAL PUNISHMENT FOR MURDER
Oeov ?Troir](ra tov avOpojirov?because in the image of God I have
made man?which, nevertheless, is scarcely suitable to the
occasion in which God himself is the speaker. It is still more
remarkable that this " reason" is not repeated in Leviticus, but
that the reason there given for inflicting death upon the
murderer is, that the land (of the Jews) should not be defiled,
and that the land could only be cleansed from " blood by blood."*
We will also decline taking any advantage of the dubiety of the
Hebrew particle rendered?"for in.the image"?in this passage,
which has sometimes, at least, the sense of although. Nor will
we resort to any other of the seven different versions which the
words in question have received,t nor attempt to convert them
into a prediction ; but granting, as Schulz does, the genuineness
of the common Hebrew text of this passage, and accepting the
English version of it as correct, we unre that the reason here
? ... O t t
given for the infliction of death on the murderer is simply of
a positive nature, and, as already observed, it is simply what it
seemed good to infinite wisdom and goodness to assign at a par-
ticular time, and with a view to a particular effect, and not
founded on moral and therefore immutable reasons: and our
argument for this view of that "reason" is taken, as heretofore
intimated, from the well-known procedure of the Almighty in the
case of Cain. For,
Fifthly. " If ever there was a murder," to use the language
of modern journalists, "committed by a man in a state of
perfect sanity, and with malice prepense," it was that committed
by the first fratricide. Envy and wrath, arising from the most
exceptionable causes, and guiltily unsuppressed, are stated by
the Scriptures to have been the causes of the bloody deed.
" Cain slew his brother, because his own works were evil and
his brother's righteous." " Cain was very wroth, and his coun-
tenance fell, because unto Cain and his offering the Lord had
not respect; but the Lord had respect unto Abel and his
offering.":}: " Perfect deliberation attended the act of unnatural
violence," for, according to the reading of the Septuagint,
Syriao, Vulgate, and both Targums, a reading pronounced by
Dr. Kennicot to be " undoubtedly genuine," although it has
entirely slipped out of the present Hebrew text, " Cain said to
his brother Abel, let us go forth unto the field." And then, as
the English version properly proceeds to read, " it came to pass,
when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel
his brother and slew him." But what was the punishment
inflicted on Cam ? Instead of being put to death by the
, * Numbers, xxxv. 33.
f See Leone Levi's ? Law of Nature and Nations." Note.
+ 1 John in. 12. Genesis iv. 4, 5, &c.
SCRIPTURALLY CONSIDERED. 257
immediate hand of God, or even by Abel's brother, son, or other
next of kin, or by any other human being, " because in the
image of God made he man," Cain was simply condemned by
the Almighty to disappointment in agriculture, and to be a
fugitive and a vagabond in the earth. " The Lord said unto
Cain, What hast thou done ? The voice of thy brother's blood
crieth unto me from the ground. And now thou art cursed
from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy
brother's blood from thy hand. When thou tillest the ground,
it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength?a fugitive
and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth." And when Cain
complained of the severity of his sentence, saying, " My punish-
ment is greater than I can bear. Behold thou hast driven me
out this day from the face of the earth (land), and from thy
face shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in
the earth?and it shall come to pass, that every one that findeth
me shall slay me. The Lord said unto him, Therefore, ivhoso-
cver slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken of him sevenfold.
And the Lord set a mark upon Cain"?or, rather, appointed him
a sign, that is, some miraculous token?" lest any finding him
should kill him." Now we maintain, that had the punishment
of death, for even a wilful, premeditated, and deliberate murder
been founded in moral law?that is, in those abstract relations
arising from the nature of things, and in the distinctions of moral
right and wrong, which, along with all sound authors, we hold
to be not the dictates of the mere or sovereign will of the Deity
?either the Almighty himself, whose own " everlasting righteous-
ness" consists in his invariable adherence to those moral dis-
tinctions, and upon whose inflexible adherence to them all the
confidence, all the hopes, and all the fears of his rational creatures
are entirely, and will for ever be founded?would either have
himself inflicted death upon Cain, or would have required " the
blood" of Abel, at the hand of some human being, by requiring
him to inflict death upon the fratricide. But since Cain was
not put to death by the first of these means, and was actually
preserved by a miraculous interposition of God from death by
the second of these means, we infer, with entire confidence, that
the "reason" of the precept given to Noah, namely, "for in the
image of God made he man," is not founded on moral and im-
mutable grounds; that consequently, the precept itself, as well
as the reason for it there assigned, are simply of the nature
called positive, and therefore, and in the absence of any declara-
tion of Scripture to the effect,--not binding upon the whole human
race in all ages. Accordingly, a judicious commentator* is
actually driven into the following explanation of the case 01
* Pyle.
s 2
25S CAPITAL PUNISHMENT FOR MURDER
Cain as compared with the precept to Noah. " I so far forgave
Cain the first act of murder, as not to punish him by a violent
death for it; yet, for the future, life shall go for life."
It cannot be rejoined that there was then no man to kill
Cain, for otherwise Cain's dread that any one finding him should
slay him, and God's interposition in giving him a sign, lest any
finding him should slay him, would both have been perfectly
futile. It is true that we have no recorded account of the
existence of more human beings at this period than Adam, Eve
Cain, and Abel?neither is the existence of more human beings
denied ; but it is plainly implied, in the terms of the narrative.
Nor is the age of the two brothers respectively recorded; we
may safely conceive of them as being each more than a century
old. Mr. Scott observes, "Adam and Eve had many more
children than are mentioned in the brief narrative, which was
principally intended to record a few important particulars, and
to trace the history from the beginning to the time of Moses;
and if, as is generally thought, Abel was murdered but a short
time before the birth of Seth, the human race might have
been greatly increased in the space of 130 years."* Stackhouse
remarks, " It has been calculated that, according to the Hebrew
chronology, there might have been upwards of 420,000 men
alone then living, without reckoning women, or even children
under seventeen years old ; and, if the Septuagint chronology
of Dr. Hales be followed, the number of mankind before the
death of Abel might have been much greater, "f Abel himself
might have been the progenitor of a numerous offspring, and
Cain also might have been the father of many more children
beside Enoch, after whose " name they called the city which he
built, after he went out from the face of the Lord and dwelt in
the land of Nod." Assuming then that the human race had
become numerous, it would seem certain from the dread of
Cain that 11 every one finding him should slay him," that the
law of blood revenge, as already described, was unknown at that
period. Nor does it seem to have been known in regard of the
apparently unintentional homicide by Lamech,"+ who observes,
" 1* Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy-and-
sevenfold. ^ Neither is there any trace of this law before the
deluge. Since then the infliction of death on Cain for the
murder of Abel was prevented by an especial intervention of the
Almighty, we are persuaded that the appointment of that punish-
ment to "Noah and his sons" by the hand of the " brother" or
next of km of the murdered man was a mere positive precept;
" Commentary on Genesis.
+ History of the Bible. Edit. Bishop Gleig. London. 1817. p. 114.
X Genesis iv. 23. a 1
SCSIPTURALLY CONSIDERED. 259
and since tlie positive precepts of the Levitical law into which
that precept was incorporated are not binding upon Christians,
so neither is this precept itself, as modified by that law, binding
upon Christians. We apply to this precept our Lord's refuta-
tion of the Levitical law of divorce, " From the beginning it
was not so consequently we believe that neither the precept
in question, nor any other portion of Scripture, necessitates or
compels, proprio vigore, Christian nations to punish the mur-
derer with death, and that the abolition of this punishment for
murder would not be contrary to the inspired and universally
obligatory will of God. We regard this precept as partaking
in all respects of the same positive character with its associated
precept not to eat blood, with the distinction of clean and un-
clean beasts in the preceding chapter, polygamy, concubinage,
and other ante-levitical and positive, and therefore changeable
customs, which Moses either incorporated into his legal code as
he found them, or regulated by certain restrictions and dis-
tinctions, so as to make them useful under the peculiar circum-
stances of the Jews?but as having 110 claim upon the universal
adoption of Christian nations, because not re-enacted by divine
authority upon such nations. Accordingly, we think that to
insist upon the adoption of this precept by Christian nations,
and especially along with the rejection of other associated
precepts, is an act partaking largely of that fondness for " beg-
garly elements," against which St. Paul set himself with entire
and unwearied opposition.
Sixthly. It may be here permitted to the writer to explain
his views of the exact ground taken by the Church in regard of
the question of capital punishment for murder. He craves this
permission, because he has often heard it intimated that the
Church affords the chief obstacle to the abolition of that punish-
ment for that crime. Now, the Church certainly teaches, in her
Thirty-seventh Article, that " the laws of the realm may punish
Christian men with death for heinous and grievous offences." It
is, however, obvious to remark, that the Article does not specify
any particular offences, nor does it say nvust punish "with, &c.,
it speaks only generally and permissively, and it speaks justly
here, in its character as "a witness and keeper of Holy Writ;
but in this case it quotes no passage of Scripture ; nor is capital
punishment for any crime forbidden in Scripture. Certain
emergencies are easily conceivable in which "the laws of the
realm" would be scripturally justified in taking the lite of the
grievous and heinous offender, and such an emergency would be
any offence that was irrepressible by any other means, or
equally repressive ; for, as Bishop Burnet observes 011 ns?
Article, " the lives of men ought not to be too lightly ' .
260 CAPITAL PUNISHMENT FOR MURDER
except as it appears necessary for the preservation and safety
of the society."* It being clear, then, that the Article of the
Church does not necessitate the punishment of Christian men
Avith death for murder, and it seeming evident to us that neither
do the Scriptures unconditionally demand it, we beg to suggest
that the experiment might be, on all grounds, safely made,
whether any or what other mode of preventing murder would at
least be equally effectual with the gallows. At all events, we
can scarcely imagine that cases of murder would exceed, while
such an experiment was being made, in number and atrocity,
those which have been perpetrated in Great Britain during the
past year, and many previous years, under the full operation of
capital punishment.
Nor shall we shrink from the task of proposing an experimen-
tal substitute for that punishment for the crime, although such
a task is not strictly required by the foregoing investigation.
We recommend, then, the confinement of the convicted murderer
for life, as a being who is unqualified for the advantages of
society. Treat him in all respects as a convict; exact from him
hard labour, if he can endure it; but also atford him moral and
religious instruction, that, if he be of sound mind, the agency of
conscience and the grace of God may effect his- genuine repent-
ance unto that " eternal life which no murderer hath abiding in
him."t Nor do we believe that the disposal of murderers by
this method would increase their crime. From inquiries we have
diligently made, we infer that depraved and desperate minds actu-
ally dread condemnation to such a mode of spending the rest of
their days, more than they dread a violent death. We are happy
to find the following concurrence with these latter views in the
work of a celebrated writer:?" It is not the intenseness of the
pain which has the greatest effect on the mind, but its continu-
ance ; for our sensibility is more easily and more powerfully
affected by vjeah but repeated impressions, than by a violent but
momentamj impulse. The death of a criminal is a terrible but
momentary impulse, and therefore a less efficacious method of
deterring others than the continued example of a man deprived
of his liberty, and condemned as a beast of burden to repair by
his labours the injuries he has done to society. ' If I commit
such a crime, says the spectator to himself, I shall be reduced to
that miserable condition for the rest of my life !' A much more
powerful preventive than the fear of death, which men always
? . in obscurity. In the contemplation of continued
suffering, terror is the only, or, at least, the permanent sensation.
* Exposition of the Thirty-nine Articles.
+ 1 Johniii. 15.
i Marquis de Beccaria's '' Essay on Crimes and Punishments." Edit. 2.
SCRIPTURALLY CONSIDERED. 261
Although we are fully aware that the readers of this journal
are not influenced merely by names, yet it may be acceptable to
them to find that some divines of the highest eminence, and
belonging to various communions, have coincided with our inter-
pretation of the precept given " to Noah and his sons." Nor are
we surprised to find some commentators, especially English, in-
terpreting that precept as a universal and perpetual command
for putting the murderer to death. Our very few English com-
mentators on the whole Bible, probably viewed this precept
under the bias of national prepossessions. Nor are commen-
tators upon the whole Bible, or on any very considerable portion
of it, the best referees for the sense of individual portions of
Scripture. The vastness of their undertaking does not admit of
their scrutinizing particular passages with sufficient pains. Such
commentators are generally mere compilers : they follow the
beaten track of interjjretation, as even Whitby himself ultimately
confessed he had done- with regard to his commentary on the.
New Testament. The opinion of one unbiassed, learned, and
investigating divine is worth more than a whole host of adopted,
retailed, and conventional interpretations. We proceed to ad-
duce the opinions of the superior class of theologians, in addition
to those quoted in the preceding paper. Arnheim gives his
opinion that " the precept establishes the lex talionis: if one
stranger DINH slay another, the kinsmen of the murdered man
are the avengers of blood; but if he be slain by V!"IN one
of his own kindred, the other kinsmen must not spare the
murderer; but should they do so, then Divine Providence will
require the blood, i.e., avenge it." Schulz remarks upon the pre-
cept?"God is here speaking to men having no magistrates.
Hence, he grants to the whole society of men, and to every
individual man, the right and power of punishing any homicide,
whatever, with death, and at the same time inculcates the use and
exercise of this right and given power. The society of men living
in a natural state requires it, and it is exercised by all nations
where they live in a state of nature without magistrates. But
this law, given and inculcated upon men living in a state of
society, which readily runs into abuse, does not reach beyond;
neither, therefore, is a positive, universal law to be deduced
from this 'passage."+ Michaelis remarks upon the application
of this precept to " the infancy of society," and " its antiquity
long before the time of Moses, who adopted the wise plan of
appointing the privilege of asylums, as did most other legisla-
tors ; thereby taking away, in a great degree, the power to
punish the murderer from the Goel, and preventing,^ what must
have often happened, the shedding of innocent blood."! Houbi-
* Whitby's " Last Thoughts." + Scholia in Vet. Test. J Recht Moses.
262 REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
gant applies the precept to " the law of retaliation, and not to
punishment inflicted by the magistrates." Dr. Geddes adopts
the same view of it. To these authorities we may add those of
Winer and Gesenius. After all, the question must be left- to the
judgment of the reader, formed upon a consideration of the
materials now submitted to it, and directed by the enlightened
benevolence, which it is the privilege of a sound understanding
to enjoy and exercise under the present advanced state of Christian
knowledge, science, reason, aud civilization.
