On the Insanity of Early Life
===============================

Am. II.?
BY M. BRIERRE DE BOISMONT, M.D.
Chevalier des Ordres de la Legion d'Honneur et du Mdrite Militaire de Pologne;
Ancien Medeein des Hopitaux de Paris et de Varsovie;
Lauroat de l'lnstitut et de 1'Academic Imperiale de Medecine, &c. kc.
[ Written expressly for this Journal.]
There have recently been published in France two theses?one
upon mental affections in children ;* the other upon insanity
at the epoch of puberty, f It seemed necessary to inquire the
limit of the age of the individuals who formed the subjects of
these two essays, because until then we had believed mental
alienation to be very rare in childhood. Amongst the seventeen
cases observed by the authors, the youngest were fourteen years
of age, and the others varied from fifteen to twenty-two. The
critic might reasonably object that the designation of chil-
dren was scarcely applicable to the greater part of these
patients. We are aware, however, that Haslam, Greding, Frank,
Burrows, Spurzheim, Friedreich, Esquirol, and Guislain have
related cases of insanity amongst children of less than eleven
years. We owe to Dr Marc, physician to Louis Philippe, the
very curious observation of a young girl aged eight years, who
openly avowed her intention to kill her mother, father, and
* Paulmier. Paris, 1856. Rousseau. Paris, 1857.
ON THE INSANITY OF EARLY LIFE. 623
grandmother. Two motives seemed to influence her in this reso-
lution?the desire to possess their property, and to amuse herself
with little boys and men. She was morose, taciturn, and an-
swered very laconically to any questions addressed to her. In
the country she abandoned herself early to solitary vice, without
her health appearing to suffer; but on her return to the town,
she began to fall away rapidly. It was some time before the
cause of this emaciation was discovered: on surprit enfin ses
habitudes onaniques; elle les confessa cyniquement, en disant
qu'elle regrettait de ne pouvoir y substituer le commerce des
petits gargons.*
In the course of a practice of more than thirty years, we have
only observed three cases of mental derangement in children.
The first relates to a pretty and intelligent little girl of seven
years of age. Her mother was under treatment for a mental
affection, and it was observed shortly that the child became
irritable and capricious, and gave way to the most violent fits of
passion, during which she would break and destroy everything
which came to hand. Soon afterwards she became subject to
attacks of ecstasy, in the course of which her features had a
seraphic expression, and her eyes remained fixed upon the sky
for a great length of time; she would cry aloud with a voice
vibrating with emotion, " I see the angels; they are coming to
me." When the crisis was past, she was very excitable for some
time, but gradually became tranquil, and could answer rationally
the questions put to her.
The second case was that of a boy, aged six, extremely difficult
to manage, and of an irritability which had become, during the
past four months, insupportable. When he was placed under
my care, he could not remain in one place, was continually
mounting upon the chairs, tables, and window-seats, and rolling
in the dust; he ate gluttonously and irregularly. He would
listen to nothing, but got into a rage if any one wished to control
liim. He perpetually escaped from surveillance, and was never
found again until he had accomplished some mischief. On
account of his violence, which rendered some serious result not
improbable, it was necessary to impose mechanical restraint
upon him. When he found himself thus disabled, he became
enraged, and menaced us in a manner most extraordinary for a
child of that age : " As soon as I am at liberty, I will set fire to
the house, and if I can find a pointed knife, I will stab you to
the heart; I should^ rejoice to see your blood flow, and to kill
you." In his father's house, he had often used similar language;
and it was the fear on the part of his parents that he would,at
* Marc. De la Folie, t. i. p. 96.
624- ON THE INSANITY OF EARLY LIFE.
some time carry Iris threats into execution, that had led them to
the resolution of placing him in our institution. We found it
would be dangerous to keep such a patient; he therefore
returned home, and we lost sight of him.
The third example of this kind was observed by us in the
asylum of St. Athanasius, founded by the much-regretted Dr.
Follet. When we visited this model establishment, the directing
physician, M. Baume, showed us a boy of ten years of age, who,
notwithstanding a defect of the right eye, had a lively, bold,
intelligent aspect; he was properly developed for that age. We
were informed that he had an excellent memory, and learnt his
lessons very easily. He had just made his first communion, and
it was hoped that this religious act would have a favourable
influence upon his shocking propensities. From his earliest years
he had manifested the very worst instincts; he stole everything
to which he took any fancy; he was the terror of his play-
fellows, whom he pinched, struck, and abused in every way; he
obeyed no orders, and wandered about incessantly. His parents
had never been affected with mental disturbance, and he was an
only child, so that jealousy could have no share in producing
these results. His instincts became more and more perverted,
and as he uttered threats perpetually, would strike and try to
wound, and talked continually of killing some one, his mother
determined to bring him to the asylum. There he became
the terror and scourge of the patients, always pinching, biting,
and striking. His victims were especially the imbecile and
idiots. This kind of instinct exists also amongst these classes
particularly. Last year, visiting an asylum, I saw, in the section
devoted to idiots, one of them, who thought he was unobserved,
steal round to give a kick to one of his companions, who had in
no way molested him.
When the boy was in our presence, he seemed at first a little
abashed, and spoke only in monosyllables. But speaking to
him with much precaution, and attributing liis misdeeds to his
malady, he became more communicative, and answered our
questions. He avowed quietly all that he had done ; he said,
" I have no pleasure except in doing mischief. I should like
to shed your blood. When I pushed against my mother, it
was to throw her down." On different occasions he manifested
a desire to stab her with a knife to kill her. It is naturally,
and without anger, that he does wrong. He knows well that
it is wrong, but he feels no regret; he gives a blow as
another child would give a piece of bread to a beggar. He spoke
to us without reserve. One would have thought that the con-
versation was upon the most indifferent matters; the eyes had
no particular expression. He retains the remembrance of what
ON THE INSANITY OF EARLY LIFE. 625
lie supposes to be an injury, or of an unpremeditated wrong, and
avenges it on the first opportunity. Religion has made the first
attempt at cure ; a prolonged moral treatment may second it.
It will be interesting to know what will result from this innate
tendency to evil, against which chastisement would assuredly
be inefficacious, independent of its injustice; and which would
certainly, to any enlightened mind, be a surety of nonresponsi-
bility in the commission of any criminal act.
These three cases establish clearly the fact that mental
derangements may occur in childhood; but they constitute
rather perversions of instinct, of sentiment, and of the moral
faculties, than well-defined types of mania or monomania. This
tendency, moreover, is in relation with the psychological disposi-
tions of this period of life. For ninety-nine years there have
been received at the Salpetriere and Bicetre, in the department
of epileptics, idiots, and imbeciles, young children, who, examined
carefully, do not really belong to this division, but are liars and
thieves ; immodest and vicious in every form. M. Schnepf, in
his thesis on Aberrations of Sentiment (1855), has related nine
cases, among which are found children of seven years and nine
years and a half.
Sundry authors, and amongst others, MM. Parchappe, Aubanel,
Chore, Delasiauve, and Paulmier, have classed mania amongst
those affections to which children may be liable. The cases
which we have seen, characterised by great agitation, have not
appeared to us to constitute true mania ; and the communication
made to the Medico-Psychological Society by Dr Delasiauve
refers chiefly to epileptic children, whose maniacal attacks were
complicated by a kind of ecstasy. It is, however, necessary to
recognise that a form of mania may exist in children. Lastly,
in his Report of the Devon Asylum for 1856, Dr Bucknill, after
having divided insanity, according to the symptoms, into mania
and melancholy, relates, in the first category, the case of a child,
twelve years of age, who was brought to the asylum , for having
attempted suicide by drowning and strangulation. He was
affected then with chorea. Around his neck was distinctly
visible the mark produced by the cord. He cried incessantly,
" I wish to die?I wish to die." He struck his head against the
wall and tried to suffocate himself by pressing his fist against his
throat. He bit and struck at every one who came near him.
He was put in the padded room, and had baths and medicines
to procure sleep. In forty-eight hours he was quieter. Three
days after, the remedies having been discontinued, the symptoms
returned with all their first violence, but yielded completely to
hot baths, morphia, and cold affusion to the head.
The preceding observations leave no doubt as to the disorders
626 ON THE INSANITY OF EAELY LIFE.
of mind which may affect children. As yet the subject is new,
and has not generally engaged attention ; and it is easily to be
understood how it happens that there is no large collection of
such cases. But the subject being opened out, it is not-to be
doubted that shortly more extended and complete communica-
tions will furnish to education, to medicine, and to philosophy,
new materials and useful data, which will rectify many errors.
We may consult on this subject a very interesting essay by
Dr Bush.* The author divides the cases which he has
observed into two series; 1st, those children who present exces-
sive irritability of the nervous system, with a general lack of
mental and bodily vigour; and 2nd, those who, with the same
lack of vigour, present diminished irritability. After examining
with the greatest care the causes of the physical, mental, and
moral inequality of children, he shows forth the general standard
of education to which all these varieties of intelligence are sub-
jected. He shows then that before punishing idleness, inatten-
tion, obstinacy, perversity, but especially moral derelictions, as
lying, theft, &c., we should most carefully examine whether
these dispositions are due to education or to the defective nature
of the child. Punishment, in this case, would be only an aggra-
vation of the evil, whilst the best corrective would be modifica-
tion or change of education. No doubt the custom of considering
children as mere similar units of society makes a great proportion
of them entirely ignorant, where it does not morally degrade
them. But how few parents would be able to have private in-
structors? Their assemblage in communities is the most prac-
ticable resource; but it will never be advantageous to the country
at large, until the heads of colleges and similar institutions
devote themselves less to the making of money, and more to the
careful consideration of the faculties of their pupils, with the
view of leading each in his own peculiar vocation.
We arrive now at the second division of our subject, which
treats particularly of mental alienation at the period of puberty,
or rather of adolescence. Documents on this branch of inquiry
are doubtless less rare, and the related facts much more nume-
rous, but there does not exist as yet in France any good descrip-
tion of this phase of insanity. We are indebted nevertheless to
Dr Wigan, author of the " Duality of the Mind/' for a remark-
able notice on motiveless crime amongst young people.-}- These
series of reprehensible acts belong very evidently to perversions
of instincts and sentiments of which we have already spoken.
Amongst the cases which the author has collected, we find
* On "juvenile Delinquency." P. 57. Jour. 1849, P. 428.
*f* Journal of Psychological Medicine, &c., vol. ii. p. 497. Loud. 1849.
ON THE INSANITY OF EARLY LIFE. 627
instances of incendiarism, poisoning, cruelty to animals and
children, and even of murder. The age of these delinquents is
generally sixteen to eighteen years amongst the girls, and from
seventeen to twenty-one of the boys. The special characteristic
?of these acts is that of being uninfluenced by any motive of
animosity towards the object injured.
According to the observation of Dr Wigan, the majority of
these young persons had been subject to nasal htemorrhage,
which in some cases, even in boys, appeared with the regularity
of the menstrual secretion. The criminal act was generally com-
mitted after the temporary cessation of the flux. The aspect
was then always heavy, stupid, and languid. In no case was
there any animation of feature, nor any of the repulsive characters
of vice.
On interrogation as to the motives of their conduct, they
would answer almost invariably, " I do not know?I had no
motive?I thought I must do it." No other answer could be
obtained but this, "I was compelled to do something." As to
the something itself, it was determined by a simple accident, the
sight of the means of accomplishing it. Dr Wigan attributes
this irresistible impulse to a local and special congestion of the
brain. He has observed facts of this nature in the most respect-
able families, in which the greatest pains had been taken, by
education and example, to instil good principles into the minds
of the children. To the same disposition of mind he attributes
certain forms of forgetfulness of the rules of propriety and
decency in society, contempt of public opinion, and rashness,
which nothing could explain or justify. He relates also certain
instances of bravery almost beyond precedent, ? which have
excited to the utmost the admiration and applause of contem-
poraries, which were neither excited by rivalry, nor the love of
glory, nor the desire of applause, nor the passion of war?but
simply by this irresistible impulse to do something. Under
this temporary constitutional impulse these young people have
shown a contempt for dangers which at another time would
have been incomprehensible, and which has excited in them
veritable terror on reflection. Dr Wigan's hypothesis is, that this
state may result from the too slow growth of the osseous case of
the brain. We do not discuss the hypothesis; we merely collate
the facts, which have an important significance in relation to
morals, education, and legal medicine. We may, however, re-
mark, that the question in reference to causation is rather super-
ficially treated ; and that to be satisfactory, it would be necessary
to obtain more precise information upon hereditary influences,
upon the early maladies which might have modified the consti-
NO. VIII.?NEW SERIES. T T
628 ON THE INSANITY OF EARLY LIFE.
tution, and especially upon the kind of education. We now pass
on to our own observations.
The cases observed by us are 42 in number, which, out of 1200
patients received during the same time, give a proportion of
about 1 in 28. This proportion may doubtless vary with greater
numbers for comparison, but there is nothing surprising in it,
inasmuch as it is strictly conformable to the calculation of pro-
babilities : of these 42 insane persons, 23 were men, 1 9 women ;
their age was from 14 to 56 years, and they are in detail as
follows :?
Years of Age. ISTo. of Patients,
1 4 1
1 5 3
1G 3
17 G
IS 4
1 9 3
2 0 4
21, 1
22 4
Years of Age. No. of Patients.
2 3 0
2 4 1
25 ...... 2
2G 4
30 2
36 1
40 1
45 1
56 1
We shall here make an observation which may appear super-
fluous?that is, that the age indicated is that of the last entry ;
and that of all these cases, there is not one whose mental derange-
ment did not date from childhood, from puberty, or from men-
struation.
The first symptoms of the appearance of mental disorder among
the boys, have generally been observed about the twelfth, thir-
teenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth years; and those cases in which
they have not manifested themselves until the seventeenth or
eighteenth year, had been in their earlier age Hectares, singular,
unequal, capricious, and the children of diseased parents.
Amongst the girls, the morbid phenomena generally first ap-
peared at the eleventh, fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth years;
and those in whom they did not appear until the seventeenth
and eighteenth, were characterized by similar states to those just
mentioned, or had difficult menstruation. If true mental aliena-
tion begins in some of them about thirteen, fourteen, or fifteen
years of age, we may affirm that in the majority of cases, the
phenomena first observed are of a nervous, hysterical or convul-
sive nature?an unequal, depressed, eccentric disposition?in
short, rather the elements or precursors of insanity, than the
malady itself, which generally has a period of incubation more or
less prolonged.
It is natural to inquire whether the causes of adult insanity
are the same as those which determine that of the young; or
ON THE INSANITY OF EARLY LIFE. 629
if in the latter cases there may be peculiarities of organization,
or special circumstances which modify the malady?the answer
must be sought in the antecedents.
With the greatest care in inquiring into the causes or predis-
posing influences, there are twelve of the cases in which we have
been unable to gather any precise information : perhaps because
the parents have not attended to the early indications?a very
common occurrence. There is nothing more frequent, indeed,
than to be told by them, that the affection is quite recent, when
the simplest questions oblige them to recognise the existence of
certain signs long existing, often because they wilfully ignore
any acknowledgment of hereditary influence.
There remain, then, thirty cases in which we have been able to
collect precise information. Hereditary (13) and moral (5)
causes have been noticed eighteen times. Independent of
mental alienation, the parents were often eccentric, bizzares,
of an excessive weakness, false in judgment; either incapable of
forming any decision, or of extreme obstinacy. More than once,
the tendency to insanity has been denied ; but it has been granted
that the subject was of an excessively nervous temperament, of
extreme excitability, of an imagination always running into ex-
tremes ; dwelling only upon the darkest ideas, affected with
fixed fancies, and strangely moved by the least accidents. The
majority of children born of such parents were uneven in temper,
irritable, coarse, dishonest, sad, difficult to manage, obeying no
rule ; scolded, constantly punished, detested by their instructors,
in whom they saw their future enemies, the abettors of their
persecutions?a form of insanity now so common.
In proportion as we advance in experience, we cannot but
deplore the ignorance of men, especially those who are engaged
in the instruction of youth. Because they have taken high
scholastic rank?because they know Greek and Latin, and have
a certain faculty of divining the ordinary intellectual and moral
status of their pupils, they consider themselves competent to
direct their life-career. Yet there rarely passes a year in which
pupils leave the public institutions of whom their masters have
neither suspected the talents nor the destined renown. But this
is not the question?that with which we chiefly reproach them
is, that they ignore completely the physiology of man?that they
have not the least knowledge of hereditary influence, and that
they believe when they find a pupil idle, captious, or rebellious,
that the remedy is perpetually to punish. The first thing ought
to be to ascertain if the evil proceed from constitution, from
education, or from hereditary causes. In this latter case all chas-
tisement, far from correcting, will only aggravate the evil and
T T 2
630 ON THE INSANITY OF EARLY LIFE.
hasten the explosion of the disease. I have here for illustration
only the embarrassment of choice.
M , son of an ill-judging father, who was obstinate, and
incapable of directing the education of his children, was from
his infancy a witness of and actor in domestic scenes which
reacted only too strongly upon an excitable organization. He
became sad and pre-occupied, and at twelve years of age
he was heard to say he should be glad to die. At school, his
melancholy and sulky temper subjected him to frequent punish-
ments; he was expelled, placed elsewhere, again punished, and
deprived of his walks. Shut up in his room, he became peevish,
rude, singular in manner: at length mental alienation clearly
showed itself; and with this disposition it was not surprising
that he attempted suicide at sixteen years of age.
A , whose mother was deranged, did not lack intelligence,
but had the defects of his sad heritage. Similar to the last
case in treatment, the result was the same?viz., an access o?
mania. It was cured, but doubtless a portion of the thorn was
left behind.
There is a disease of childhood which exercises evil influence
upon the mind of its victims?that is, brain fever. I knew a
young man, the son of intelligent and healthy parents, who by
their energy and talents had obtained a high position in society.
They had six children, five of whom were lively,'resolute, and
capable of making way in the world. The subject of my obser-
vation presented the most marked contrast to his brothers and
sisters. Full of good sense, conversing with remarkable justice,
he was afflicted with a torpor which nothing could shake. He
passed entire days laid upon a sofa, reading everything he could
get, without being able to make the least exertion to acquire
useful ideas or a suitable education. He listened to advice,
declaring at the same time that it was out of his power to follow
it. Punished incessantly for idleness by his masters, he never
complained, but equally never amended. This young man had
had, when twelve months old, a brain fever, which had nearly
carried him off. It cannot be doubted that this was the cause of
these mental peculiarities; and yet his instructors, who had been
informed of this, continually treated him as one of the wilfully
bad, making 110 account of the melancholy physical deteriora-
tion. Place this young man in another sphere, that of criminal
acts, and justice would only see the accusation and would con-
demn him! And these facts are frequent,
Let us now resume our examination of antecedents. Physical
and moral heritage is not the only influence which has operated
unfavourably upon our patients; in ten cases the character had
that stamp of singularity and eccentricity which onty needed
ON THE INSANITY OF EARLY LIFE. 631
some determining agency to lead to insanity. Continued mas-
turbation and typhoid fever have also, in six cases, seemed to
cause mental alienation. In one case it was attributable to the
employment of preparations of lead. In another it was the
compulsory sight of the execution on the scaffold of a brother,
condemned for treason, which brought on furious mania, ending,
at twenty-seven years of age, in dementia.
In the female sex there is a function which even in its phy-
siological state ebranle leur moral, et a fait dire de celles qui
ont dte cdlebres qu'elles cessaient d'etre hommes. Menstruation
is in effect the great regulator of the sex, and when the function
is imperfectly performed, especially if there be any hereditary
or other predisposing agency, it is frequently the cause of in-
sanity. In the nineteen cases to which we have alluded, twelve
times the menstruation, either at the first occurrence, or at the
critical period, has exei'cised a marked influence upon the de-
velopment of insanity, or of the nervous and hysterical symptoms
which have preceded it.
One of these cases appears to us remarkable. A young lady,
ret. 15, observed the precursory signs of her first menstruation,
and experienced at once the strongest tendency to suicide.
Parental affection, judicious care, incessant surveillance, all were
lavished upon her; but the idea continued during the flow, be-
came less and less strong as this ceased, but only to reappear
with the same intensity at the next period. Esquirol was con-
sulted, and treated her for a year, when the morbid tendency
disappeared. Thirty years elapsed without any recurrence ; but
at the critical period, the same idea recurred with all its pristine
force. She was again taken to the private asylum?her reason
was perfect upon all other points; but she could not expel the
idea of death. She felt herself irresistibly impelled to kill her-
self?she did not wish it, and made (she said) every effort to
resist the tendency, but could not. We observed the case for
many months, during which the idea persisted constantly.
In three cases, one of which terminated in idiocy, onanism was
the exciting cause. Lastly, the abuse of intoxicating liquors, of
absinthe, of tobacco, and masturbation, combined to produce
insanity in a young man in whose family there was no germ
of the affection.
The inquiry into the causes of juvenile insanity, then, shows
that it is developed under the same influences as that of adults ;
only the predisposition receives a fresh impulse from the ^phe-
nomena of puberty and menstruation.
The form of alienation exhibits nothing peculiar. In our
cases, seventeen times it was mania, seventeen times mono-
mania. Three other cases were acute delirium?three stupidity
632 ON THE INSANITY OF EARLY LIFE.
?one was monomanie orgueilleuse, and one general feebleness
of intellect.
To enter into the symptomatology of these forty-two cases
would be to repeat what is found everywhere; there are, how-
ever, some particulars which appear worthy of special mention.
A merchant feels unable to work, knows that he is ill. and says
of his own accord that he has one foot upon the threshold of
insanity; he is afflicted at the thought, and would be cured ; but
he has neither the will nor the power to act.
The folie de I'orgueil produces occasionally singular effects. A
notary's clerk, well versed in his profession, was attacked by
mental alienation. He was formerly fearful, and pusillanimous?
he now became bold, hardy, and enterprising?his professional
capacity was transformed into an unlimited confidence in his
talent and resources. He suggested and invented means of
success with an astonishing animation and closeness of reasoning ;
until we might have been tempted to inquire where was truth
and where error, had it not been for a trace of cretinism occurring
in the sequel. He ultimately committed an act the audacity of
which required his sequestration.
The intermittent form of mania lately described under the
name of folie a double forme, or "circular insanity," may
present so great a calm during the melancholic stage, that we
have seen a young man thus affected fulfil with perfect propriety,
during four years, his duties in an extensive financial establish-
ment, where he had every day to make the most complex calcu-
lations.
Another case became melancholic, and a monstrous polysarcia
coincided with the period of convalescence; he went out of the
house perfectly well, but double his former size. Some months
afterwards he had returned to his normal condition, and for the
last two years his reason has been intact.
One of the most interesting of the cases, and one which we
believe at present to be unique in science, by reason of the long
period of the incubation of the malady, is that of a man of forty
years of age, a distinguished military officer. At thirteen years
of age, he was assailed by religious scruples which made him
wretched. Six months afterwards these ideas disappeared, and
were replaced by that of doing some injury to his parents ; this
idea occurred on touching some vessel containing verdigris. He
thought that the poison adhered to his fingers, and he washed
them frequently during the day. This idea persisted for twenty-
seven years, often giving him no rest, but never preventing his
attending to his duties. At the end of this time it became more
intense; he felt that he was losing command over himself; and at
length, accompanied by one of his relatives, he came to relate his
sufferings to ine?sufferings which neither his present companion
ON THE INSANITY OF EARLY LIFE. 633
nor any of his friends had ever suspected. What surprised me
the most was, that after three months of care, he was restored to
calmness. He was able to accomplish a mission of importance,
and I saw him many years afterwards in the most perfect sound-
ness of mind.
We have likewise attended a young lady who for a long time,
at the periods of menstruation, was pursued by the idea of doing
some evil. She could not see a knife or a fork at table without
this idea being intensified. It then seemed to her that her
hands were red with blood, and she kept perpetually washing
them, whilst none of the family could conjecture the motives for
this exaggerated cleanliness.
Religious scruples are very common amongst young girls, and
their alarmed consciences easily lead them to believe themselves
eternally lost. In these cases preaching and imprudent forms of
tuition may have the most disastrous consequences.
Hysterical symptoms of all kinds are very frequent as the
forerunners of mental alienation; in concert with menstruation,
these symptoms assume the most varied forms, and are compli-
cated with epileptiform and cataleptic attacks; and we do not
hesitate to assert that we have verified in some instances certain
of the phenomena of animal magnetism. This subject, a very
delicate one, is about to be entered upon by the Medico-Psycho-
logical Society; and we believe that it is quite time that capable
and conscientious men should examine into the question, as to
what really scientific elements can be deduced from this part of .
our knowledge, as yet very obscure. When men of such emi-
nence and learning as MM. Ferrus, Cerise, Peisse, Des Etanges,
and others, shall have given the result of their experience, we
shall then have a good criterion as to the merits of magnetism.
Amongst the nervous symptoms of the hysteric character, we
must not forget a special form of convulsive cough, which we
have observed in four cases of insanity. It may persist for
months, even for years after recovery; then it becomes inter-
mittent, and disappears as it came.
When the delirious idea flickers about the mind, we gene-
rally advise the patient to repel it, and make no concession to it;
this rule, however, is subject to exception. In the case of one
young female patient, each time that she attempted to repel the
morbid idea, of which she recognised the falsity, or to dissimu-
late it, in order to avoid remonstrances, she was subject to
extreme agitation and spasm, to a sort of convulsive action ; she
rubbed her hands and thighs with extreme rapidity, and wore
out her clothes without being aware of it.
Sometimes we observe in young girls very odd habits. One
young lady perpetually pulled her front hair over her face ; it was
cut off once for the purpose of breaking her of the habit; but as
6o-t ON THE INSANITY OF EARLY LIFE.
soon as it grew again slie resumed it. She would also walk five
steps forward and five backwards for hours together.
Apathy and indifference are sometimes carried to the extreme.
Some of the patients would remain for entire days in one position,,
as if stupified, and would not occupy themselves in any manner,
unless absolutely compelled to it. They lamented this state,
but affirmed that they could not move. Others, again, would
exhibit a vivacity by no means natural to them, would express
themselves in terms more polished than usual, would speak on
subjects not generally familiar to them?it was a veritable meta-
morphosis. These changes of character have been brought about
frequently by typhoid fever, the influence of which in these
respects has not been sufficiently indicated.
To form a prognostic sufficiently accurate upon this form of
mental alienation, it would be necessary to enter upon the me-
dical biography of each of these cases; to follow the course of
the antecedents, the incubation, the relapses, the progress, the
termination, and the consequences of the affection. This we
shall do in some detail, leaving out such of the antecedents as
have been before treated of.
In nine individuals, the disorders of mind of which the mani-
festation dated from puberty, had either been restrained, con-
cealed, or showed themselves with such characters that isolation
had not been necessary, nor medical advice taken. The period
of incubation varied in these cases from four to twenty-seven
years. This last fact is full of interest, inasmuch as the patient,
during this long period was able to conceal his sufferings from
the penetrating eyes of his relatives and associates. Seven times
the relapse occurred at intervals of from nine to forty-one years.
In two observations, where there had been an interval of thirty
years in each case, the critical period was the determining cause
of the relapse. In three others, it was accouchement. One of
these ladies, after an interval of eleven years, has fallen ill again.
If we analyse now the progress, the consequences, and the ter-
minations of the derangements, we find amongst the twenty-three
men the following: results :?
Dead in a state of dementia
Cured?Died of bronchitis
Left melancholic?lost sight of
Commencing dementia
Fallen into a state of idiocy
Commencing feebleness of intellect
llemained melancholic
Cured .....
2
1
3
1
1
l
l
13
23
ON THE INSANITY OF EARLY LIFE. 635
This last result (viz., the thirteen cured) requires further atten-
tive analysis.
CM these, 3 were lost sight of, and 1, an artist of great merit,
died of fever many years after his cure . . . .4
Six others had either relapses, or remained quarrelsome, unma-
nageable, inconstant, uncertain, and changeable?some of the
G were drunkards and masturbators, and had, as consequences
of these vices, epileptiform attacks . . . . ,6
There remain satisfactorily cured .3
13
Let us now pursue the same analysis amongst the females,
and see what will be the result of the examination as regards
prognosis.
The nineteen females, of whom five were married, may be
thus divided :?
Four left uncured, with forms of insanity of an intractable na-
ture, or presenting phenomena of a nervous or hysterical
kind. They have been lost sight of . . . . ,4
Two relapsed?one after 11 years, the other after 30, presenting
the same symptoms as at first ...... 2
Six strove for many years against their delirious ideas without
success; finding, on the contrary, that they ever increased
in intensity. Two of these were like automatons, so apa-
thetic were they and indifferent to everything . . G
One fell into dementia ........ 1
Six were cured?three after having had two, three, and four
relapses. The others were only treated for the first attack,
and have been lost sight of. All these, except one, were of a
difficult, uncertain, fantastic character, excitable, and weak
of judgment ......... G
19
If we have entered thus minutely into this examination, it is
because it was of importance to know what data we might cal-
culate upon in forming a prognosis of the insanity of young
persons, especially those born of parents so affected, or in whose
families or history there existed the elements of insanity. Far
from us be the wish to extend this melancholy influence beyond
its due limits, as has been done of late years by means of the
theory of "pathological transformations/' We have sought for
mental alienation where it was, and have carefully avoided
doubtful cases. What has our examination revealed to us ?
Eighteen times out of forty-two, the children inherited the
mental malady from their parents, or from their eccentric and
bizarre habits. In the great majority of cases, either under the
636 ON THE INSANITY OF EARLY LIFE.
hereditary influence, or under that of puberty or menstruation,
we have recognised the principle of the elements of mental
alienation. In interrogating the parents upon the characters of
their children, they have almost always answered that they were
sad or gay without motive; they could not fix them to work;
they had not capacity; or perhaps occasionally they had brilliant
talents, but could not submit to any rule. Some were apathetic,
without emulation; others of a frivolity which nothing could
control. Many had convulsive affections. A very long period
of incubation presaged a grave malady. The eighteen cures ob-
tained had been often preceded by relapses?left often great
changes in the character, especially an inaptitude to assume and
keep any defined position in society, and presented but uncer-
tain chances of durability of cure. The consequence deducible
from this summary is, that if the cure be permanent in some
cases (which we are far from denying), yet mental alienation in
the young is a malady of very grave import, whether by reason
of the antecedents, or of the incomplete development of the
organism.
We have not spoken of the treatment, because our therapeutic
agents are those of all enlightened practitioners; but especially
because in these cases, it is chiefly preventive measures to which
recourse should be had. A distinguished physician who, in his
treatise upon the " Degenerations of the Human Race/' lias had
the merit of opening a new method in our science, eminently
social and anthropological, has insisted strongly upon the form of
degeneration produced by mental alienation.
Eighteen years ago, in a memoir read before the Academy of
Sciences, we called the attention of the learned world to the pro-
gress of insanity. This opinion, controverted for some time, is
now admitted by many authorities.* All civilized States, where
charity is at the height of progress, have seen their magnificent
establishments scarcely opened, but crowded at once with the
insane ; yet without are thousands similarly affected?not dan-
gerous? idiots and cretins, who have an equal right to admission,
as they are equally the victims of the ignorance and prejudices
of society. Hereditary influence ! there is in reality the knot of
the question?that upon which we should direct all our efforts?
that which has impelled us in these researches. When we
have grouped the facts related in scattered works?when we
have added our statistics to the valuable labours of Dr Lucas
upon " Natural Inheritance"?when we have proved to all that
insanity is transmitted fatally by the seminal germ in very large
proportion?when we have exactly realized the strong bond of
* Once for all, we do not attack civilization and progress; we only mark out the
events which embarrass their march.
ON THE INSANITY OF EARLY LIFE. 6-37
union between this and other nervous affections, and the genera-
tive influence of these latter in producing the former, we may
then, with hope of success, occupy ourselves with the social
measures of hygiene necessary to be adopted to arrest this de-
generation. Even now, it is ascertained that drunkenness en-
genders mental alienation, and creates thousands of idiots, im-
beciles, and feeble-minded persons. The facts cited by Dr.
Magnus Huss and M. Morel* leave no doubt on this point. M.
Ferrus, in his book on Prisoners, has likewise shown that the
prisons contain a considerable number of these degenerate beings,
the feeble nature of whose faculties place them in the power of
clever scoundrels, whose instruments they are. No session ever
passes where we do not observe criminals with lowering brow,
fixed, dogged look, and imbecile physiognomy, with dangerous
instincts and habits, who listen unmoved to their sentence, as
though it in no wise concerned them. It is not many months
since one of these wretched creatures was condemned to the
galleys for having murdered a child, in order to become in-
visible (!) that he might rob with impunity ! When the scien-
tific facts, of which we are now the depositaries, shall have passed
from our books to the public, and make part of the public educa-
tion, so far behind-hand in the practice of life, then physicians
will be called in to examine such criminals, and their reports
will show, in many such cases, the hereditary result of drunken-
ness, of imbecility, and of mental alienation.
Meantime our mission is incessantly to indicate the "preventive
cure of insanity; to oppose all our forces to the causes of degenera-
tion ; to prevent the affected from perishing, and the sound from
becoming affected by contact with the unsound. Observation also
shows that we may combat the degeneration of the race by crossing
the breed of races. The facts illustrative of this position are as yet
chiefly derived from the domestic animals. Without going out of
France, and confining ourselves to two recent experiments, we
may mention the race of " charmoise " sheep, and the. pigs of
Boiogne. The former are produced by a somewhat elaborate
double crossing of different breeds, by which a race is obtained
double in value to that of the parents. The pigs of Boiogne are
derived from an extremely degraded local breed, which are
crossed with Yorkshire and Leicester pigs. The mules thus
obtained breed together, and so a very fine breed, furnishing an
important article of commerce, is obtained. With regard to the
objections to crossing of races, it is sufficient to say that the want
of success has been chiefly due to the neglect of the most ordinary
* A summary of these will be found in our last number, "On the Degeneracy of
the Itace."
X
638 ON MORAL LIBERTY.
physiological laws; as, for instance, in the attempt to mix our
race of horses with that of the English.
However cautious we ought to he in any comparisons between
men and animals, we believe that these facts should be taken into
consideration. There are, moreover, experiments ready made in
the human race, which throw much light on the subject.
Wherever precise observations have been made, the mixed
races are found superior to the coloured?almost equal, some-
times superior in certain respects, to the white races themselves.
In the Philippine Islands, the mixed race forms a numerous,
active, brave, industrious class of people, who have already ob-
tained many and just concessions. It is scarcely necessary to
recal what were those men of colour at St. Domingo, who so
cruelly expiated their alliance with the blacks.
In Brazil, thanks to its moral and intellectual force, the
crossed race has in great measure overcome the prejudice of
blood, and it is especially remarkable for an aptitude for culti-
vation of the arts far superior to that of the pure white race.
In this same empire, we find an entire province entirely peopled
by a breed or race, a cross between the Europeans and the indi-
genous inhabitants. What is the result of this marriage ? Their
peculiar stamp, their chivalrous character, their bravery, and their
perseverance, have been recounted by M. Quatrefages in his
" Histoire naturelle de rHomme."*
Marriage is, then, the great preventive of insanity. Such a
subject can only be slightly hinted at in a memoir like the pre-
sent ; we shall treat of it in speaking of the means necessary to
be opposed to the development of alienation in general. Our
observations upon the insanity of young people furnish one page
of the history of mental maladies ; we trust our fellow-labourers
will give them a favourable reception.
\
* Rev. des Deux Monties, 1857.
