On the Compensatory Relations Between the Faculties of order and Memory
=========================================================================

Art. VI. ? .
BY A. F. MAYO, ESQ., BARRISTER-AT-LAW.
I think it may be shown that Order and Memory, regarded as
separate and independent faculties of the mind, stand related to
each other as compensating faculties; in other words, that a
deficiency in either of these faculties can, in some degree, be
supplied by the other faculty.
In the first place, I will inquire how the presence of Memory
compensates for the absence of Order, both being regarded on
this occasion as independent faculties of the mind.
Memory involves the power of retaining or fixing for perma-
nent use the ideas which, from any cause, whether internal or
external to the mind, occur to the mind. It may seem strange
that Memory, which from the abundance of the wealth which it
enables the mind to conserve and store up for future use, might
seem, more than all the other faculties of the mind, to require
the assistance of Order, steward-like, to arrange its accumulations,
716 ON THE COMPENSATORY RELATIONS BETWEEN
should have a facility of its own in dispensing with the assistance
of Order. Yet that it is so, I think I shall show my reader.
The one great difficulty in giving harmony to the ideas which
we derive from so many sources, arises from the associations and
prejudices which cling to the ideas. Thus, what the ideas gain
in bulk and thickness they lose in delicacy and clearness of out-
line. Each new idea which we form has, in proportion to its
novelty, a cloud of associations attaching themselves to it, the re-
sult often of the casual circumstances of the moment at which it
was impressed. These associations, while they tend to amplify the
scope and dignity of the new idea which Ave have gained on one
subject^ in the same proportion tend to the disparagement of our
former ideas on the same subject. Here the faculty of Order, if pre-
sent in strength, would insist on showing the symmetry and bear-
ing of our new ideas; in other words, would harmonize our new
knowledge with our old ideas, and thus with our old knowledge.
But if the faculty of Order is weak, and that of Memory
strong, the mind, instinctively tending to consolidate its footing,
will summon instinctively Memory to its aid, which, under
the mere laws of association, will bring to our consciousness
hosts of old ideas, which will modify the new ones, and deprive
them of their arrogant claim to enthrall the attention.
The old idea thus becoming associated with the new idea,
will, by the aid of Comparison, immediately become the measure
of the new idea; and thus also Causality will often exert its
function to show the essential moving principle common both to
our new and old ideas.
Nor to produce this effect need we suppose the faculties of
Comparison and Causality strongly developed. For the bright-
ness of the images which a strong Memory reproduces makes
their critical function an easy one. Thus the mental idols (in
the sense of Lord Bacon) which are stamped on the mind by the
passions, the pursuits, and the other individualities of each man,
and which so often intrude on the mind when excited by the
orgasm of a novel conception, are, by the aid of Memory, coolly
brought face to face with our antecedent knowledge, and often
will retire abashed.
This effect is often produced by the merest juxtaposition, in-
dependent of any visible exercise of Comparison and Causality.
In this way the new idea is controlled by the memory of past
ones, and being divested of its superfluous attire, is ready for in-
scription in those mental tablets for the registration of particu-
lars, on the basis of which alone all sound inquiries must be
conducted. The new idea is like an obtrusive home-boy, who,
placed in a public school, at once loses his offensive impertinence
under the mere pressure of numbers, producing a constant
abrasion of the edges of individual minds. The remembered
THE FACULTIES OF ORDER, AND MEMORY. 717
ideas will also confer upon the new one the polish of uniformity,
and if detracting in some respect from its picturesqueness, will
give more than an equivalent in adding to its usefulness. Where,
however, the power of memory is deficient, but is nevertheless
invoked, a confused idea is the probable result, from which the
thinker recoiling falls back upon his new idea. Otherwise the
confusion in the recollection of former ideas is propagated into
the new idea itself. Suppose a man to have presented to him a
new tenet of morality, which chimes in with his prepossessions.
If he cannot recollect any analogous cases except very feebly, he
would do better to apply to the faculty of Order to test the
general reasonableness of the doctrine, than to endanger it by
specific yet untrustworthy analogies.
Minds with a strong passion for truth, and only choosing to
recognise ideas which are distinct, will, in such a case, discard
the incumbrance of imperfect recollections. Without the aid
of Memory, the mind depending on mere association could
never rely on its own capacity to summon up a group of past
ideas which should be united together with any closeness of
adhesion; hence, minds which have to deal with new ideas, in
their carefulness not to impair their clear and vigorous reality
by the shadowy forms of dimly remembered past ones, will, in
their defect of Memory, be disposed to ignore, not simply their
forgotten ideas, but all that general result of such forgotten
ideas which express their sum and substance in the convictions
of the present: while others, by reason of the same defect of
Memory, habitually check the fine elasticity of their intellect,
restraining it, as huntsmen do their greyhounds in a leash, in
fear lest, in giving way to such elasticity of mind, they may com-
promise truths which are in fact forgotten, or mitigate their
authority if they should be recalled to the mind in future.
They do this from an instinctive apprehension that the posses-
sion of a mind by a new idea may make the retracing of a
former idea on some subject so much the more difficult, unless
it can be renewed by force of contrast. On the other hand,
suppose that a man's memory is strong, and that he has under
a flexible command a large army of acquired ideas and facts;
we shall generally observe that he can place them in a rough
sort of order, however destitute of method his mind may other-
wise appear to be. The memory of a Lyndhurst or Macaulay
will present them with visions so bright in colour, so clear in
outline, so girt with all the moving lineaments of the life which
they possessed when they were first mirrored from their object
upon the mental sensorium, that the task of Order in allotting
them a collocation will be small; and this on the same principle
that while the most adroit captain called on to marshal his bat-
talion in perfect darkness would assuredly fail, they would be
718 ON THE COMPENSATORY RELATIONS BETWEEN
nowhere, as are the ideas of the past to him who has forgotten
them :? but pour the light of day on the battalion, and then a
school-girl might arrange them with some pretence of symmetry.
All large masses of ideas, like all large masses of men, neces-
sitate by their very presence, a rough sort of Order to prevent
them from jostling and crowding each other. The man in the
crowd must have standing room. He must also adjust his posi-
tion in some harmony with that of his neighbour. So an idea,
by virtue of its being remembered, must have some clearness of
outline, and in proportion to this last, which is made up partly
of the strength of the impression and partly of the strength of
the memory, has it a facility for coming into accordance with
other ideas.
That the faculty of Order should compensate for the absence
of Memory seems a corollary from the above remarks. I can
make it more evident. The faculty of Order places ideas in cer-
tain synthetic relations to each other. These synthetic (universal)
relations must have a connecting link. This link is obtained by
the faculty of Order. Order therefore has a sympathy with the
design or ultimate object of any course of action, and similarly
with the general tendency of a collection of facts. It does not
so much investigate their separate truth or qualities ; but, assum-
ing these as proved, strives to obtain their general harmony and
result. It performs the functions of a gardener who surrounds
his younglings with a fence, or places them within an iron frame.
Besides this, the faculty of Order provisionally tickets each new
idea which it encounters according to certain preconceived
generalizations. Thus, to the struggling infancy of the idea of
which Comparison and Causality have been the inventors, Order
offers a home and shelter under the bosom of recognised and
admitted truth. In this way, Order defends the delicate specu-
lations of the analytic faculties from a premature destruction.
Those who do not recollect that without speculation unverified
in the first instance the laws of no single science could ever
have been discovered, love to nip in the bud the luciferous
speculations of even undoubted genius. This perverse hatred of
generalization and dislike of innovation which beset common
minds, are soothed into neutrality by the intervention of the
faculty of Order, when it squares and cunningly adapts that
which is as yet an unverified speculation to an agreement with
recognised laws. Yet does not this take place without danger
from those anticipations of truth which the verification of after
inquiry does not always confirm. If, however, the provisional
generalizations are well remembered to be only tentative guesses
at truth, to be subjected to the probation of inquiry, the gain is
all on the side of truth.
THE FACULTIES OF ORDER AND MEMORY. 719
We have seen that Memory recals former ideas in a freshness
and beauty which is even purified by the lapse of time, and
modifies our admiration for the most recent child of our thought
by the juxtaposition of our former knowledge.
This result Order effects, but in an inverse manner. While
the man of strong memory gives full swing to the associations
caused by the idea before him, however prurient they may be,
in order that the images of the past catching fire should appear
in brightness, the man strongly gifted with Order lops off the
associations which ivy-like conceal the symmetry of the new
idea and its analogies with old ideas, or he packs it up in the
shape in which it is most portable, and in which it may be most
conveniently laid alongside of old ideas. With a man, then, of
strong memory, the arrogance of the new idea is chastened by
the recollection of ancient facts; with a man strongly endued
with order it is chastened by a reference to established laws.
While Comparison may be said to estimate and observe the
rough lineaments of phenomena, and the varieties and difference of
the surface of things, and while Causality penetrates into the hidden
essence of things, thus confining itself within a narrower area
than Comparison, but digging to a greater depth, Order takes
a further sweep than either into the expanse of Nature. Akin to
Comparison in its love of extent of observation and to Causality
in its love of boldness of theory, it carries both further than
Comparison and Causality respectively. In its love for catching
at large general laws.and combinations, and for observing the
mutual action of such laws and the general harmony of the
universe, it stands alone. Its danger lies in its soaring spirit,
in its despising the ground, when it can find symmetry and
beauty in ideal realms. Its strength lies in the firmness of its
alliance with the two sister faculties, Comparison and Causality,
and while it plumes itself as being a pioneer in mental inquiry,
as well as an ultimate refiner and purifier of mental wealth
already acquired, it is bound not to forget those stern delvers in
the search for knowledge, who dealing at first hand with Nature,,
sustain the heaviest burden. Order has a speculative bearing,
in the extent of its telescopic sweep over the realm of nature.
It has a practical bearing in its showing the co-operation in
action of various coefficients.
Comparison and Causality, often too much occupied in an
intense regard of objects, with a view to nothing further than
their separate natures, forget occasionally as well their practical,
as their theoretic value. I mention all this to indicate with
what a strength of grasp the faculty of Order co-ordinates or
views, in general relations, the facts and ideas of nature. It may
be asked, in what way this faculty disposes of those superfluities
720 ON THE COMPENSATORY RELATIONS BETWEEN
of separate objects which it is compelled to elide that their
facilities of combination may become visible ? It does not throw
them away; they, too, may be ticketed by Order, and provi-
sionally bracketed with similar residuary facts.
Each new fact or idea may thus be made a probationary
member of a system, from which however it must be displaced
if further inquiry, by Comparison and Causality, should show its
collocation to be founded in error. Even pure association, when
the mind is not conscious of any exertion, but allows the pano-
rama of the past to move silently before it, is often subjected to
the latent influence of Order. The full explanation of the laws
connecting Association with this faculty more than with the
other faculties of the mind, I must reserve to another occasion.
Even at first sight it cannot surprise us that the mental system
should be largely indebted to the faculty of Order as a phy-
scian to remedy the morbid action of Association. Frequently,
without exciting our notice, the faculty of Order will step in
among the associations, and while leaving them their outward
form and gesture, will reduce the stragglers to some provisional
discipline; or if any idea imbedded amid our associations is
painful or turbulent, will eject it as summarily as a policeman
an offender out of a crowd. So gentle is the action of Order,
that it often introduces quiescence into the utmost turmoil of
the mind, without any recognition of its presence.
In addition, then, to the function of Order exercised after Com-
parison and Causality, in giving breadth and generality to the
conceptions of the mind, it has also a function antecedent to the
ordinary action of the above faculties. In both cases by intro-
ducing a logical connexion over a large surface of facts or ideas,
it tends to render them indelible in the mind, and so far usurps
the proper functions of Memory. For it must be recollected that
the corrosive element which chiefly destroys mental impressions
is vagueness. Now, vagueness is caused either by excess of
Association, implying the absence of intellect, or by the excess of
intellectual action (chiefly characterized by Comparison and
Causality), implying the absence of Association.
The conchologist minutely inspecting (id est comparing)
the colours of a shell, may, in the very intensity of his gaze,
miss his purpose of seeing definite outlines, by over eagerness.
And the crystallographist, bending over the problem of the
law of crystals, and using all his Causality to explore it, may
defeat his purpose by not co-ordinating the laws of other sciences
(such as mathematics) as assistants in his inquiry. In both such
cases Order comes in to relieve the mind from its speciality of
aim, and, by widening the prospect, to give security to our
explorations. Order loves to place the inquirer upon the highest
THE FACULTIES OF ORDER AND MEMORY. 721
peak, from whence he may command the largest area of facts.
And those gifted with this faculty are safe, if they remember that
the surveyor, descending the mountain after his trigonometrical
survey, has to fill it up in the most submissive reference to the
meanest turnpike road in the valley. Yet, for the simple purpose
of the retention in the mind of the features of the country, even
though he did not follow it up, the traveller would find himself
repaid. And with results equally happy will a man, deficient in
the special faculty of Memory, introduce his faculty of Order to
forge links, however artificial, among his ideas, by which each one
will always have a rational bond of connexion with the rest.
By the use of the word artificial, I intend that it is most im-
portant for us not to confound the two occasions on which Order
is called forth, the one early, the other late, in philosophical
inquiry. Order, indeed, waits till a firm and solid foundation is
laid before it ventures to rear its massive buttresses on high; but
like a good architect, it is ever ready to assist its masons?Com-
parison and Causality?with a provisional scaffolding. From
considering the work of Order, whether evinced in provisional
generalizations or in the establishment of verified laws, we may
estimate how powerfully it compensates for the absence of
Memory. If, indeed, Order cannot, like Memory, reproduce and
revivify past associations and past forms, it can at least refer to
its own work?those artistic combinations with which Order is
ever clothing the nakedness of Fact.
On the one hand, the dominion of Memory over former facts
is pure and simple. For whenever the simple succession of
ideas, in their order of coming before the mind, is so indelibly
impressed on the mind as to be capable of being recalled at will,
either individually or in combination, there is Memory. On the
other hand, the dominion of Order over facts (represented of
course by ideas), is over facts transmitted into, or forming a part
of, generalizations, each portion of which involves the judicial
action of the mind, and if remembered is remembered only in
consequence of the impression produced on the mind by mental
acts.
In conclusion, of the two faculties, Order and Memory, Order
has, perhaps, the more dignity, as possessing most affinity with
the other faculties concerned in inquiries after truth. But
Memory seems to satisfy a more general necessity of the mind.
Besides, Memory seems more independent of Order than Order
is of Memory; for there must always be a moment of time during
which we are compelled to retain a fact before any of the faculties
which give the fact a philosophic shape can be used upon it;
and this must be done by Memory, which can act " sponte sua,"
and recal facts linked together by no bond; for to call mere
722 ON THE COMPENSATORY RELATIONS BETWEEN <
succession a bond would be to assume the point in question. To
the other compensation which Memory offers for want of Order,
I will add, that Memory gives opportunity for the repeated
examination of past facts or ideas, and can introduce, by the
clearness of the images which it reproduces, the faculties of Com-
parison and Causality to give the last finish to the details which
otherwise the faculty of Order would have given to the whole.
On the other hand, Order compensates for the absence of Memory
by suggesting new postures and assortments of old ideas, thus
enabling the analytic action of Comparison and Causality to be
applied from a new point of view. Thus some equality in the
balance of results is produced.
Perhaps the majority of men would get on better if devoid of
the assistance of Order, than if devoid of the assistance of
Memory. For Order principally looks to large generalizations,
which, from the nature of the case must be few as compared with
the minute and practical details which, whether in speculation
or action, it is left for the mass of mankind to carry out, in
obedience to the expansive laws which genius discovers. For the
details of action and of thought, habit produces the same facilities
which, in large and expansive speculations, are achieved by a
sense of Order and of Harmony. And we may note another
divergence; that by the action of habit too prolonged men's
minds become dead and automatic, and that by the action of the
faculty of Order over-exercised the stability of the mind is im-
perilled by the vastness of the ideal landscape which it discloses.
To the mass of mankind Memory is of priceless importance.
For no extrinsic aid could supply the void and uncertainty
caused by the forgetfulness of particulars on which the safety of
action mainly rests. On the other hand, to the philosopher a
deficiency in his faculty of Order would be a far greater evil
than a deficiency in his faculty of Memory.
For in the establishment of large and fruitful generalizations,
the theory must long beforehand have been silently yet surely
maturing from a constant verification of its various steps by
reference to particular cases; and it is assumed that the processes
of the intellect do stereotype themselves on the mind with a
force which requires no assistance of Memory, which is chiefly
required for those ideas between which there is no link forged
by the intellect. Memory in general is chiefly applicable to those
innumerable chains of facts and of ideas, between which we can
discover no necessary connexion, but which we have to retain in
the mind in combination as if they were necessarily connected.
What particulars, therefore, the philosopher needs, his faculty
of Order would always point out, by description sufficient for him
whose knowledge Order has arranged in marked receptacles, to
THE FACULTIES OF ORDER AND MEMORY. 723
which he may always refer. The whole of literature and science, as
stored in books, act in fact as Memory to a philosopher gifted
with the faculty of Order and who has duly exerted it. But if, on
the other hand, the philosopher is strong in the accumulations
which Memory heaps up of facts, but is deficient in the faculty of
Order, then indeed rich in the raw material of knowledge he
may be, but he will be skilless in that wisdom which can in-
spire dead matter with life and beauty; the diamonds may
glitter in the sand, but where will be the hand which can
arrange them in sparkling brilliancy around the coronet ?
