On Marriages of Consanguinity
==============================

By S. M. Bemies, M.D., of Louisville, U.S.A.4
" They breed in-and-in as might be known;
Marrying their cousins, nay, their aunts and nieces,
Which always spoils the breed if it increases."
Some facts illustrating, in a remarkable degree, tlie evil results
of marriages of consanguinity, fell under my observation several
months ago, and determined me to collect others of a similar
character, and endeavour to arrange them in such a form as to
warrant some definite conclusions upon this important subject.
The collection of original facts connected with these marriages
is a matter of difficulty and delicacy, and oftentimes as dis-
agreeable as it is difficult and delicate. We can seldom gain
information in reference to their history and results from any
source so exact and reliable as from the family itself; and such
is frequently the secrecy observed by relatives in regard to these
revelations, that we are unable to obtain statistics sufficiently
minute to afford a basis for positive conclusions. Such statistical
information as my paper contains may, however, be relied upon
as strictly correct; for I have at once rejected all presented to
me in such a manner that I was not able, from my knowledge
of the informant, to endorse as entirely to be relied upon. One
other difficulty met with in a comprehensive presentation of this
subject, is the poverty of its literature ; for, though long and able
treatises have been written upon the best methods of preventing
or arresting deterioration of domestic animals, by the introduc-
tion, from time to time, of new crosses into their respective
breeds, yet the question of degradation of numerous families of
the human species, by neglect of similar counteracting influences,
has rarely been a subject of literary or medical discussion.
Nevertheless, the opinion is strictly tenable, however humiliating
it may be to our pride, that the rules which govern the procrea-
tion of species are not essentially different in man and domestic
animals. This want of medical research upon the subject in
question does not proceed from the novelty or recent origin of
the truth just stated, for Rilliet has well observed, " no one can
claim priority of the idea, when its antiquity is such that we can-
not trace it to its source."
In primitive ages, marriages between near blood relations were
occasionally necessary to the perpetuation of the race ; but it is
very probable that their abuse led to the early enactment of laws
* From No. I. of the "North American Medieo-Chirurgical Review," January
1857. Philadelphia. J'
ON MARRIAGES OF CONSANGUINITY. 369
to establish the degrees of consanguinity beyond which marriages
might be consummated without fear of perverted sanitary con-
dition in the progeny. It is by no means an ascertained fact of
history, that these early laws of incest owed their origin to physi-
ological observations ; but it seems to me entirely reasonable to
infer that, witnessing the pernicious effects of such unions upon
offspring, first suggested the establishment of laws to prevent the
continued repetition of the evil. Those were ages in which
physical force had not been superseded by the inventions and
mechanical appliances of the present day; and the power of a
community was measured by the amount of muscle under its
control. Legislators who contended that " walls of men were
better than walls of stone/' would certainly exercise the most
sedulous care to maintain, so far as practicable, the physical
integrity of their people. In further proof of this inference,
Socrates, when inveighing against the incestuous marriages that
were sometimes practised at Sparta and Athens, says, he regards
them as " prejudicial to the healthy propagation of the species."
?(Rilliet.)
The laws of Moses interdicted marriages within the third
degree of relationship. The Roman laws were more strict in
this respect in former than in later times. Plutarch says, " In
ancient times the Romans abstained from marrying their kins-
women in any degree of blood ; as they at present forbear their
aunts and sisters. It was late before the marriage of cotisins-
german was dispensed with."?(Janeway.) The Catholic Church,
at an early period, opposed itself to blood alliances. Pope
Gregory the Great, in proscribing such marriages, gives, like
Socrates, a physiological reason: " Experiments didicimus ex
tali conjugio sobolem succrescere non posse/'?(Rilliet.)
References may be found to the unfortunate influences of
marriages of consanguinity upon offspring, in various medical
works of the previous and present century,* but no facts are
adduced to support the conclusions of the authors : nor have any
statistics, illustrating these effects, been presented to the profes-
sion, so far as I am aware, except some facts included in Dr.
Howe's valuable reports on idiocy.
By much labour, I have obtained statistical accounts of thirty-
four marriages of consanguinity. Of this number, twenty-eight
were of the third degree of the civil law, or between first cousins ;
and six were of the fourth degree, or second cousins. Of the
total number of marriages, twenty-seven were fruitful and seven
sterile. The twenty-seven fruitful unions produced one hundred
and ninety-one children. In only thirteen of these marriages
was the sex of the offspring reported, giving forty-nine males o
* Mason Good, Combe, Barlow, 4c.
B 13 2
370 ON MARRIAGES OF CONSANGUINITY.
forty-two females. Of tlie twenty-eiglit marriages of the third
degree of relationship, twenty-three were fruitful and five sterile.
Of the six marriages in the fourth degree, four were fruitful and
two sterile. In both these latter instances of sterility, the
female was the product of a marriage of consanguinity. The
relative proportion of children to the total number of marriages
was 1 to 5 6. The average fecundity to each fruitful union was
seven and a slight excess. The average births to each fecund
marriage in the third degree of kinship was 6*87, nearly. The
average number of births in the fruitful unions of the fourth
degree was 8^.
. Of the 192 children resulting from these marriages, 58 perished
in early life. In 24 of the 58 deaths, the causes are stated as
follows :?of consumption, 15; of spasmodic affections, 8 ; of
hydrocephalus, 1. Of the 134 who arrived at maturity, 46 are
reported as healthy ; 32 are set down as deteriorated, but with-
out absolute indications of disease ; and 9 are returned without
nny statement as to health or condition. The remaining 47 all
possess such abnormities as to render them the subjects of par-
ticular obseiwation. These are classed as follows :?23 are scro-
fulous; 4 are epileptics; 2 are insane; 2 are mutes; 4 are
idiots ; 2 are blind ; 2 are deformed ; 5 are albinoes ; 6 have
defective vision ; and 1 has chorea.
In point of fecundity, these marriages probably present results
not differing materially from the average fertility of marriages
in the rural districts of the West. I do not know of any rules
by which to determine the average number of births to a
marriage among our country population, but 1 do not doubt
they will equal in fruitfulness the most prolific portions of
Europe. In some villages of Scotland, the proportion of births
to a marriage is stated to be seven. (Cy. Pract. Med.) The
parties to the above intermarriages were, with one or two ex-
ceptions, of rural habitation; were, in many instances, remark-
able for mental and physical development; and were surrounded,
in a large majority of cases, by circumstances of living calculated
to ensure the utmost degree of fruitfulness and prolonged life.
These statistics, then, I am satisfied, exhibit results on this
account more than usually favourable to the offspring. In sup-
port of this opinion, Ave may contrast this report with Dr Howe's
observation of seventeen marriages of blood relations, in his
report on idiocy. These seventeen marriages gave "birth
to 95 children, of whom 44 were idiots, 12 scrofulous
and puny, 1 deaf, 1 dwarf ? 58 in all, of low health
or imperfect?and only 37 of even tolerable health/' An
unusually largo number, over vone-fifth, of the marriages in
my report, were sterile; and I am not aware that this
can, in any instance, be imputed to other causes than the
ON MARRIAGES OF CONSANGUINITY. 371
influence of consanguinity. Some of the parties to tliese sterile
unions have had excellent corporeal and mental endowments, and
have arrived at unusual longevity. In four instances reported to
me, females descended from these intermarriages have proved
barren without exhibition of constitutional defect. In two of
these instances, they had married relatives; in the other two,
they married without the circle of family affinity.
I shall not attempt to offer any hypothesis as to the active
cause of sterility in these cases ; it is a subject in reference to
which physiological reasoning has, up to the present time, fur-
nished no satisfactory results. We cannot force our researches
into the hidden penetralia of nature, and there discover how her
processes of reproduction are so interfered with as to render
these intermarriages disastrous to their issue; nor by what means
she avoids these unfortunate results, by rendering many such
unions fruitless. We must leave the development of this subject
to the future physiologist; if, indeed, the sea of human know-
ledge shall ever extend its limits in this direction.
1 come now to speak of the defects of the offspring, in the
cases alluded to. I have no doubt that the number of cases of
scrofula is larger than the same number of descendants of
marriages of consanguinity would ordinarily exhibit. This pre-
dominance of scrofula probably results from the fact that, in
three of the families, there is reason to suspect the previous
existence of strumous taint. These families alone yield sixteen
cases of scrofula. This fact, and the large proportion of the
deaths ascribed to phthisis, demonstrate the truth of Dr Barlow*s
observation, that the tuberculous diathesis " shows itself, in the
greatest intensity, in the offspring of marriage between relations
in whose family the taint has already existed."
I have not obtained sufficient information to enable me to
describe the particular manifestations of scrofulous diathesis in
each individual case ; some of them are, however, represented as
scrofulous ophthalmia.
Rilliet places epilepsy first in order of frequency, of the diseases
of the nervous system to which the product of family inter-
marriages are most liable. My report comprises four epileptics,
the father of one of whom was likewise the result of a marriage
of cousins. Eight of the deaths are ascribed to spasmodic affec-
tions, and four of this number are specified as epilepsy.
I have no information in regard to the degree or character of
mental aberration of the two insane subjects contained in the
enumeration. The two cases of muteism were congenital, and
will be again referred to, as will also the four cases of
idiocy.
I am not informed whether the two cases of blindness were
congenital, or produced by causes occurring after birth : they,
372 ON MARRIAGES OF CONSANGUINITY.
however, both occurred in the same family, and were, in all
probability, congenital.
The cases of deformity were, in one instance, curvature of the
spine; in the other, malformation of an arm. The six cases of
defective vision were myopia, and the results of scrofulous oph-
thalmia.
It now remains to notice the most remarkable of all the abnor-
mities of offspring my report presents. I refer to albinoism.
Absence of the pigmentary cells of the integument and coats of
the eye is, undoubtedly, like most other deviations from the
normal type of reproduction, a mark of deterioration. But albi-
noism sometimes occurs where there is no cause or condition,
apart from its own manifestation, to lead us to infer degradation ;
and, having once occurred in a family, the influence of maternal
emotion might have much to do with its repetition. It may
exist in connexion with a moderate state of corporeal health,
and a striking development of intellectual spriglitliness, as in
some of the subjects of my Report, In domestic animals, it is so
well understood to indicate impaired value, that connoisseurs in
horseflesh reject such animals as have absence of colouring pig-
ment in the hair and tegumentary tissues. M. Siecle's* obser-
vations upon albino cats led him to conclude that it was, in this
animal, uniformly attended by absence of the auditory sense.
No defect of hearing has accompanied its presence in the subjects
of my report. Almost all the albinos here included are near-
sighted. Esquirol also mentions an albino who was certainly
myopic, and another whom he supposed to be. I am not aware
that any author has spoken of this condition as the result of
in-and-in marrying; but Esquirol states that, wherever we meet
with albinos, there wo also find the goitrous and idiotic; and
these latter are known to be common products of marriages
between kindred. From Dr Howe's investigations upon this
subject, it is safe to infer that idiocy is oftener the result of this
cause than was heretofore suspected. In Dr Howe's report,
seventeen out of 359 idiots were found to be products of mar-
riages of consanguinity. If the same ratio held good through-
out this country, there would have been, in 1S50, 7-17 idiots
in the United States, the offspring of parents connected by
blood-ties.
Congenital deafness is another impairment common to the
products of marriages of this character. M. Meniese, physician to
the Imperial Institute for the Deaf and Dumb, at Paris, con-
siders this infirmity, when congenital, more often referable to
this cause than to any other. My inquiries have not, thus far,
led me to a similar conclusion ; but its great frequency among
the offspring of such marriages cannot be doubted. A writer in
* "London Modical Times vol. xviii., p. 12S.
ON MARRIAGES OF CONSANGUINITY. 373
the " National Intelligencer," some years ago, stated that "a
great proportion of the inmates of the asylums for the deaf and
dumb, the blind and idiotic, are found to be the product of the
intermarriages of cousins." Then, if we add to the 747 idiots,
the mute, epileptic, blind, and insane products of these mar-
riages, computing the number at the very lowest probable figure,
and sum together the whole, we shall have, resulting from this phy-
siological error in the United States, not less than two thousand
victims, whose conditions are, for the most part, irremediable;
besides a much greater number suffering from other impairments
of constitution entailed upon them by the same cause. Truly,
" Democritus did well to laugh of old :
Good cause he had, but now much more;
This life of ours is more ridiculous
Than that of his, or long before."
I am aware that many circumstances may produce defective
issue besides the influence of consanguinity, such as the habits
of the parents, and their particular condition at the period
of approach. Maternal emotion or constitutional derangement
during pregnancy may also frequently determine the character
of the offspring. But these accidental influences are not more
likely to prevail in marriages of consanguinity than in those of
a different character ; while the number of departures from a
healthy standard in the issue of these marriages is incomparably
greater than in those where no such connexion exists.
To prove still more certainly that these various impairments of
offspring are due to the influence of too frequent admixture of
the same blood, we have only to associate the cases in my report
in the various degrees of relationship, and observe if the propor-
tion of accidents to the offspring is increased with the degree of
relationship. To arrive at this point, I shall divide the pro-
ductive marriages in my report into three classes?those of the
fourth degree, or between second cousins; those of the third
degree, or between first cousins ; and those nearer than the third
degree, as between double cousins, or between cousins, themselves
the descendants of cousins. The table will stand thus :?
Degree.
4tl? degree .
3rd degree .
2J degreo .
4
19
4
34
130
27
37
13
6
31
5
10
17
6
10
30
3
374 ON MARRIAGES OF CONSANGUINITY.
It will at once be seen that the percentage of calamitous results
to the progeny is largely increased as the relationship becomes
closer. I have also accounts of two marriages in the second
degree, or between uncles and nieces; but they have not been
consummated sufficiently long to determine their results.
I now propose to notice briefly the circumstances calculated to
modify the effects of marriages of consanguinity, either in lessen-
ing or aggravating their evil results. That these marriages
? ? ? ??II
are sometimes practised without apparent ill consequences to
the offspring, is obvious to all whose attention is drawn to
the observation of these points. Under what circumstances,
then, may they be expected to be followed by healthy offspring ?
Is it when, as Mercatus has advised those entering upon matri-
mony, the parties are of opposite temperaments ? I incline to
the opinion that this, with some other circumstances to be men-
tioned, has great influence in determining the results. Baillou
has remarked, that " parents transmit to their children disease as
well as wealth, but the former much more certainly than the
latter." (Stille's Pathology.) This remark is probably equally
true with regard to points of temperament and types of physiolo-
gical idiosyncrasy as to predisposition to disease. In truth, pre-
disposition to disease may often consist in a hypermanifestation of
certain constitutional peculiarities. Nature seems to have
designed that the conditions and tendencies of human organisms
should be kept very nearly in a state of equilibrium. This equi-
poise, necessary to the healthy condition of man, upon whatever
inexplicable cause it may depend, may be readily disarranged by
giving undue predominance to any particular constitutional phase.
The slighter deviations from a normal mean would constitute in-
dividual or family peculiarities; while more marked perversions
become morbid manifestations, and infirmity results. As in the
moral man none are exempt from the taint of sin, so in the
physical man each individual of our race has his obliquity towards
disease?generally, perhaps uniformly, towards some particular
disease. It is, then, reasonable to expect that when two indi-
viduals marry who possess the same morbid proclivity, their off-
spring will exhibit that identical divergence, but in a much more
marked degree. Thus, undoubtedly, have originated many family
peculiarities, perverted tastes, and morbid diathesis. The circle
of individuals thus constituted sometimes includes large com-
munities, as is observed in reference to the disease denominated
Plica Polonica, which attacks the Polish and spares the Russian
peasant living under external circumstances equally liable to
produce the malady. . (Pritchard.) There is no better mode of
maintaining this happy mean of temperament than by admix-
ture of types of constitution possessing no family identity. We-
ON MARRIAGES OF CONSANGUINITY. 375
may possibly, and justly, think with Benton, that " it hath been
ordered by God's especial providence, that in all ages there
should be (as usually there is), once in 600 years, a transmigra-
tion of nations, to amend and purify their blood, as we alter seed
upon our land ; and that there should be, as it were, an inunda-
tion of those northern Goths and Vandals which overran, as a
deluge, most parts of Europe, to alter, for our good, our com-
plexions, which were much defaced with hereditary infirmities,
which, by our lust and intemperance, we had contracted."
History presents some instances altogether antagonistic to the
doctrine of degradation from this cause. Especially does Sacred
Writ offer some cases, of such remarkable emphasis, that it
would be extremely difficult to explain the non-sequence of
deterioration of offspring, if the rule by which our contem-
poraries are measured were equally applicable to them. Abra-
ham, Isaac, and Jacob, all married wives connected to them by
blood-ties; and yet they were the chosen progenitors of a
privileged and highly-gifted people, and nothing pertaining to
their history suggests the idea of immediate degradation of pro-
geny. A very learned divine has explained to me this seeming
contravention of a natural law, by the supposition that, as the
Jews were a people chosen for an especial purpose, they existed
under abnormal conditions, and all influences ordinarily enuring
to their prejudice were providentially countervailed. This pre-
sumption is certainly plausible ; and as we see the same people
protected in future trials by miraculous interposition, the argu-
ment may be entertained without violence to reason. But with-
out presupposing the exercise of supernatural influences, the
apparent inoperativeness of this law of degradation by in-and-in
marrying, in the above instances, as well as in those of Adam's
sons and daughters, may be explained by the incomparably
superior endowments of these primeval denizens of our globe.
Those were days in which man dwelt as it were in the presence
of his Creator ; " when," as Sclilegel observes, " God familiarly
taught man the rudiments of speech, as a parent teaches a child."
If those ancient patriarchs were found worthy of these high
honours, and if they could ordinarily attain to a longevity many
times beyond that to which our most perfect organizations can
now arrive, how immeasurably superior to ourselves must we
suppose them to have been in vigour and excellence of constitu-
tion ! They were thus enabled to propagate the race by alliance
with their own blood, with no such baneful results as similar
causes now call forth. But it is not necessary to believe that
such unions were even then exempt from pernicious effects, but
in their perfect condition of corporeal organism, and freedom from
predispositions to disease, the deterioration of race resulting loin
376 ON MARRIAGES OF CONSANGUINITY.
this cause was probably exhibited in the lowering of the vital
powers and simple abbreviation of life, rather than in demon-
strations of the diseases of the present day. We still see these
very same circumstances of constitution and condition counter-
acting, to a limited extent, the evil tendency of this cause. In
the early settlement of the West, the inhabitants were, for
security, gathered into communities of greater or less magnitude,
separated from each other and from the older States by miles of
dangerous wilderness. It was natural that each community
should be composed in a great degree of blood relations, since,
in forming companies for migration, the several branches of one
family would often combine. When in their new homes, a
scarcity of marriageable material would often render unions
between relations expedient, and afterwards, these covenants,
arising at first from necessity, became a habit, often convenient
in some respects, since it preserved estates within the family
circle. But these pioneers were a hardy, robust people, living
much in the open air, and undergoing vigorous exercise ; having
for their aliment wild game and the fresh products of a genial
soil, and not addicted to any habits calculated to impair the in-
tegrity of their well-endowed constitutions. We would naturally
expect conditions of life so favourable to the sound development
of the bodily organism to overrule all counteracting influences,
and it might prove almost the exception, when marriages of con-
sanguinity gave origin to defective issue. Not so, however,
among the valleys of the Alps, where, from the barriers formed
by impassable mountains, the same seclusion of communities and
frequency of family alliances are found to exist. There, with
impure air, bad diet, and constitutions infected for generations
with hereditary taints, it proves an exception when a healthy
child is born from parents of the same blood. There we find
goitre, cretinism, scrofula, albinoism, and muteism in their most
aggravated forms.*
In this country, the Jews, whose religion forbids them to marry
except with their own race, are often driven, from the scarcity of
marriageable subjects in their communities, to form alliances
with their own kindred, and a physician of distinction informs
me that they are peculiarly liable to strumous taints and con-
genital defects. In this connexion it may also be of interest to
mention Bayard Taylor's observation, that the Jews of America
are far inferior in personal appearanco to the Jews of Palestine.
These same social conditions and connubial exigencies exist also
* It may be proper to remark, in this connexion, that there is within a few
miles of this city a child, the issuo of cousins, whoso cranial bones have undergono
the rachitic softening so frequently observed among the cretins and idiots of
the Alps.
ON MARRIAGES OF CONSANGUINITY. 377
among the free coloured inhabitants of the Northern States, and
may account for the increased ratio of deaf and dumb, blind, and
insane, found in this population.?Comp. U. S. Census 1850, p. 77.
Wherever in-and-in marriages are practised under circum-
stances of life calculated to annul their tendency to deprave the
offspring, we see a prominency given to certain points of physio-
gnomy, which constitute striking marks of resemblance, not only
evinced in families, but sometimes found to pervade a numerous
nation. Thus, Hippocrates states that the Scythians all resembled
each other, although they were different in appearance from all
other people. The Jewish face has, under favourable circum-
stances, retained its characteristics from the earliest ages to the
present day.
History will, I think, sustain the opinion that the most vigorous
people have sprung from the ingrafting of nations differing in
constitution and temperament from each other. I believe, with
an observing writer, that the extraordinary activity and energy
of the American people are due to the composite nature of their
blood. This rule, however, seems subject to some qualification ;
for there certainly exist strong reasons to believe that matrimonial
alliances between the greatest possible contrasts to be found on
our globe?the negro and Caucasian races, for instance?are not
favourable to the most vigorous propagation of species. I do not
look upon mulattoes as hybrids, but think they exhibit less of
vigour and vital force than are found in crosses where there is
less contrast. Mr. Alexander, perhaps one of the most experienced
cattle-breeders of the world, has observed that the cross between
the finest and coarsest breed of cattle is far inferior to that between
the best blood, and a medium between that and the worst.
The prevention of the serious evils I have under consideration,
which, of course, consists in the prevention of in-and-in marriages,
is a point which I do not think is to be attained by the
enactments of civil laws bearing upon the subject. It would
prove equally difficult to convince either legislators or commu-
nities that there could be a necessity for going beyond the
requirements of the Levitical law. It is, however, the duty of
physicians to labour unremittingly in the collection of facts per-
taining to this subject, and to submit them to the public. A
reasoning man will refrain from a connubial association likely to
inflict irreparable injury upon his offspring, after he lias learned
that such is the fact; and church governments will forbid their
clergy to celebrate nuptials which they find tend to the abase-
ment of the species, and the subversion of God's beneficence to
mankind. As previously stated, the Catholic Church has already
discouraged union in any near degree of blood affinity. We have
no means of ascertaining, by reference to masses of population,
378 ON MARRIAGES OF CONSANGUINITY.
tlie effects of this prohibition in diminishing the congenital
occurrence of such defective offspring as ray report presents. It
has been attempted in Europe, as Rilliet mentions, with results
favourable to Catholic populations. Quetelet's computation of
the ratio of deaf and dumb to the whole population is precisely
the same in both England and Italy. M. Meniese states that at
this day every trace of this interdiction of the Church has dis-
appeared. " Pendant une longue suite de si&cles, le mariage fat
absolument interdit a tous les individus parents a un degr^
quelconque, l'Eglise se r^servant le droit denfreindre la r&gle
posde par elle-meme dans les rares circonstances dont elle voulait
apprecier la valuer; mais ces rigueurs de la discipline furent
sujettes, corame toute autre chose, a un relachement deplorable,
et aujourd'hui toute trace de ces interdictions a disparu."
The facts offered in my paper are much too meagre to afford
a basis for positive conclusions, but I think it is a step in the
right direction, and will at least serve as a guide for other
inquiries on this subject. I have, in the last few days, learned,
with much pleasure, that Dr John Bartlett, of Keokuk, Iowa, is
now collecting facts for the publication of an essay 011 this sub-
ject. We may congratulate the profession that such an earnest
and indefatigable lover of science has taken the subject in hand.
The attention of the public press is somewhat, but not sufficiently,
awakened to the importance of this subject. The Ohio Legisla-
ture, much to the credit of her physicians and lawgivers, passed
at their last session a law requiring the assessors throughout the
State to collect the facts connected with marriages of consan-
guinity and certain defects of offspring, and report them. These
statistics will furnish a sufficient amount of testimony to establish
beyond cavil the character and degree of influence these marriages
exert upon offspring, and the profession will await with much
anxiety the publication of this most important addition to our
vital statistics.*
* The following is a copy of the Act referred to :?
"An Act to ascertain the Number and other Facts respecting Deaf and Dumb,
Blind, Insane, and Idiotic Persons, in the State of Ohio.
"Section 1. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of tho State of Ohio, That
the Assessors in tho several townships of each County of tho State, while perform-
ing their duties, shall ascertain and enter upon a schedule prepared for the pur-
pose, the name, in full, of each deaf and dumb, blind, insane, and idiotic person
in the township, together with tho ago, sex, colour, occupation, and place of birth
of said persons, and whether educated or not ; also, the names, in full, of the
parents of said deaf and dumb, blind, insane, and idiotic persons, their place of
birth, occupation, numbor of children, number of deaf and dumb children, and what
affinity of blood, if any, existed between tho parents previous to marringe; and
that said papers be returned in duo form to tho Auditor of the proper County, at
the time of returning tho assessment of property, and by the said Auditor to the
Secretary of State, 011 or before the first day of July, 1850. The Auditor of State
shall furnish to the several County Auditors the necessary blanks or schedules to.
carry out the provisions of this Act."
PATHOLOGY OF INSANITY. 379
For reasons too apparent to be indicated, I am compelled to
forego the satisfaction of an individual expression of thanks to
many friends, both in and out of the profession, for the assistance
they have kindly rendered me in the collection of facts upon
this subject.
