Pllofessoll Felliuer's New Scottish Philosophy
===============================================

Aiit. II.?
Why Professor Ferrier should givo to his system of philosophy
a title which was only gradually extended as a mark oi honour
to the one it proposes to supersede,?and this, too, when it is not
an extension, but a subversion, of the older system,?we leave to
those who love to study character. To have won for his specu-
lations a right to the title with which ho has dignified them, ho
should at least have built upon tho old foundation; and oven
then the imposition of so proud a name ho should liavo left for
others.
Reid won his laurels in defending the citadel of truth against
the assaults of idealism and scepticism; and how did ho do this ?
By stoutly contending for the veracity of the primary deliver-
ances of the mind. Philosophers had given undue prominence
to demonstration as the source of philosophic truth. To those
fundamental beliefs which afford the data from which wo reason,
they had .assigned a very subordinate place. Seeking to provo
all things, they, one after the other, wandered into the maze of
scepticism, or fell into (he dream of idealism. But proof must
at last repose upon self-evident truths. Hero, then, is a source
of truth independent of proof: on it llcid took his stand. True,
it was that on which all, except philosophers, already took their
stand. So much the better. Indeed, its universal recognition
as a foundation evinced that it was the right one. lleid there-
fore decided upon siding with tho " vulgar" against philosophers,
" ^ e ftre necessitated by reasoning," savs Hume. " to contradict
Ferrkr?^'8'1 * '1^030I^O Tho Old ami tlio Now. A Stfttoniont l>y Profuiior
NEW SCOTTISH PHILOSOPHY. 29
the primary instincts of nature, and to embrace a new system
with regard to the evidences of our senses." "It is a bold phi-
losophy/' says Reid, " that rejects without ceremony principles
which irresistibly govern the belief and the conduct of all man-
kind in the common concerns of life; and to which the philosopher
himself must yield, after he imagines he hath confuted them.
Such principles are older and of more authority than philosophy:
she rests upon them as her basis, not they upon her."
13ut had Reid done no more than vindicate the superiority of
our primary convictions over every derivative assurance, he would
lmve accomplished little more than most unsophisticated scholars
do when they encounter the deformed half-truths of idealism, and
the offensive insinuations of scepticism. Besidesthus standing forth
as the champion of common sense against the philosophy of the
period?in which he was not original, being only the mouthpiece
of the unphilosophizing millions?he laboured hard to quell the
feud that had existed so long between common sense and reason-
ing, with regard to the cardinal point of philosophy; and it
was his success in this important undertaking that constituted
his originality as a mental philosopher. Hence, in a letter to
Dr Gregory he writes:?"It would be want of candour not
to own that I think there is some merit in what you are
pleased to call my j^ilosopJnj; but I think it lies chiefly in
having called in question the common theory of ideas, or images
of things in the mind, being the only objects of thought?a
theory founded on natural prejudices, and so universally received
as to be interwoven with the structure of language."
Herein, then, consists the spirit of the Scotch philosophy; it
maintains the veracity of those primary convictions which all
men have in common, as to the existence, for example, of the
material world as a non-ego. Reid, finding it impossible to doubt
such convictions, determined to accept no theory of outward
cognition that did not confirm them. The received theory was
at variance with our fundamental beliefs: this was enough to
satisfy Reid that it was erroneous. He consequently, with all
the humility and patience of the true inductive spirit, resolved
to find out the true explanation of his spontaneous assurances;
and if he did not reach the desired land, he obtained a view of
it, and left for his successors the result of his valuable labours.
Sir William Hamilton, with the strong spontaneous assurances
of his predecessor, with prodigious powers of memory, yet with
reflective talent second to none, performed for the common-sense
philosophy what its most sanguine admirers could have wished,
lie correctcd some of its errors; he laid its foundation deeper
by a more rigid?wo do not say complete?analysis, and brought
to its aid, from the prodigious store of his learning, the corrobo-
30 PROFESSOR FERRIER S
rative statements of philosophy from the dawn of speculation to
the present day.
Now, however much Sir Wm. Hamilton has had occasion to
differ from his predecessor, Reid; and however much he has
reduced that philosophers first truths to ulterior principles, he
has always remained faithful to the spontaneous convictions of
mankind ; he is a true promoter of the genuine Scottish philo-
* sophy. He contends that every one who aspires to the name of
philosopher should stanclily maintain, in opposition to any-
negative doctrine falsifying our fundamental beliefs, what is uni-
versally, because necessarily, believed ; and " that nature is not
gratuitously to be assumed to work, not only in vain, but in
counteraction of herself; our faculty of knowledge is not, without
a ground, to be supposed an instrument of illusion ; man, unless
the melancholy fact be proved, is not to be held organized for
the attainment, and actuated by the love of truth, only to
become the dupe and victim of a perfidious Creator."
It is not necessary, then, to admit the first truths of "Reid as
final; but it is all-important that we hold them to be truths, even
though we have not yet arrived at the ground of their certainty.
To call them vulgar prejudices that will not stand the scrutiny of
philosophy, is grievously to mistake their nature ; at all events,
they are not on a par with ordinary prejudices ; they arc uni-
versal, and not to be dispelled, either by effort or by argument.
The belief that the sun turned round the earth, did not exclude
the contrary belief, as the issue proves ; but the conviction that
the mere material world exists, does, at least practically, exclude
the contrary conviction ; and this being the case, ho is the
truest philosopher who, admitting the authority of our sponta-
neous assurances, seeks the ground of it, rather than ho who seems
to rejoice in proving it to be fallible, as if what is universally
believed must of course be philosophically falso and vulgar.
Now, Professor Ferrier, although he claims for his system the
paternity of Scotland, certainly cannot call it an extension of the
older system; for being opposed to the primary cognitions of
mankind, it must be similarly opposed to the conceptions of
Reid, Steuait, and Hamilton; lie consequently errs in giving
nus system a name that has so long been associated with a
system radically different. " I hold," says Professor Ferrier, "that
philosophy exists for the sole purposo of correcting the natural
madveitences ol loose, ordinary thinking?that is her true and
proper vocation ; the old school, 011 the contrary, are of opinion
that philosophy exists for the very purposo of ratifying, and if
possible systematizing, these inadvertences. This is held by
xfceid and his followeis to be the proper business of metaphysical
science. L
NEW SCOTTISH PHILOSOPHY. 31
The proper business of Reid, Stewart, and Hamilton, has
been to ratify and attempt to systematize the inadvertences of
loose ordinary thinking! What a waste of time and talent!
But who calls tlie convictions that Reid and his followers
attempted to ratify, inadvertences? Professor Ferrier. What poor
deluded mortals we are. But then, if we sit at the feet of Professor
Ferrier, what shall we profit by it? we shall still have to carry
our delusions with us to the grave. But are we, in the words of
the truly great philosopher we have recently lost, really and
truly " the dupes of a perfidious Creator." Monstrous supposi-
tion ! No ; what Professor Ferrier brands, with a veritable Corio-
lanusair, as the natural inadvertences of loose ordinary thinking,
we shall continue to call spontaneous truths?truths that result
from the constitution of the human mind, and which admit of
being speculatively established ; but which certainly can never
be upset by any apparent demonstration?which every demon-
stration must be that leads us to regard them as inadvertences.
Doubtless, Professor Ferrier is led away by the stubbornness of his
reasoning; but where valid reasoning leads to such conclusions
(0 ye of little faith), 'there must be some flaw in the premises.
Men of his cast of thought prefer admitting a demonstration to
distrusting a pet principle which they have been at enormous
pains to excogitate. Men like Reid and Hamilton prefer
doubting the principle, to admitting an inference at variance
with their primary convictions.
Without entering into the details of Professor Ferrier's system,
let us simply examine his statement?that the mere material
world has 110 real and absolute existence. His argument is as
follows:?" The only material world which truly exists is one
which either actually is, or may possibly be known. But the
only material world which either actually is, or may possibly be
known, is one along with which intelligence is, and must be,
also known. Therefore the material world which truly exists
is one, along with which intelligence also exists. Therefore the
mere material world has no real and absolute existence."
We propose amending this argument by the addition of two
small words: it will then run thus :?The only material world
which truly exists (for us), &c. But the only material world,
&c. Therefore the only material world which truly exists (for
us) is one along with which intelligence also exists. To the
argument thus worded there certainly "can be raised no just ob-
jection. But then it does not warrant the sweeping conclusion,
that the mere material world has no real and absolute existence :
this would be to prove more than is contained in the premises.
Now if there is really no mere material world, our only autho-
rity for the statement is consciousness. But how can con-
\
32 PROFESSOR TERRIER'S
sciousness, from the knowledge it lias of the non-ego, infer that
the latter exists solely in connexion with intelligence ? Only in
one way: consciousness must be proved inseparably necessary to
the absolute existence of the material world ; so that if con-
sciousness were to cease, the non-ego would cease as well; but
to be known being a passive condition imposed upon the
, object by the active process of knowing, we have prima facia
evidence that it must exist antecedently to the imposition of this
condition upon it by consciousness ; for this condition is only a
constituent of its known existence, not of its unknown. Let us
enter into the matter more fully.
An object can only exist for us in connexion with intelligence.
True : yet consciousness declares the object to be a non-ego, and
if consciousness is veracious, a non-ego it is : then it is a non-
ego-cognised : yet the non-ego is only causally, paternally* related
to consciousness?that is, it is a genus paternally related to its
differentia-cognised, forming the species?non-ego-cognised.
Now, to this species, or synthesis, either element is indispensable ;
take away the non-ego, you destroy it; take away cognised, you
destroy it likewise?you destroy the syntlicsis in which alone the
non-ego exists for us. Therefore, for us there exists 110 mere
material world, no non-ego minus cognised.
But, on the other hand, the genus, non-ego, being only pater-
nally related to the differentia-cognised, the latter admits, in
reality, of being separated from its genus, without obliging us to
conceive that the genus is destroyed by the separation. u Admits,
in reality, of being separated from its genus." What do you
mean by that ? In an act of perception, there are two elements,
forming what we shall call, with your permission, a biune fact
(object, plus consciousness); the minimum of existence for us
being that contained in this biunity?that is, existence with this
condition imposed upon it. Now, wo mean that from this biune
fact the object, element, is constantly passing away, leaving the
other element as the remainder to record its presentation; but
when it passes away, what becomes of it ? Are we forced to
infer that the separation of the other element from it involves
its non-existence ? By no means. . Consciousness does not enter
into its composition as a constituent part: it is a non-conncious-
nesn, consequently we cannot infer that, apart from conscious-
ness, it does not exist; but can we prove that, apart from con-
sciousness, it does exist ? AVe believe we can-our argument is
as follows: 0
In the order of knowledge, which is first to us, objects suppose
consciousness (no consciousness no objects for us) ; but in the
procZ0 P?atulat0 t!"B proposition here, referring U,e reader to t1,o ,;,i?el fortl,o
n
NEW SCOTTISH miLOSOPIIY 33
order of existence consciousness supposes objects (no objects no
consciousness). Now, since consciousness in the order of exist-
ence supposes objects, the latter must be chronologically prior to
the former, and consequently in the perception are only pater-
nally related to consciousness in the order of existence, while in
the order of knowledge the reverse is the case?that is, con-
sciousness is causally related to objects in so far as they are
known (not in so far as they exist) ; and it is the exclusive con-
templation of this subjective side of the truth that leads to the
incredible conclusions of idealism. Let us regard, as we ought,
the subjective and objective sides of the truth with equal vene-
ration, and then we have the philosophy of our spontaneous
assurances?a philosophy not exposing their perfidiousness, but
establishing their veracity.
There is a marked tendency among many philosophers to
admit nothing into the category of existence but facts of
consciousness; meaning the fact of its testimony, in contradis-
tinction to the truth of the same. They admit the existence of
the traveller, but deny his narrative, or deem it unworthy of
credit. Now, in so doing, they are unconsciously undermining
the ground they stand upon. Consciousness reports its own
existence?reports all its changes?so then, at the foundation of
all existence, we have a communication, or revelation. This is
the ultimate fact, even that on the credibility of which we
admit the existence of consciousness of the revealing power
itself. Now, if consciousness be not allowed to speak decisively
concerning what, by its own showing, is not itself; neither can it
be allowed to speak decisively concerning itself ;* "for the maxim
' faleus in uno, fulsus in omnibus,' must determine the credi-
bility of consciousness, as the credibility of every other witness."
It matters not how conclusive your proof may be that conscious-
ness exists,?and here we shall quote the clearest we know of,?
namely, "that in doubting the fact of his consciousness, the sceptic
must at least affirm the fact of his doubt; but to affirm a doubt
is to affirm the consciousness of it; the doubt would, therefore,
be self-contradictory,?i. c. annihilate itself." It matters not,
we repeat, how conclusive this proof may be, if the deliverances
of consciousness are in the least incredible ; for this proof sup-
poses them,*f* and therefore cannot be more credible than they
are. So then ^ve have no alternative left us, but to concede to
consciousness the power of knowing a real non-ego. We can
perfectly enter into the words of Stewart, therefore, when he
says, " that the belief which accompanies consciousness, as to the
present existence of its appropriate phenomena, rests 011 110 foun-
* Hamilton's edition of Reiii's works, page 7-16.
'I" Ah concertm us, everything that exists supposes the veracity of consciousness.
NO. V.?NEW SERIES. D
34 PROFESSOR TERRIER'S
dation more solid than our belief of the existence ?f
objects and we cannot fully coincide with, fen
ton's views on tliis point. t , ?00(i
Stewart means, of course, that practically we ? ?
ground for believing in the existence of externa 0 I)1'
that of internal phenomena; and that this should besufficient
to win our speculative belief in the existence of eit ler. ?
thinks this a mistake. If it is a mistake, it must be one in tne
speculative, not the practical sense. Stewart may no >e ?} . .
in stating that philosophers had no better reason or ac ?
the existence of consciousness than of external o vjec s,
Descartes, according to Hamilton and Cousin, had >y a ?
established the existence of the thinking subject, w ien as 1
had by a reasoning established the existence of ex erna J
Sir William Hamilton, relying on the conclusive^ ss <> ie^
reasoning, gives up the argument irom common sense, in . p
to the fact of the testimony of consciousness; and on ) con.
it in so far as it enables us to vindicate the truth o ? ie
mony of consciousness. While Reid and Stewar - u-u ^ .
that common sense is our ultimate authority, subjective }' as wc
as objectively, Hamilton recognises " a reasoning ns ?ur. .
mate ground of certitude in the subjective sphere ; wrn o in
objective sphere, he thinks with Reid that implicit tai i in _
deliverances of consciousness is amply justified. We u gari .
William Hamilton's contributions to philosophy, then, as in a
state of transition from pure common-sense views to pmo specu
lative. He gives what he considers a philosophical connrma ton
of the existence of consciousness, and its phenomena , m ac ,
he apparently establishes, in a speculative sense, the hist la o
the doctrine of common sense. But why did he stop hot c, an
lead us to suppose that speculative reasoning had no more o
conquer. .
Having gained possession of the subjective sphere, will it con
tent itself with anything less than the objective as well I ?
think not; and had Sir William Hamilton boldly pursued t ie
path he followed thus far, he would have arrived at a lull specu-
lative confirmation of the faith of Stewart, which he now considers
a mistake. We feel assured that the mistake is on Hamilton s
side, and that Stewart's faith is more to bo relied on than his
critic's inference. We feel convinced that consciousness 18 no
more credible, and that speculative reason can discover no butter
ground for admitting its credibility, when it asserts its own
existence, than when it asserts the existence of the non-ego.
The veracity of consciousness is the ultimate fact, whic t wo can
neither prove, nor disprove, without committing a pchtlO pnn-
cipii; and we cannot admit the testimony of consciousness as a
NEW SCOTTISH PHILOSOPHY. 35
fact, without supposing the veracity of consciousness in revealing
such a fact; and if we distrust our sensible perceptions, we are
compelled also to doubt the very existence of the same, for, if
they are not competent witnesses in their declarations concerning
external objects, neither are they competent to report their own
existence : for, as concerns us, everything that exists supposes
the veracity of consciousness.
This lends us to remark that Mr. Ferrier, like many others,
has been led astray by want of implicit faith in the integrity of
consciousness. Did he believe that this involved the reception of
the first truths of Reid as final ? That he could not do, when
many of them had already been reduced, or were in process of
being reduced, to simpler elements. " The first truths of the old
Scottish school have not only no value in philosophy, they have
no value in any intellectual market in the world," says the Pro-
fessor. Perhaps so, yet they are legitimate results of laws of
thought, laws which at first have only an implicit manifestation,
and depend upon reflection for their explicit development.
Perhaps the statement, that consciousness is trustworthy when
its demands are complied with, is of no value in philosophy;
yet certainly the proof of the statement must be a philosophical
acquisition ?f the very first value; and, were it established,
Professor Ferrier would have to concede that the wlixit of exist-
ence, even in a philosophical sense, must be simply apprehended,
before anything pertaining to it can be logically apprehended.
To come to the point, Mr. Ferrier states, that after much
elaborate demonstration, and in opposition to the whole teaching
of psychology, he has proved that existence is a compound, and
not a simple; in technical language, that it is a synthesis of sub-
ject and object?a union of mind, and something else?which is
not so strictly mind as mind itself is mind.* Now, in opposition
to this, we state that consciousness has an immediate apprehen-
sion, an intuitive cognition of an object as a noiv-ccjo, i.e. not
a union of mind and something else. This is a simple and ulti-
mate deliverance of consciousness, a deliverance universally
* The writer in Blackwood's, June, 1S42, on Berkeley and Idealism, lias these
words:?"Naturo herself, wo may say, has so beaten up together B'glit and colour,
that man's faculty of abstraction is utterly powerless to dissolve the charmed union.
The two (supposed) elements are not two, hut only one ; for they cannot be
separated in thought, even by the craft of tile subtlest analysis. It is God's syn-
thesis. and man cannot analyse it." Professor Kfcrrier says?"The mere material
world has no real and absoluto existence. Hut neither is it a nonentity (I am no
Idealist) ; for there is 110 nonentity, any more than there is entity out of relation
to all intelligence." The writer in Blackwood's also says?"It is perfectly true
that tlio existence of matter depends entirely 011 the presence?that is, either the
real or the ideal presence?of a conscious mind. But it does not follow from this
that there would be no matter if 110 such conscious mind were present, or thought of
as present; becauso no matter depends just .as much upon the real or the ideal pre-
sence of a conscious mind." What are wo to infer from these coincidences ?
D 2
36 PROFESSOR FERRIER'S
acted upon. But some men are not disposed to confide in it
speculatively, unless some reason can be discovered to exclude
the supposition of its being untrustworthy. Must we, therefore,
prove the existence of external objects, or cease to contend for
their reality ? By no means: we have two alternatives still,
which must be destroyed before we are brought to such a pass
as t lat. In the first place, if we cannot prove the existence of
the mere material world, you cannot prove its non-existence.
o ar then it is a drawn battle, but now we have a reserve to
mng up, and you have not. We have an immediate perception
o an object as numerically different from the conscious subject.
is more lational, therefore, to believe in the reality of the
ex eina woild than not. But, in the second place, if we cannot
pro\e ic independent existence of the non-ego, it still remains
compe ent foi us to admit its existence without direct proof, and
see on y to 'prove the veracity of consciousness in general, and
consequently in its immediate perceptions. Well, then, is con-
sciousness possessed of infallible integrity ? We refer to what
N1N111ttcn above; but, let us ask, what part of the mind
m ^fUC u ? mail thus satisfied '( Certainly not the pri-
ar^ ac.u lei?" Immediate perception assuredly does not doubt
? own sincerity. The conviction that there is an al)ject nurae-
?// 18 mct !om our apprehension of it is the very essence of
thoni e I)eiception; the absence of such a conviction involves
i<? tn ffen^e J Perception also. Whence, then, the suspicion
mtiJv 'ruth.fu'ness? It is one of reasonings raising! it is
havino- h'KCU Ve*' ^ calln?t bo practically entertained, i.e.,
awnvHi 10 pe.rc?Ptl01J .we cannot by any amount of effort will
Now 'G convi 1011 which is absolutely essential to its existence,
deinonytro't1,11 n? C?n ? 8ati8fied with nothing less than absolute
demands ? "sr w-ir' P08s^e to render it the satisfaction it
specullitive t HamUton has done very much to mako
to exclude it f * ? "r rePutation, but he has not dono enough
r rry re miml- v?
actual manifestations thn l i- es apprehended facts, or
all scepticism ? hnt i . verances consciousness are above
We Zk thai Hamfc U'"\k of **
the claims of reasoning in"!}6 Pymc.0(1 a disposition.to grant
gone farther, or, at least ha? ? 9Pl,oro> ?l\o?ld have
soiling's ratifying (,li ti, I iy admitted the possibility ot rea-
they regarded self or not self.^"111068 of common H0U80? whether
exactly realized Us intoM'1? t^u\t.r^,? Scotch philosophy has not
for a source of truth nrLr f, W? thinH while contending
right, it carries the contest toe 0j.noil8tr!.ltion> 1,1 which it is quite
contest too far, uud usurps the province of
NEW SCOTTISH PHILOSOPHY. 37
reasoning. For instance. Reasoning asks to be assured of the
faithfulness of immediate perception, and Common Sense puts
on the air of wounded honour, and feels surprised how Reason-
ing can be so basely suspicious, indeed so insane, as to doubt for
a moment the integrity of a friend?a friend in whom she must
practically confide, whether she will or not. But poor Reasoning
is really wronged by such usage ; she has a right to make her
demand, and will continue to make it till all doubt disappears.
Let us fully understand the point. Reasoning not only de-
mands proof of the veracity of the primary deliverances of con-
sciousness, but even calls itself to account, and seeks to prove
that it is not self-deceived. Now, we humbly conceive that
the Scotch school, as well as defending Common Sense against
Reasoning, should have defended Reasoning against itself (i.e.,
reasoning regarding its objects, against reasoning regarding
itself). The Scotch philosophy, we conceive, when rightly un-
derstood, is a protest against the practice of openly or virtually
doubting the veracity of the mind?of our reasoning as well as
of our intuitive faculties; and it errs when it takes upon itself to
interdict any inquiry that speculative reasoning, which is not
satisfied with the mere testimony of immediate perception, may
make for its own peculiar gratification. But we must hasten
back to the road from which we have digressed.
We have shown that many truths have to be received on the
testimony of intuitive perception alone, and that the only proof
they are susceptible of is an indirect one, namely, a proof of the
veracity of consciousness. Had Prof. Ferrier sought to demon-
strate this veracity, he would have done wisely ; but attempting,
as he does, to prove what is immediately apprehended, is simply
an abuse of one's reasoning powers.
We stated above, that consciousness is veracious when its
demands are complied with. The first clause of this sentence
we have just considered ; it remains for us to say something
also about the second. The demands of consciousness we call,
in other words, its forms. Now, neglecting the question of
veracity, and striving to discover the form in which we discover
new truths or principles, we call to mind Bacon. Neglecting
to discover the form in which consciousness acquires first prin-
ciples, but adopting the ancient deductive method, and labour-
ing to establish the existence of consciousness as a basis of cer-
titude, we call to mind Descartes. Bacon's method has been
productive of an immense accumulation of scientific truth. Can
we say the same of Descartes' ? We cannot; and why ? Because
lie missed the forms, without the observance of which the prin-
ciple of certitude does not apply ; whereas, if the forms be
observed, the principle applies, though it be yet unnoticed.
38 PROFESSOR FERRIER'S NEW SCOTTISH riULOSOPIIY.
Having shown that consciousness was the ground of all certi-
tude, had Descartes substituted as the condition of that certitude
Bacon's rules instead of the axiom?All clear ideas are true, what
very different fruit would his method have borne. Conscious-
ness is not to be regarded as a voucher for truth, when ideas are
merely clear and distinct, as the result of the Cartesian philo-
sophy so deplorably evinces. Indeed, Leibnitz's improvement
upon this last, although a step in advance, does not quite bridge
over the chasm which divides the inductive from the deduc-
tive method. And Mr. Ferrier, evidently continuing the same
search, has yet to learn that the principle of contradiction is an
essential part of inductive reasoning, and has not found in his
pages its true place and formal enouncement. We mean to
say, that if truths were not previously felt to be necessary, Prof.
Ferrier's test would not prove them to be such. Take an
example : Two straight lines cannot enclose space; you question
the universality of this truth, how are you to lie convinced ? By
laying down the counter-statement, Two straight lines can enclose
space; we then perceive that this contradicts the conception
which we must form of two straight lines. But must it do so
for ever. Must it do so in the moon ? The test is only effec-
tual, as far as we can apply it in any number of conceptions we
may choose to call up. But any number of such testings does
not amount to infinitude, and consequently does not necessitate
a universal conclusion. If then, for the sake of argument, we do
not admit the proposition, that two straight lines cannot enclose
space, to be universally true, we do not perceive that Mr.
Ferrier's crit.erium forces us to do so; because it is not proved to
us that in the counter-statement the predicate must necessarily,
must always, be subversive of its subject. Enclosing space must
be proved to be the positive cause of the absence of straightness
in the two lines; and not enclosing space the negative cause of
the presence of straightness in them, before we are warranted to
conclude formally that two straight lines can never enclosc
space ^ But how is this to be done ? That is the question.
Prof. Ferrier must go considerably farther into the interior yet.
A\ hile upon this subject, we would tako the opportunity of
stating that we have evidence of two kinds of necessity; and
that we think that Professor Ferrier comes down rather hard
upon Mr. Cairns for suggesting, aftor Sir William Hamilton,
that there is more than one. There is?1st. TI10 necessary
junction of one fact with another, perceived by us as an infer-
ence necessitated by the comparison of two propositions ; and,
nd. lliere is the universal junction of one fact with another,
w lerever or whenever that othor exist*, peroeived by us as au
111 cience necessitated by the law of contradiction j and now we
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE. 39
would intimate to Mr. Ferrier that a counter-statement is not
necessarily contradictory to a proposition, the necessity of which
is not previously proved, or capable of being proved, as alluded
to above. (No. 1.)
Before we conclude, we cannot help recording our conviction
that Professor Ferrier has done well in so forcibly drawing atten-
tion to the not sufficiently recognised fact, that, as concerns us,
objects only exist in the biune fact of perception ; but then, like
most system-builders, he makes his truth four-square, when it is
only half that. He errs in supposing that the subject-object is
an essential part of the object-object; and he is right in assert-
ing that the object-object only exists for us in connexion with
the subject-object; but again he errs in supposing that the
external world can exist only under the condition in which it
exists for us. Perception, so far as we have been able to analyse
its contents, is?I. Consciousness. 1st, revealing itself; 2nd,
as revealing a not-self?plus. II. The not-self, which it reveals.
Revealing itself, as revealing a not-self, is the one element, the
not-self is the other; and they are numerically different?the
knowledge element, for instance, is not a component part of the
other element. Professor Ferrier, therefore, commits an im-
mense oversight in not severing consciousness as a se?/-object
from the not-self object, when consciousness itself does this in so
'positive a manner. " Positively truly," says Air. Ferrier, " but
inadvertently !" This is the natural result of placing the fact
of the testimony of consciousness before the truth of that testi-
mony?the derived before the ultimate.
