Prolonged Shower-Baths in the Treatment of the Insane.

THE JOURNAL
OF PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE AND MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
JANUARY 1, 1857.
Part First.
(Original Cttiitntanitiitious.
,/
A tit. I.?*
BY TIIE EDIXOK.
Our readers will remember that the Commissioners in Lunacy
instituted a prosecution against Mr. Charles Snape for having,
as they alleged, caused the death, on the 9th of April, 1856, of
a pauper patient of the name of Daniel Dolley, confined under
that gentleman's care, in the male department of the Surrey
County Lunatic Asylum, by subjecting him to a continuous
shower-bath of thirty minutes' duration, and for having admi-
nistered to the said Daniel Dolley, soon after his removal from
the bath, and whilst in a state of vital depression, a dose of
" white coloured mixture," alleged to have contained two grains
of tartar-emetic. In the last number of this Journal we intimated
that the grand-jury had thrown out the bill of indictment.
Pending the trial, the Committee of the Surrey County
Asylum very properly suspended Mr. Snape, appointing Dr.
French, ad interim, to superintend the male side of this insti-
tution. It will gratify the friends of Mr. Snape to hear that he
has been reinstated into office. Six medical gentlemen of posi-
tion, character, and reputation were selected to decide the ques-
tion of re-nomination. Three were appointed by the Committee
* A Letter to the Committee of Visitors of tlie Surrey Lunatic Asylum; by
Charles Snape, Medical Superintendent (male department), in reference to the Case
of Daniel Dolley (deceased).?London : John Churchill.
NO. V.?NEW SERIES.
2 PROLONGED SHOWER-BATHS
of the Asylum, and three were named by Mr. Snape himself
We believe these gentlemen were unanimous in recommending
that Mr. Snape should be restored to his former official position.
Such being the verdict of the professional jury delegated with
authority to settle the question of re-appointment, we are in a
measure precluded from discussing the important points involved
in the bill of indictment against Mr. Snape.
It would be obviously unfair to this gentleman to re-open the
question. He should have the full benefit of his entire acquittal
at the hands of two tribunals, who adjudicated upon his case.
Here the matter should and ought to have rested, if Mr. Snape
had been well advised. Considering himself much aggrieved,
his character to have been seriously reflected upon, his skill and
humanity to be gravely questioned, Mr. Snape might with pro-
priety have defended himself against the specific offence imputed
to him, viz., that of causing the death of Daniel Dolley by wilful
negligence, unskilful and unscientific treatment. No one would
or could have blamed him for so reasonable and natural an act
of self-justification ; but the question assumes altogether another
and a serious aspect, when a formal and studied argument is put
forward in defence, not of his treatment of this particular case,
but of prolonged shower-baths, as a safe, efficient, judicious, and
curative process of treatment.*
Such being the position taken by Mr. Snape, in the pamphlet
which he has published, we have no alternative but to pause and
* Our non-professional readers should remember that we are not now speaking of
an ordinary harmless domestic shower-bath, but one of formidable dimensions. The
following extract from the report made for the Commissioners in Lunacy by Mr. C.
Vignoles, civil engineer, will convey some idea of the size of the bath used in the-
Surrey County Lunatic Asylum, and which Mr. Snape alleges he has been using
for four or five years:?"On the supposition that the supply was equal to the
discharge (during the time the lunatic remained in the shower-bath) after the water
had fallen to the minimum head of four inches, the following must have been the
quantity of water discharged upon him during the above twenty-eight minutes,,
viz :?
In the first half-minute . . 19A gallons, or 3D gallons per minute.
In the next minute and a-half 39 ditto or 26 ditto
In the last 26 minutes . . 507 ditto or 19J ditto
567 gallons in 28 minutes,
being an average discharge equal to the contents of a twenty-gallon-cask of water-
per minute for nearly half an hour upon the lunatic." Mr. Snape, questioning the
accuracy of the above calculations, appointed his own engineer to examine the
capacity of the bath, and, in justice to the accused party, we append his view of the
matter in dispute :?
"The total contents of the cistern when full are not 400 gallons, as stated by
Dr. Diamond, but 91 gallons ; and the total quantity discharged during twenty-
eight minutes, by actual test for that period, and not by estimate?was not 618
gallons, as stated by Mr. Shields, but 477 gallons; of which not more than 119
gallons could have passed over the body of Dolley during the twenty-eight minutes,
the remainder not touching him ; while even of the 119 gallons, it is evident that
the larger portion must have been wholly turned off from his body by his two hands,,
which he placed over his head."
IN THE TREATMENT OF THE INSANE. 6
consider these questions,?Is Mr. Snape right in his view of the
treatment of the insane, and has he, as he appears to believe,
discovered a new and valuable agent for the cure of Insanity ?
This subject cannot be ignored. It comes formally and legiti-
mately before us; Mr. Snape has thrown down the glove, and
challenged the profession to the combat, and we should be
guilty of a serious dereliction of duty as public journalists, if we,
out of any feelings of false delicacy, were not to enter the
arena, and subject the point at issue to a close and rigid exami-
nation. If Mr. Snape is right, then he should have all the credit
due for suggesting a novel and beneficial mode of treating one
of the most distressing class of affections with which the medical
man has to deal. If, on the other hand, we consider the use
of the prolonged shower-baths, with or without large doses of
tartrate of antimony, positively mischievous and unjustifiable,
we should be criminal if we were to be silent on the subject.
We repeat, that we axe forced into this inquiry; Mr. Snape's
published defence of his treatment makes it imperative. In con-
sidering the question before us we will, as far as practicable, leave
the particular case of Daniel Dolley entirely out of discussion.
It would appear from Mr. Snape's statement that the pro-
longed shower-bath, as a remedial mode of treatment in cases
of insanity, is no new-fangled or suddenly conceived' notion,
which has just sprung into mental existence, but that he
has, on the inductive method, for years been carefully trying
experiments with the baths, and has assured himself of their
efficacy and safety. Such is the conclusion clearly deducible
from the subjoined paragraph :?
"Why visit with the utmost denunciation of the law, and subject to
the obloquy and ruinous consequences of a public prosecution as a felon,
a medical man elected on account of his past experience and medical
attainments to such a post, because he has the courage to carry onward
remedial measures which, for a period of four or five years, he has been
gradually applying, and with unvarying success; although to other
institutions even the treatment so long practised by him may be
unknown, and, therefore, may be too hastily and most erroneouslv
regarded, speaking from theory only, as dangerous and bad?"
We think it would have been more discreet if Mr. Snape had
omitted all reference to the treatment pursued in other Asylums,
and had confined his observations to the defence of his own
peculiar practice. When speaking of the uncertainty of medical
treatment in all cases of disease as a justification, we presume
for his own happy " guess," Mr. Snape remarks :?
" The science of medicine in all its branches will ever be a science of
unusual difficulty and doubt, from the necessity of treatment beino-
based upon ? surmiseand, after all, he is the ablest practitioner who
B 2
4 PROLONGED SHOWER-BATHS
guesses most correctly, and assumes most justly the real seat and nature
of the disease to be grappled with. But it is still ' surmise and if
in the treatment of bodily ailments there be so much doubt, how
much greater is the doubt in reference to mental disease !"
We enter our protest against this singular^ inaccurate and
unhappy statement. Mr. Snape is not justified in representing
the science of medicine to be "based upon surmise" or in
asserting that he is " the ablest practitioner who GUESSES most
correctly, and assumes most justly, the real seat and nature of
the disorder to be grappled with." The science of medicine is
not open to so serious and fatal an imputation. If Mr. Snape
had contented himself with repeating the old hacknied assertion,
that medicine was an uncertain science, we should not have
objected to the dogma. And why is the science of medicine an
"uncertain" one? Not because the medical practitioner has to
"guess/' "assume," and "surmise," as Mr. Snape represents, but
because he has to deal with an organic living machine?with a
body endowed with mind, and with life?subtle principles, of the
nature of which we know little or nothing?principles of vitality
and intelligence always in operation, modifying the character of
healthy and morbid action, and powerfully influencing the modus
operandi of remedial agents exhibited for the cure of disease.
It is a libel upon the medical profession to say that the treat-
ment of disease is "based upon surmise" and "GUESSES," or that
"he is the ablest practitioner, who guesses most correctly." This
is the language of the empiric, not the man of science. If a
patient were brought to the Surrey County Lunatic Asylum,
suffering from delirium-tremens, would not Mr. Snape's expe-
rienced eye immediately recognise the malady ? There would
be no " guessing " in the matter; he would, without hesitation,
designate the disease by its right name. Again, when called upon
to grapple with the case remedially, his treatment would not be
based upon "surmise," neither would he "guess" at.his thera-
peutic agents. Instinctively he would seize upon the appropriate
specific. In the treatment of the ordinary diseases which come
under the notice of the physician in every-day practice, such as
gout, pneumonia, enteritis, gastritis, as well as in the numerous
class of cutaneous affections, where is the " guessing," the
" assuming," and the "surmising"? Surely there are intelligent
and well-educated men in the profession, who can diagnose with
extraordinary accuracy the pathological character and seat of the
principal morbid changes that may have taken place in the
various vital and organic tissues ? Consider, for example, the
organ of respiration. In the affections of this organ, is not the
experienced physician fully competent to pronounce authori-
tatively upon the case, as one either of congestion, inflammation,
IN THE TREATMENT OF THE INSANE. O
or hepatization ? Is not the existence of pulmonary tubercles
easily detected? Is it not possible to say with certainty whether
a cavity does or does not exist in the lungs? This is not
"guessing" or "surmising/1 So wonderful is our existing know-
ledge of the characteristics and pathology of disease, that it is
rare for a well-educated and experienced practitioner to commit
an error, either in his diagnosis or treatment. He does not,
unhappily, always succeed in curing his patient, but this does not
arise from a wrong "guess," or an unlucky "surmise," or unfor-
tunate "assumption," as Mr. Snape would lead the public to
believe. The profession of medicine would indeed be reduced
to a very low ebb, and the practitioner of this exalted art would
be in a humiliating position, if the noble science which he culti-
vates and practises were based upon "guesses" "assumptions,"
and " surmises." There is much in pathological science still
sub-judice; and there are a few diseases which continue to
baffle the physician, and set at defiance the best directed of
his most powerful remedial agents. This, necessarily, must
always be the case; but this generally acknowledged fact does
not justify the sweeping and indiscriminate charge brought by
Mr. Snape against the science of medicine. God forbid that the
physician who, in the language of Mr. Snape, "guesses most
correctly, and assumes most justly," should ever be considered
as " the ablest practitioner."
But to proceed. Mr. Snape quotes approvingly from a recent
work of Dr. Conolly, who, when speaking of the " obscurity" of
our "pathology of mental disorders," observes, "there is still no
reason to abandon the hope that fresh resources will some day
be possessed by the practitioner, and that the real nature of the
changes taking place in the brain may be better understood, and
greater success attend medical treatment." We cordially re-echo
the wish expressed by Dr. Conolly; but in what way do these
remarks bear upon Mr. Snape's defence of prolonged shower-
baths ? He alleges that he ought not to be " denounced as a
barbarous practitioner for advocating a course of treatment
which he has practically proved to be so good and valuable in
itself (speaking of twenty minutes' continuous shower-baths),
because others who have not tried this treatment consider it as
dangerous and unsafe." Certainly not. It would be monstrous
to condemn a man on such grounds. But he must first
clearly establish that he has discovered a course of treatment
not only "good and valuable in itself," but safe and judicious.
If Mr. Snape considers that the " prolonged shower-baths"
are the " fresh resources" in the way of treatment, which
Dr. Conolly hopes may at no distant period dawn upon the
psychological horizon, then we are bound honestly to ask our-
6 PROLONGED SHOWER-BATHS
selves these questions, are they remedial in their effects upon the
insane; and are they safe modes of treatment? Mr. Snape
alleges, that he speaks not only of the efficacy, but of the safety
of these baths, basing his observation and conclusion upon "four
or five years' most valuable experience." He says :?
"I have been in the frequent habit of administering continuous
cold shower-baths to insane patients for periods of fifteen and twenty
minutes, with and without intermissions of a few seconds, with the
greatest success. I never knew tiie slightest ill result, and
instances can be given of entire restoration to reason by one single
-fifteen or twenty minutes' continuous hath: added to which, there are
cases, which I should have proved had my case gone to trial, in which
discharged patients have imputed their restoration solely to these
long baths."
This is strong evidence in favour of Mr. Sn ape's treatment, and
it is entitled to our respectful consideration. Such being the re-
sult of his "four or five years' valuable experience," we think he
should have placed upon record, in the pamphlet under considera-
tion, a more satisfactory and scientific classification of the cases
in which he has used, with advantage and safety, the prolonged
shower-bath, and have, at the same time, clearly expounded to
his professional brethren a sound principle of treatment, as well
as described the forms of insanity for the cure of which this
remedy is adapted. Without data of this kind no general
assertion of the curative efficacy of any particular course of
treatment can meet with the deference and attention of scientific
men. Are the prolonged shower-baths safe and useful in the
treatment of acute mania, monomania, melancholia (acute and
chronic), dementia, general paralysis ? Upon these important
points Mr. Snape throws no light:
" He dies and makes no sign."
He uses the general phrase, "Insanity," forgetting that this
term conveys but a vague and unsatisfactory idea to the mind of
the pathologist when called upon to estimate the value of any
special course of medical treatment. A patient is brought to
the Asylum in an acute state of mania, verging upon cerebritis,
exhibiting all the well-recognised symptoms of sanguineous con-
gestion of the brain. The patient is wildly delirious?the scalp
hot?the skin dry and parched?the conjunctivas injected?
the pulse rapid : in common parlance, he is insane. Is this, we
ask Mr. Snape, a case for the prolonged shower-bath of fifteen,
twenty, or thirty minutes' duration ? Again, a man enters the
hospital so physically reduced as to be unable to creep into the
wards. He has the physiognomy of an imbecile; he cannot
articulate ; he falters and staggers in his gait; his general bodily
condition is that of extreme prostration. Associated with these
IN THE TREATMENT OF THE INSANE. 7
symptoms, liis mind is in a morbid state of exaltation. He
?asserts that he is the possessor of a fabulous amount of wealth,
and maintains that he is a king, an emperor, or our Saviour: in
?other words, he is suffering from the general paralysis of the insane.
Is this a type of case in which Mr. Snape would advise the use of
the prolonged shower-bath ? Without something more specific
from the pen of this gentleman, his general, wholesale, and indis-
criminate recommendation of this remedial a<?ent in the treat-
n ?
ment of insanity is worse than valueless. But Mr. Snape not
only believes that he has succeeded in "guessing" at the " fresh
resource" spoken of by Dr. Conolly as the therapeutic desi-
deratum, but that the reason why it has been so ignored and
condemned, is, that the professional mind is not yet sufficiently
matured and ripe to receive the great truth which he has had
the good fortune to discover, and the moral courage to propound.
Creclat Judcvus ? In other words, this wonderful and happy
" guess " of prolonged shower-baths, is only second in importance
to the discovery of railway travelling !
Mr. Snape remarks?
" When the late Mr. George Stephenson was asked by a Commons ?
railway committee, in the year 183G, whether a railway train could
travel at the rate of a mile a minute without danger, his sagacious
reply was ' Yes; but the public mind is not yet prepared to receive that
truth as a fact.'' Such is precisely the present state of the ' shower-
bath ' question."
Fustian and bombast! Surely Mr. Snape is a wag, and has put this
forward as a piece of pleasantry? After reading the paragraph,
" To be grave exceeds all power of face."
Mr. Snape would wish the public and profession to believe
that he is another Galileo?a second Jenner: prosecuted, per-
secuted, hunted down, condemned, tabooed, and vilified, because
he lias had the good fortune to make a discovery considerably
in advance of the age !
" Ye lesser stars, hide your diminished heads"
and prostrate yourselves before this modern psychological lumi-
nary. When a man commits so egregious an act of folly as to go
about the town upon a pair of stilts, with a ticket tied to the tail
of his coat, on which is inscribed in large and legible characters
the word Martyr, it is time that his ostentatious pretensions to
so honourable a designation, and to so high a distinction, should
be freely, fully, and unreservedly canvassed and criticized. Mr.
Snape has only himself to blame if he does not come out of the
field with a flourish of trumpets and flying colours.*
* One would imagine, from the way in which Mr. Snape writes, that he was
entitled to all the credit of having been the first practitioner who advised the use of
8 PROLONGED SHOWER-BATHS
Feeling himself to be in a difficulty as to the best mode of
justifying his use of the prolonged shower-baths?appreciating
the necessity of expounding some principle of treatment in
connexion with them, Mr. Snape again shields himself behind
the back of Dr. Conolly; but, conscious of the weakness of
his case, he summons two other physicians to his support, He
waves his magic wand, and 'presto, Drs. Elliotson and Davey
appear upon the scene. And Avhat do our readers conceive
tO' have been the principle which has guided Mr. Snape in the
treatment of the insane, and which, according to his mode of
reasoning, justified the use of the j)rolonged shower-baths?
Before proceeding further in this part of our inquiry, we would
premise that in no science, so much as in medicine, is a reference
to principles of so much consequence, for nowhere does the mere
sequence of events, the post hoc propter hoc mode of argument,
so often lead into error.
" Without principles," says the great Dr. Cullen, " deduced
from analytical reasoning, experience is a useless and a blind
guide." Appreciating this truth, Mr. Snape protects himself?in
fact, hedges himself in?by enunciating to the scientific world the
principle which Jias led him through the obscure and hazy paths-
of mental pathology to the great fountain, source and light of all
sound therapeutic knowledge. " What," says Mr. Snape, " is the
purpose for which the shower-bath is recommended V The ob-
ject of the practitioner (quoting approvingly the words of Drs.
Conolly,* Davey, and Elliotson), in the administration of the
the shower-batli in the treatment of the insane ! As far hack as the time of Boer-
haave they were used in cases of insanity ; and every modern writer on the sub-
ject speaks of their efficacy in certain forms of mental derangement. A physician
is in the habit of prescribing six or ten grain doses of quinine in cases of intermit-
tent fever. His neighbour ventures, under similar circumstances, to administer
half-drachm doses of the same drug. If the dose were considered safe and
judicious, and were in a few instances to succeed in stopping the progress of the
fever, no person outside of St. Luke's would think of placing this practitioner upon
a pedestal, or consider him a .Tenner, or a John Hunter ; neither would his friends,
when lie passed to the tomb of all the Capulets, have the courage to apply to Par-
liament for a public grant to erect a statue to his memory ! Admitting Mr. Snape
to have had the good fortune to hit upon an efficient remedy, what is really
his due . It is perfectly preposterous for him to talk of his having made any dis-
covery at all; and still more ridiculous for him to assert that his discovery is in
advance of the age !
I?r. Conolly never recommended continuous shower-baths of any considerable,
duiation. He speaks favourably of the effects of "intermittent shower-baths," and
says, "if employed in the ordinary manner (that is, wo presume, for three or four
minutes), its effects are rather exciting than depressing." Mr. Snape would lead us
to believe that intermittent baths are more distressing and dangerous than a conti-
iiuoui shower-bath ! How can this be? A patient who is subjected to a shower-bath
of ten or fifteen minutes length, with a clear intermission of two or three minutes
after the expiration of every four or five minutes' bath, must, of necessity, have a
much less shock than he would be subjected to if the bath were continuous for a
period of fifteen or twenty minutes. In the intermittent baths, the patient is per-
mitted occasionally to rally his powers ol life ; this cannot occur to the man who-
liao a continuous bath.
IN THE TREATMENT OF THE INSANE. 9
shower-bath, is the " overpowering of the patient," 11 the'pros-
tration of the system ;" it is to be continued "until decided
prostration ensues."
If such is the principle upon which Mr. Snape regulates his
administration of the prolonged shower-bath, or, in fact, any
other of his remedial agents, lamentable, indeed, must be the
result to the unhajDpy patients subjected to the treatment.
This may be considered strong language, but we cannot finesse,
or use equivocal and ambiguous terms, when discussing a
matter involving not only the reason but the lives of so many of
our afflicted fellow-creatures. We do not hesitate to assert that
the principle of treatment propounded by Mr. Snape is glaringly
inconsistent with the modern and approved views of the patho-
logy of insanity. The practice of "overpowering" an insane
patient, of " prostrating the system," of pursuing any plan of
treatment, "until decided prostration ensues," is indefensible
and unjustifiable.
In insanity, the vis vitai is often reduced to the lowest possible
condition. In the great mass of acute cases of disordered mind
which the physician is called upon to treat?particularly in our
public Asylums?the nervous system is in a state of positive ex-
haustion and debility. The furor,?the violence,?the maniacal
excitement; the muscular resistance, so often associated with
insanity, are generally symptomatic of profound nervous and
vascular depression. The excitement of the insane is an excite-
ment without power, and he is truly the "ablest physician' who,
recognising this important pathological fact, does his utmost to
conserve and husband the flagging and ebbing vitality of his
patient, until the mind recovers its healthy equilibrium.
Insanity does not result from active inflammation of the brain,
and, if such were its origin, no physician would be justified in at-
tempting to "prostrate the system" of those mentally disordered.
In cases of profound cerebral excitement, the patient often recovers
under the combined influence of a tonic and stimulating plan
of treatment. AVe have known violent mental perturbation
considerably mitigated, and often cured, by the administra-
tion of wine and stout combined with iron and quinine. To
put a patient, because he is "violent," "noisy/ "excited,
and " destructive," into a shower-bath of fifteen or twenty
minutes'duration, with a view of "prostrating" his energies,
is a practice that cannot be too gravely and seriously cen-
sured.
The physician may, by this mode of treatment, make a violent,
excited, and unmanageable patient quiet and docile for a time ,
but it ivill be quietness and docility gained at the expense of
his reason, and perhaps of his life. "VV e are not called upon to
mince words, or delicately and nicely weigh the import o
30
PROLONGED SIIOWER-BATIIS
phrases, when addressing ourselves to a point o Pmass 0f
magnitude and importance. Facts?an overwl e,
evidence?conclusively, irresistibly, and mcontrover ^ wer_
beyond all doubt, that the depressing, lower in J, 1
ing plan of treating the insane is most disastrous Whv
Why is the lancet never now used in cases of insanity . JW
is the strictly antiphlogistic treatment so _ stu ious.y o .gt&
Because all practical, sagacious, and experience p y ? ^
having to do with the care of the msane, recog ug
morbid affections of the mind a condition of bram _ ? >>
system which will not tolerate a " depressing, ?v P '
and " prostrating" mode of treatment. What would be tUe
effect?the certain effect, if the practitionei, mere J ^
the conditions of violence, excitement, and misc ie , ^ noed
delirium-tremens, were to subject the patien o ?. p .'p.
shower-bath? Consider, again, the consequences _
course of treatment in a case of puerperal insani y . ,
class of cases we often witness extreme excitemen a ttow
associated with profound vascular and nervous ernesi
dangerous must then be a practice which overlooks entimlytne
pathological state of the patient! If the treatmen I)0Wers
is to consist in a rapid reduction of the physical and ment^po^
of the patient to the minimum standard; if it c ^ auiet
to make a noisy, excited, destructive lunatic tiac - ?
so as to preclude the necessity for the use of x
restraint,* then continue the prolonged shower- a , ^
by large nauseating doses of tartar-emetic; bu 1 imls?.
intention to carry out a curative process of treatmen , >
by every effort in our power, husband aud conserve
energies until reason ascends her throne. A ,, ?? 0f
We have hitherto confined our observations to i
* With something like a pruentimcnt of the substitution of ^?ll^^rks in the
tartar-emetic for mechanical restraint, wo penned tne ^ n0^ the frequent
October number of this Journal, for the year grower and
administration of nauseating doses of tho tartrate ot an 1 ?'?, -producing, at
cold bath, in several asylums, taken the place of mechamca insanity, the most
can Ic readily conceitcd by those conversant icith the ]>?? 'ji njcai restraint in
disastrous consequences ? The use of the milder forms o .?nont injury ; but the
cases of acute and dangerous insanity can do little or no pern anj etupifying
repeated and continuous exhibition of tarter-emetic, cl 1 ore) ? insane, and
doses of opium, with the view of subduing the muscular *'10. .. tj10 necessity for
thus reducing them to a manageable condition, and o vi h 0\,vious
mechanical restraint, may do serious und irremediable mtsci" J, ^ depress tho
reason, that tho patient is compelled to take medicines w uc 1 k v~g vfagt
nervous system, at a time when everything should be done o' ' ^ inucll 8agacity
and give increased impetus to tho nervo force. It does no 1 ^ve com,>oBuro
to reduce, by these means, a violent lunatic to a state ot c P reHponsiblo
and quietude ; but wo would caution all engaged in tho - dmirerous to
duties of treating the insane, against the adoption of a course alike dangerous
life and perilous to reason."
IN THE TREATMENT OF THE INSANE. II
the prolonged shower-bath, as the distinguishing feature in Mr.
Snape's practice. Let us now briefly direct the attention of our
readers to its necessary adjunct. It appears that Mr. Snape
administers to his patients, after coining out of the prolonged
shower-bath, one and a half to two grains of tartar-emetic ! In
other words, he, in addition to the shower-bath, exhibits an emetic
to the patient. The above dose may not always induce vomit-
ing, but it must do so in many instances. A man in health
could not easily take one grain of the tartrate of antimony with-
out disgorging the contents of his stomach. The insane, we ad-
mit, may take larger doses of this nauseating medicine with im-
punity ; but, nevertheless, such a dose would cause violent vomiting
even among the insane. If the medicine has not this effect, it
will certainly lower and depress the powers of life, and we pre-
sume it is administered with this object. Let our readers pause
for one moment to consider a patient suffering from a depressing
and exhausting disease (and insanity is essentially one of this
type), exposed to the still more depressing influence of a con-
tinuous fall of a large volume of water upon the head for a
period of fifteen, twenty, and thirty minutes. He emerges out
of his bath (as he must do) with the powers of life reduced to
the minimum point Not satisfied with this amount of physical
exhaustion, the poor, helpless patient has his vis vitcv still further
lowered by administering to him a large dose of tartar-emetic!
What is the principle involved in this plan of treatment, and
why is the tartrate of antimony administered at all in such a
state of the system? We can well understand in the early
stages of sub-acute insanity, analogous in its symptoms to phre-
nitis, why nauseating doses of this medicine should cautiously
be given ; but in our judgment it is inadmissible in chronic
forms of insanity, particularly when exhibited immediately after
the use of a depressing prolonged shower-bath. This practice is
opposed to the experience of most men engaged in the treatment
of the insane, and we shall be glad to hear ot its being altogether
abandoned in the Surrey County Lunatic Asylum. In defence
of his mode of treatment, both by the prolonged shower-bath
and the tartrate of antimony, Mr. Snape has appended to his
pamphlet a series of tables, illustrating his peculiar mode of
practice. In justice to that gentleman we transfer to our pages
the whole of this tabular statement, without abridgment or
alteration. In these tables Mr. Snape cites the particulars of
fourteen cases of alleged " cure," extending over the 11 four or
five years," during which he has been experimenting with the
batli! Is this not a small ratio of cure ? viz., not one per cent,
per annum, out of the four hundred male 2wtients >on his side
of the establishment always under his treatment!
12 PROLONGED SHOWER-BATHS
L
SELECTION FROM CASES
In which Shower Baths and Tartrate of Antimony have been administered to Patients under Mr. Snape's
Care, and Extracts from Medical Case Books in support of the Treatment and its Effects. <
No.
. , Length of Bath
Age of 1 atient ajmiuistered, in
on Lntrv. Minutes.
About GO
57
51
When followed by Tar-
trate of Antimony, the
Quantity.
15 or 20
15 or 20
20
1^ arid 2 grains
and 2 grains
Extracts from Case Book of Special Notes in
reference to Treatment.
29th Sept., 1841. Admitted.
22nd Dec., 1854. Remains unchanged; suf-
fers occasionally from
attacks of maniacal ex-
citement, during which
he is disposed to be mis-
chievous and violent to
others. Shower-bath and
tartar emetic are the re-
medies which have been
employed.
1st March, 1854. Admitted.
14th June, 1S5G. He is subject to occa-
sional attacks of maniacal
excitement, with a dispo-
sition to be violent to
others. Shower-baths and
tartar emetic mixture
have been found beneficial.
lGth Dec., 1848. Re-admitted.
Result to Patient,
1850.
In Asylum.
In Asylum.
IN THE TREATMENT OF THE INSANE. 13
No.
Age of Tatient
on Entry.
61
40
2G
Length of Bath
administered, in
Minutes.
15 or 20
15 or 20
When followed by Tar-
trate of Antimony, the
Quantity.
lc] and 2 grains
1^ every 3 hours
20 2 grains
Extracts from Case Book of Special Notes in
reference to Treatment.
6th June, 1853. Occasional shower-baths
have been given with
good effect.
17th March, 1849. Admitted.
9th Jan., 1854. He continues to have
paroxysms of maniacal
excitement, with a dispo-
sition to violence. An
occasional shower-bath
and tartar emetic mix-
ture have been prescribed
with advantage.
20th Dec., 1855. He. continues to have
periodical attacks of ex-
citement, during which
he is disposed to be vio-
lent in his conduct.
Shower-baths, with the
mix. ant. tart., are some-
times found beneficial.
4th Dec., 1851. Admitted.
5th ? ? Mix. tar. ant. 3 table-
spoonfuls every 3 hours.
7th ? ? Broke windows; ex-
cited; shower-bath; con-
tinue ant. potass, tart.
2nd Feb., 1852. Admitted.
Result to Patient,
1856.
Cured.
I
i\ i
, |V
14 PROLONGED SHOWER-BATHS M
*r Age of Patient
on Eutry.
Length of Bath
administered, in
Minutes.
When followed by Tar-
trate of Antimony, the
Quantity.
Extracts from Case Book of Special Notes in
reference to Treatment.
57
15 or 20
2 trains
4th Feb., 1852. Conducted himself in a
violent and noisy man-
ner ; shower-bath and a
large dose of tart, emetic;
promised betterbehaviour
for the future.
21st ? ? Made attacks upon those
around him with a knife.
A shower-bath and a
grain and half of tart,
emetic every six hours;
gruel diet; to be kept
under strict surveillance
in No. 3 Day-room.
23rd Feb., 1855. Is perfectly rational in
his conduct and conversa-
tion, and, at his urgent
request, the medicine and
shower-bath have been
ordered to be discon-
tinued.
28tlr Oct., 1853. Broke windows.
3rd April, 1852. Admitted.
7th ? ? Ant. tart.
9th ? ? Shower-bath.
12 th ? ? To have shower-bath
every morning.
Result to Patient,
185C.
Cured.
IN THE TREATMENT OF THE INSANE. 15
,H C-
?KW1
No.
Age of Patient
on Entry.
Length of Bath
administered, in
Minutes.
When followed by Tar-
trate of Antimony, the
Quantity,
Extracts from Case Book of Special Notes in
reference to Treatment.
Result to Patient,
1856.
40
20
J "rains
58
10 28
15
1 r; or 2 grains
20
1 grain
9th Jan., 1854. Re-admitted.
20th Feb., ? Abusive and destructive
of his clothing, when an
occasional shower-bath is
given.
3rd May, 1852. Admitted.
5tli May, ? Shower-bath and tart,
emetic.
7tli ? ? Shower-bath. \N.B. This
patient imputed his reco-
very to the shower-bath,]
20 th July, 1852. Admitted.
15th Jirne, 1853. He continues to labour
under periodical attacks
of maniacal excitement,
at which times lie is very
noisy, abusive, threaten-
ing, and violent. A
shower-bath and dose of
mixt. ant. tart, have been
employed with advan-
tage on two or three occa-
sions.
19th June, 1855. No alteration; baths
occasionally.
30th July, 1852. Admitted.
31st ? ? Tart. Anty.
Cured.
In Asylum.
Cured.
16
PROLONGED SHOVVEll-BATHS
No.
11
12
Age of Patient
on Entry
58
41
Length of Bath
administered, in
Miuutes.
Not known
20
When followed by Tar-
trate of Antimony, the*
Quantity.
Nil
Extracts from Case Book of Special Notes in
reference to Treatment.
"rains
31st Oct., 1852. Threw down an attend-
ant ; shower-bath twice
a day and seclusion ; 1
grain of anty. 3 times
a day.
27th Nov., 1852. Admitted.
5th April, 1853. A shower-bath has been
given on two or three
occasions ivith apparent
benefit.
29th Nov., 1852. Admitted.
29th March, 1854. Has been labouring un-
der maniacal excitement,
with a disposition to be
violent to others, for
several weeks past. The
shower-bath, with an oc-
casional dose of mix.
tart, ant., together with
purgatives, have been
employed with the great-
est advantage.
26th Dec., ? Excitement; the same
remedies have been em-
ployed with marked
benefit.
Dec., 1855. He continues to have
Result to Patient,
1856.
Cured.
In the Asylum.
i & ?
IN THE TREATMENT OF THE INSANE. 17
o No.
n
03
M
2 13
r*5
CC
14
15
1G
Age of Patient
on Entry.
21
G4
26
37
Length of Bath
administered, in
Minutes.
20
20
20
When followed by Tar-
trate of Antimony, the
Quantity.
2 grains
Not stated
4 grains
Extracts from Case Book of Special Notes in
reference to Treatment.
occasional attacks of
periodical excitement,
?which have been treated
as heretofore.
lGth July, 1853. Admitted.
29th Nov., ? Bath and emetic.
10th June, 1854. He has had two or three
paroxysms of maniacal
excitement since last re-
port (22nd Dec.), for
which shower-baths and
a draught containing two
grains of tartar emetic
have been administered
toith most beneficial effect.
Gtli Aug., 1853. Admitted.
23rd ? ? Shower-bath every morn-
ing.
7th Feb., 1854. Admitted.
14th March, ? Shower-bath ordered to
be given occasionally.
10th June, ? Ditto ditto.
23rd March, 1854. Admitted.
25th May, ? Shower-bath and emetic.
29th June, ? Slightly excited and vio-
lent. Shower-bath twice
a day, with emetic.
Result to Patient,
1856.
In the Asylum.
Cured.
Cured.
18 PROLONGED SHOWER-BATHS i
No.
Age of Patient
on Entry.
17
34
Length of Batli
administered, in
Minutes.
20
When followed by Tar-
trate of Antimony, the
Quantity.
It]- and 2 grains
Extracts from Case Book of Special Notes in
reference to Treatment.
10th Aug., 1854. Repeat ^batli and mixture.
14tli June, ? Excitement. Shower-
bath twice a day, and
tartar emetic mixture,
2oz. (2 grains anty.) occa-
sionally.
20th June, 1854. Has become quiet and
tranquil. The shower-
bath, with the tartar
emetic, are remedies
which appear most effi-
cacious in subduing cere-
bral excitement. He is
now employedin his trade.
15th July, 1855. Relapse. Shower-bath
morning; warm bath
night. Tartar emetic
mixture (2 grains to a
dose) occasionally.
29th ? ? Shower-bath, warm-bath
continued, with morphia.
12th Dec., ? Remedies repeated.
19th April, 1854. Admitted.
2nd Oct., ? Shower-bath every morn-
ing ; warm bath every
night.
5th Dec., ? Slioioer-bath and warm
Result to Patient,
1856.
Still in Asylum.
IX THE TREATMENT OF THE INSANE. 19
11-  -
No.
o
LO
Age of Patient
on Entry
18
41
Length of Bath
administered, in
Minutes.
When followed by Tar-
trate of Antimony, the
Quantity.
"rains
Extracts from Case Book of Special Notes in
reference to Treatment.
bath, with tartar emetic,
are prescribed with ad-
vantage.
25th Jan., 1855. Occasionally labours un-
der great maniacal ex-
citement. Shower-bath;
occasionally blistering
liquid to the back of neck.
5th Jan., ? Highly excited. Tartar
emetic 2 oz. occasionally,
and shower-bath.
10th July, ? He continues to labour
under a good deal of ce-
rebral excitement, which
appears to be much sub-
dued by a good strong
shower-bath and warm
bath, and morphia at bed-
time. Castor-oil occa-
sionally.
1st Aug., ? Much more tranquil and
composed.
25tli Sept., ? Excited and violent;
shower-bath & tart. ant.
10th Oct., ? ."Remedies continued.
lGthJan., ? Admitted.
Result to Patient,
1856.
In the Asylum.
20 PROLONGED SHOWER-BATHS
r
No.
19
20
21
Age of Patient
on Entry.
19
45
4G
22 About 28
Leugtli of Bath
administered, in
Alinutes.
15
20
20
20
When followed by Tar-
trate of Antimony, the
Quantity.
Nil
J grams
li grains
2 grains
Extracts from Case Book of Special Notes in
reference to Treatment.
29th March, 1855. Shower-bath and tart.
ant. occasionally.
29 th May, ? Shower-bath every morn-
ing, and tart. ant. mix.
2 oz, (2 grs. a dose) occa-
sionally; warm bath at
night.
21st June, ? Repeat.
lGtli ? ? Repeat shower-bath and
tart, emetic.
25tli ? ? Continue.
23rd Jan., 1854. Admitted.
24th ? ? Shower-bath occasionally.
2Gtli ? ? Warm bath every night
in addition.
10th Feb., 1855. Admitted.
4th Oct., ? Excited; shower-bath
and tart, emetic (2 grs.).
2nd Feb., 1856. Bath and mixture con-
tinued.
31st July, 1852. Admitted.
31st ? ,, 1 gr. tart. ant. powder.
2nd Aug., ? Repeat powder & shower-
bath.
5th Oct., ? Castor-oil and bath.
27th Jan., 1849. Admitted.
15th Sept., 1850. Is excited. Struck the
Result to Patient,
1856.
Cured.
In the Asylum.
Cured.
IN THE TREATMENT OF THE INSANE. 21
No.
23
24
25
Age of T.-itient
on Entry.
10
37
33
Length of Bath
administered, in
Minutes.
15 or 20
15 or 20
20
When followed by Tar-
trate of Antimony, the
Quantity.
Not stated.
Ditto
Extracts from Case Book of Special Notes in
reference to Treatment.
attendant this afternoon.
Shower-bath every morn-
ing. Mix. ant. 2 oz.
(2gr. dose).
June, 1851. Occasionally violent.?
Sometimes has a shower-
bath.
14th June, 1855. Occasionally excited and
violent. Shower - baths,
ivith the tartar emetic
mixture, are the reme-
dies employed.
7th July, ? Admitted.
31st ? ? Shower-bath every morn-
ing.
30th ? ? Admitted.
1st Aug., ? Excited, and violent to
others; shower-bath and
morphia.
8th ? ? Repeat bath; emetic occa-
sionally.
24th Aug., ? Admitted.
8th Sept., ? Tart. ant.
22nd ? ? Shower-bath every morn-
ing, and morphia every
night.
Result to Patient,
1856.
Cured.
Dead.
Cured.
22 PROLONGED SHOWER-BATHS
No.
26
07
Age of Patient
on Entry.
58
39
28 44
Length of Batli
administered, in
Minutes.
20
20
11
When followed by Tar-
trate of Antimony, the
Quantity.
2 grains
2 grains
2 grains, and a
2nd Doso.
Extracts from Case Book of Special Notes in
reference to Treatment.
8th Oct., 1855. Shower-bath,tart, emetic,
and blister.
[N.B, This'patient im-
puted his recovery to the
shower-bath.]
29th Aug., 1855. Admitted.
12th Sept., ? Shower-bath.
20th ? ? Shower-bath, mix. tart.
antimony occasionally,
and blister.
3rd Nov., 1855. Repeat shower-bath, and
hot bath at night.
27th Oct., 1855. Admitted.
4th Nov., ? He continues very ex-
cited, and is disposed to
be very violent to others.
Shower-bath, liquid blis-
ter, & tart, emetic mixt.
12th ? ? Shower-bath, with 4 t. s.
of mixture occasionally.
15th ? ? Continue the shower-bath,
with the mixture.
29th ? ? Shower-bath and ant. tart.
20th Dec., ? Ditto with morphia
and ant. tart.
30th Nov., 1855. Admitted.
Result to Patient,
185G.
In house.
Cured.
IN THE TREATMENT OF THE INSANE. 23
No.
29
30
Age of Patient
on Entry.
25
39
28
Length of Bath
administered, in
Minutes.
20
20
15 or 20
When followed by Tar-
trate of Antimony, the
Quantity.
Nil
2 grains
Nil
Extracts from Case Book of Special Notes in
reference to Treatment.
30th Dec., 1855. Made savage attacks
upon liis attendants. A
shower - bath and a
draught containing 2
grains of tartar emetic
were ordered, when he
became ?perfectly calm
and tranquil.
5th Dec., 1855. Admitted.
12 th ? ? Yery violent. Shower-
bath.
22nd ? ? Shower-bath occasion-
ally.
21st Jan., 1856. Admitted
22nd ? ? Very excited. Shower-
bath and acetate of mor-
phia. Improved from
this day; was discharged
cured on 1st March, 1856.
[N".B. This patient im-
puted his recovery to the
shower-bath.]
16 th April, 1852. Admitted.
6th Oct., ? Struck the medical officer
a few weeks ago for keep-
ing him in confinement;
he is sometimes abusive
\
Result to Patient,
1856.
Cured.
Cured.
In Asylum.
\
2-i PROLONGED SHOWER-BATHS
No.
32
A^e of Patient administered,'
on Entiy. Minutes.
Length of Bath When followed by Tar-
trate of Antimony, the | Extracts from Case Book of Special Notes in
Quantity. ' I reference to Treatment.
about 40
20
2 grains
Result to Patient,
1856.
and excited, thereby caus-
ing a great deal of dis-
comfort in the place.
Shower-bath.
3rd Sept., 1852. Admitted.
3nd Oct., ? Shower-bath.
10 th March, 1853. Is in a state of lively
mania, being much ex-
cited, with a disposition
to mischief and violence.
Shower-bath.
19 th ? ? Continues much excited;
shower-bath. Mix. ant. j
2 oz. (2 gr. dose).
X.B.?The ages given, it will be observed, were those upon the Patients entering the Asylum. In many instances,
therefore, an addition of several yeax*s must be made in order to show the age at date of treatment.
IN THE TREATMENT OF THE INSANE. 2o
111 looking carefully through the preceding tabulated cases,
there does not appear to he one in which Mr. Suape has adminis-
tered a bath of thirty minutes' duration. There are seventeen
cases which were subjected to a twenty minutes' shower-bath ;
and eight who had a bath ranging from fifteen to twenty minutes.
So it would appear that Dolley was the only patient in the asylum
who had a thirty minutes' bath ! Mr. Snape offers no explana-
tion why he went, per saltum, from twenty to thirty minutes in
this single case. It is clearly the first one in the records of the
asylum in which a prolonged shower-bath of thirty minutes'
duration was ordered. If there had been other cases of the kind,
Mr. Snape certainly would have embodied the particulars in the
tabular statement which he has put forward in his defence. But
let us, for a few minutes, analyse these tables. Case No. 1 had
a bath of " fifteen or twenty minutes," with one and a-half and
two grains of tartrate of antimony. No result specified. Case
2?treatment the same: no result stated. Case 3?a bath of
twenty minutes, with emetic mixture. Result?" Found bene-
ficial." Case 4?a bath of fifteen or twenty minutes, with the
emetic mixture. Result?" Prescribed with advantage." Case
5?similar treatment. Result?" Cured." Case 6?similar treat-
ment, This patient appears to have been under treatment from
the 2nd of February, 1852, and to have remained in the asylum
until the 23rd of February, 1855, when it is alleged he was dis-
charged "cured," by means of the shower-bath and emetic
mixture. It is useless to trouble our readers with any further
analysis; the tables are before them, and they can read and
judge for themselves. It is, however, clearly apparent that the
shower-bath and emetic mixture were almost invariably exhibited
when the patient committed an act of insubordination, and was
said to be violent, noisy, and destructive ; leading one to the con-
clusion that these depressing agents were mainly employed to
induce, on the part of the patient, docility and quietness. When-
ever a patient is " noisy and violent," " breaks windows," exhibits
"a disposition to violence," "disposed to be mischievous and violent
to others," "attacks those around him with a knife," "abusive, and
destructive of his clothing,"&c. &c., lie is immediately cooled down
by means of the prolonged shower-bath and the " white-coloured
mixture/' alias, tartar emetic ! Is this not an unjustifiable abuse
of an alleged valuable curative agent ? In cases like those pre-
viously cited, Mr. Snape's difficulty will be to persuade the public
that the baths were not used as a qwL&i-\mx\ishment. It is clear
by his own admissions that he has exposed himself to such an
imputation. In the inquiry before the Commissioners in Lunacy,
the following questions were put to Dr. Diamond:?
26 PROLONGED SHOWER-BATHS
" Q. Did you ever order a sliower-batli in the Male Ward when that
department lias been under your care ?
"A. Yes. I have once, and that has been in Mr. Snape's absence.
One of his patients knocked out a tooth of one of my patients, and was
guilty of violence.
It would appear by the above extract from Dr. Diamond's
evidence, that one of Mr. Snapes patients, in a personal con-
flict, knocked out the tooth of one of liis patients, and was
subjected to a shower-bath ! In justice to himself, Dr. Diamond
should explain whether he ordered the bath as a punishment,
or as a remedial agent ? The facts cited by Mr. Snape, fully
justify the suspicion that this highly eulogised mode ot treat-
ment has not altogether been confined to its strictly medical and
legitimate uses. We cannot too strongly repudiate the idea oi
inflictingpunishment upon the insane, in or out of an asylum.
It should never be forgotten that the inmates of a lunatic
asylum are irresponsible, particularly for actions committed in
moments of maniacal and delirious excitement, and whilst under
the influence of strong delusions.*
One word as to the duration of these much-vaunted baths.
Many of the cases referred to in Mr. Snape's tables, were said to
have had a shower-bath of " fifteen or twenty minutes'" length.
How is it that the exact duration of the batli is not stated ?
W ould it not appear that no accurate computation of time was
made when the shower-baths were used ? A patient is ordered
to the^ bath,?does the attendant stand by its side, with his
watch in his hand, to measure the time? If not, how easily may
a man with the most honest intentions be deceived it he
guesses at the duration of the bath. In eight of the cases
referred to by Mr. Snape the time could not havo been accurately
computed; lor the patients are said to havo been in the bath
" fifteen or twenty minutes."
. May n?t the same inaccurate measurement of time have crept
into the^ other cases, where the period is positively stated 1 The
matter is clearly open to grave suspicion. The attendants em-
ployeu to administer the baths, may unintentionally havo deceived
Mr. Snape as to their duration ; until we aro satisfied as to the
tnne being carefully computed, 110 conclusions as to the safety
or efficacy of prolonged shower-baths can be safely drawn, f
Let our readers imagine the following extracts from the daily caso-l>ook of
a. ^ounty Lunatic Asylum. A. B.?Violent; broko Hix pane* of glass. Ordered
eight leeches to the head. F. G.?Kicked one of the attendants. A blister to bo
applied to the nape of the neck ; to Imj dressed, as an additional puniHhmcnt, with
urpentine ointment. G. W.?Tore his clothes. An emetic wiih administered.
? ?? foiled his bed. Ordered to be cupped. P. T.?Shook his fist in the faco
o the medical superintendent, and used threatening language. Calomel and jalap
0 . Destroyed bis bed-clothes. Ordered a good doso of opium !
T ilr. Snape, with the view of establishing the perfect safety of the shower-bath
IN THE TREATMENT OF THE INSANE. 27
It appears that Dr. French, who officiated for Mr. Snape
during liis suspension, did not, on his first entering upon the per-
formance of his duties, use the shower-bath at all. Mr. Snape
says:?
" It appears that Dr. French, when first appointed, alarmed very
naturally by my then position before the public, wholly refrained from
using the shower-bath from the date of his appointment to the 14th
of August last, a period of three months, but vseil the 'plunge-bath in
its steacl"
The plunge-bath in lieu of the shower-bath !* The old
story of scylla and charybdis. Have our readers any idea of
what a plunge-bath is? If not, Ave will enlighten them. A vio-
lent and excited patient is taken forcibly by his legs, and plunged
headforemost into an ordinary swimming-bath. He is not per-
mitted the use of his limbs when in the water, but is detained
there, or taken out and plunged again into the bath, until the
required effect (?) is produced ! Of course, quietness, submission
to authority, docility, and freedom from excitement and violence,
are the natural consequences of this gentle and soothing mode
of treatment. Is it possible that in the present enlightened age
an obsolete and exploded process of cure (?) like this should have
been revived in one of our large county lunatic asylums, and
that, too, in an establishment whose principal officer was under
a cloud for an alleged abuse of prolonged shower-baths ?
It would give us pain if anything that we have said in the
preceding pages respecting the use of the prolonged shower-bath,
were construed to the injury or personal disadvantage of Mr.
Snape. We have always heard him spoken of as a humane man,
anxious to perform every duty of life honourably and conscien-
tiously. He has committed a mistake on this one point, and the
best among us are not free from error.
Having been restored to an important official position as the
medical superintendent of the male department of the Surrey
County Lunatic Asylum ; being intrusted with the lives, as well
as with the care and treatment, of a large number of the most
used in the Surrey Asylum, exposed himself to its influence for a period of three-
quarters of an hour; and, wo arc glad to report, escaped unscathed ! This proves
nothing. Mr. Snape is a healthy man; he went into the bath voluntarily, with, we
presume, a determination to pass safely through the trying ordeal. How different
to the caRe of a man suffering from a depressing disease, connected with an affection
of the brain, or a shattered nervous system, forced into this bath, and detained
there against his will 1 . Mr. Snapo does not tell us what he took before going into
the bath, or what ho administered to himself after he came out of it. ^ e will
venture to say that ho did not take a dose of the white-coloured mixture.
* We have no hesitation in speaking in terms of unqualified disapprobation of the
plunge-bath as a method of treatment, punishment, or discipline. Is it true that
the plungo-bath is used as a means of treatment at St. Luke's Hospital ?
28 professor ferrier's
dejected and helpless of the severely-afflicted family of man,?we
have, occupying as conductor of this Journal a position of grave
responsibility as a public instructor, conceived it to be our pain-
ful duty to discuss with considerable latitude, and unreserved and
unrestricted freedom, the specific mode of treatment suggested
by this gentleman for the treatment of the insane. \V e have
spoken of the prolonged shower-bath and the tartar-emetic in
terms of severity, but, we unhesitatingly maintain, in the strictest
accordance with truth and justice. We have no desire to injure
or disparage Mr. Snape, whilst exercising our undoubted editorial
prerogative of freely criticising the principle of treatment he has
recommended for our adoption.
" Licuit, scmperque licelit,
Farce personis, disccre de Jltiis."
