On The Increase Of Insanity
============================

Art. V.?.
BY JOHN HAWKES, M.R.C.S.,
'Assistant Mcdical Ofliccr, Wilts County Asylum.
The subject nnder consideration is both of national and social
importance; it isone, too, that, with its increasing dimensions,
claims the attention of all. The fair face of England, dotted
over with her many public asylums for the relief and refuge of
mental disease, presents a picture of rare and painful interest to
the psychologist, philanthropist, and historian. If to such an
ON THE INCREASE OF INSANITY. 509
accumulation of suffering be due, as some assert, the apparent
increase of insanity, we may regard, not indeed lightly, but yet
without particular anxiety, the existence of this mass of disease ;
but, on the other hand, if it be true, as we have reason to fear,
that insanity, so far from being diminished, is actually on the in-
crease, it then no longer becomes us to assume the attitude of
indifferent spectators when mischief and ruin are brooding
around our hearths and beside our social altars : rather should we
resolve, as rational beings, to consider by what means the present
unnatural mental phenomena may best be mitigated, and to dis-
cover if by any way the dark cloud that threatens posterity may
happily be turned aside. The symptoms of disordered intellect,
known under the general phrase of insanity, have been familiar
to the world for ages; assuming at various times distinctive
features, borrowed from the prevailing spirit of the epoch;
encouraged at different periods by some peculiar existing super-
stitions ; or carried as an ejoidemic disease, by reason of its con-
tagious properties, from one country to another ; affording proofs
of the susceptibility of the human mind to outward impressions,
and painfully illustrating the weakness of our nature, with its
proclivity to disease and decay. But if, from the early traditions
of the world and the history of the middle ages, we learn that
disorders of the mind, no less than diseases of the body, have
from time immemorial dwelt among us, it may cause neither
surprise nor pain to reflect that mental disease, in many aggra-
vated forms, is still rampant in the land ; yet I doubt if ever the
history of the world, or the experience of past ages, could show a
larger amount of insanity than that of the present day. It seems,
indeed, as if the world was moving at an advanced rate of speed
proportionate to its approaching end; as though, in this rapid
race of time, increasing with each revolving century, a higher
pressure is engendered on the minds of men and with this ; there
appears a tendency among all classes constantly to demand
higher standards of intellectual attainment, a faster speed of in-
tellectual travelling, greater fancies, greater forces, larger means,
than are commensurate with reason and health.
And is it possible that the unnatural forcing system necessary
to meet the demand can be otherwise than wholesome ? Is it
that, as all classes are so rapidly rising in the intellectual scale,
knowledge is so generalized that individual powers are in abey-
ance ? or is it that those springs of intellect are dry from whence
arose a Bacon, a Shakspeare, or a Newton ? Truly, " there were
giants in those days/' And yet we shall do well to consider if
things are thus, what will the end be ? What, in short, must we
expect if a progressive deterioration of mental and bodily powers
be symptomatic of the age; of succeeding ages; perhaps of all
NO. VII.?NEW SERIES. L L
510 OX THE INCREASE OF INSANITY.
time ? But let us trust this is not the case, though it is appa-
rent that some physical alteration has crept over the vis vital
of our own generation within the present century?a change,
it may be sufficient to say, attacking the stamina of life, inducing
a disposition to adynamia, and rendering necessary a departure from
the former plan of treating fehrile disorders. Now, it has been
observed by those to whose hands are intrusted the treatment of
mental disease, that these cases require the same precautions.
The raving maniac must be abundantly supplied with nutri-
tious aliment; and as the blood recovers the elements of health,
the physical frame, and its occupant, the mind, give good evidence
of the efficacy of the treatment pursued. It is not my intention
to follow this argument further than to point out a palpable
source of many obscure phenomena occurring both in physical
and psychical disease, induced by an unhealthy condition of the
primary elements of life; and as bodily disorders which partake
of this character are wont to leave their impress on the fraj^ie, so
may we expect the same results from such as are purely mental.
When this is proved to be the case, the neutral ground between
the two is shortened, and we come to view them not as para-
doxical, or, so to speak, polarized phenomena, but rather as in-
timately related the one to the other, springing up and bound to-
gether by the same unhappy laws, too often mutually dependent,
near neighbours, or dwelling, alas ! in the same mansion. It is a
matter of no slight difficulty to determine, in all cases, the
primary or predisposing cause of mental disorders, apart from an
hereditary taint existing in the constitution, and where there is
no positive mental deficiency from birth; for it is only too pro-
bable that, from a much earlier period than the actual manifesta-
tion of disease, the fuel has been laid ; and it therefore becomes
a matter of grave consideration for those ^fo may have the
power vested in their hands, not so much foijfr, cure, but, which
is of far greater import, the prevention ^Pdisease, that many
carry about with them unsuspected, perlyijfTthrough a long life-
time, the dormant seeds of insanity. ^ moving now the question
of hereditary predisposition and congenital weakness, as before
stated, there is yet a fearful balance of minds wholly free from
either of the above infirmities, and yet doomed to break down
and wear out prematurely in the terrible struggle of the age.
Among the various classes which compose a community, there
may appear at first some discrepancy in regard to the proclivity
exhibited by each particular segment of society to diseases of
the mind.
It might possibly be supposed that those whose means are
sufficient to procure every earthly enjoyment?to whom, in short,
the word want is unknown?are not likely to suffer in the samo
ON THE INCREASE OF INSANITY. 511
degree as others in a humble sphere ; and yet in this particular
class we find the strongest proof that hereditary honours and
hereditary diseases descend together. But in seeking for other
causes?as failure of bodily health, pecuniary embarrassments, over-
anxiety, too great application to business, &c.?we must embrace
a wider field of observation, such as is presented in the middle
and lower walks of life: among those, for instance, who earn
their bread by the sweat of their brain ; whose lives are a con-
tinual struggle, whose daily toils are unmitigated by pleasure, to
whom each morrow brings fresh cares, and night scarce brings
repose. The hard-worked professional man, who spends his days
in painful efforts to make two ends meet; the avaricious man
of commerce, only aiming to double his gains and grind fresh
profits from his wares; the speculating capitalist, eager to lay
out lii^ treasure in the best market; the adventurous merchant,
whosgp temple is the counting-house. What a restless sea!
"VVhm troubled waves of thought and care rise up even within
this'single catalogue of callings! But look we further. Observe
the young of all classes, with what suicidal frenzy they commit
themselves to sorrow. Whether, in obedience to the promptings
of high ambition, weaving an entanglement of thought, and
straining the sinews of the mind in attempting to achieve the
gain of riper years, and to wrest the victory ere the battle has
begun; or else, led spell-bound by passion, the powers and
resources of youth are squandered in the bed of the voluptuary;
sin sinking into the heart with all its accursed stains, polluting
the fountains of reason at their source, and embittering the springs
of life. Do we not here find predisposing causes with a vengeance,
borne it may be long, bat only waiting for the spark to fall ?
Leaving, for the present, the consideration of insanity as affecting
the upper and middle classes, let us turn our attention to that
multitudinous body which, ever accumulating out of the necessary
changes and chances of time and circumstances, lies in a posture
of decrepitude and state of slow decay at the base of the struc-
ture on which society is reared. Under the humble appellation
of " paupers" will be found persons, whose phases of existence
have been spent, it is probable, in widely different spheres.
Some, nurtured in the lap of luxury, have learned in their old
xmd helpless age to taste the cup of sorrow, exchanging scenes of
the broadest splendour for the straight and narrow gate of
poverty. The aged and respected couple who, after years of
honest toil, when the day for work has passed, are compelled to
?eat the parish loaf in thankful resignation; the dissipated
mechanic, once perhaps well to do, no longer able to earn a sub-
sistence, after passing through various shades of misery, is reduced
to swell their ranks. The broken-hearted widow; the young
L L 2
512 ON THE INCREASE OF INSANITY.
and helpless; the despairing, the destitute, live under this name.
It is, in fact, a class composed of the tag-end and debris of
society at large?a formation that has settled down out of the
troubled waters of life into the stagnant obscurity of a workhouse.
In this division of the community, causes most frequent among
the upper classes are scarcely to be found. Ambition, pride, sell-
aggrandisement, intellectual labour, political excitement, &c., are
almost wholly wanting: but we have instead intemperance very
frequent; distress, in most cases arising from poverty; want, in-
sufficient food, loss of work, anxiety as to maintenance, &c.?such
are some of the most common causes of insanity in the poor.
There is another, and by no means a rare cause, especially in
certain districts, and which I shall have occasion to allude to
further on?religious distress, or excitement. It is not always
so easy as it seems to distinguish between the predisposing cause
and that which is the immediate precursor of the disorder, and
hence named the exciting. A man, for instance, is addicted to
habits of intemperance, in which he has indulged, it may be, for
several years; he is often intoxicated, more frequently, perhaps,
than otherwise. At last some accident shall befall him, by which
the already over-burdened nervous system receives a severe con-
tusion ; we will suppose a blow on the skull as the most common
kind of injury ; and after this the malady, long since impending,
appears. Or exactly the same train of circumstances may be
reversed : in this case from the blow, and consequent contusion
inflicted on a healthy brain, disease is lighted up, at first probably
insidious, perhaps only a slight deviation from accustomed routine,
an alteration in social habits, or an eccentricity of manner never
before noticed. Thus, we sometimes find a sober right-thinking
man become addicted to drinking, or to frequent places of low
resort; to adopt, in short, habits which before the accident he would
have entirely repudiated; but the disease does not stop here: it is
at present only incipient, but an early occasion of excess will
at once draw aside the veil, and insanity in its worse form
shall stand revealed. Another instance of the relation between
predisposing and exciting causes may be given. A wife, of a
soft, gentle, and affectionate disposition, lias long been sub-
jected to ill-treatment by her brutal husband; she has suf-
fered long and endured" patiently all his cruelty ; at length
a beloved child is taken away by death, and tlie mother's mind
suddenly gives way; she falls into a state of melancholia, and
will probably attempt self-destruction. Such cases are not, I
fear, uncommon. AVhen dwelling briefly 011 the predisposition
to insanity often induced by reckless or vicious habits in the
more intelligent classes, it was not judged necessary to make
;; more than a single remark on the tendency thus encouraged.
ON THE INCREASE OF INSANITY.
Exciting causes are always present, as surely as the flash of
electric light precedes the thunder of heaven; and, if duly inves-
tigated, the predisposing cause will generally be found. Among
persons of this description, whose morale and physique are alike
too often below par, trifling, or even ludicrous events, will suffice
for an exciting cause. Thus, a man of low tastes, which he abun-
dantly gratifies, to the cost both of physical and pecuniary
resources, finds himself, to use a common phrase, under water,
and lie exists?for it does not deserve the name of life?in painful
and degrading poverty : so far the train of mental disease has
been carefully laid. It shall happen, by an unlooked-for accident,
he suddenly becomes possessed of considerable property; the
means for indulging every paprice and propensity are at once in
his hand; but he straightwise goes mad : it was the exciting cause.
A gentleman was some time ago under my care, suffering from
chronic mania, induced by taking part in a jDolitical struggle in
his native town. Here there was, indeed, a strong hereditary
taint; but the fatal mistake which he made in sharing the excite-
ment of the strife, proved the immediate cause of his malady.
Even when no hereditary proclivity exists, there can be no doubt
a predisposition may be formed by too great a strain on the
mental forces sustained for an undue period. That pure and
subtle element, the mind, unlike to visible matter, endures sharp
trial and weighty stress of toil full long, without betraying to
common eyes the greatness of its pain and sorrow; but there
must come at last an hour when nature fails, and then, alas !
too late, the secret is. revealed. It was thus with the gifted
Chatterton; and many a child of genius, whose sun has gone down,
at noon, may be cited to prove the dire results of an overwrought
mind. We know not?may we never learn?by what secret pangs
the mind has been urged, day by day, to its fatal consummation.
The memory of Kirke White will ever borrow from his mental
state a shade of sadness ; and in the present day this terrible truth
has been lately enunciated by the untimely death of one great
light of the age, the lamented Hugh Miller. It is no uncommon
thing to find the most exquisitely-finished workmanship of
nature's hand, alas! most prone to decay; to find a highly sen-
sitive nervous system coincident with an active and powerful
mind : the first painfully alive to every shock of the outer world,
its every chord vibrating to those rude blasts that sweep, like
the winds of Boreas, over the strings of an iEolian lyre ; while the
latter, supreme, exacting from a fragile and delicately-organized
brain labours beyoml its strength. Can we wonder at the con-
sequences that ensue r
In some rare cases, where, like a strong man on a strong steed,
the mind and brain are happily matched, we see with feelings
514 ON THE INCREASE OF INSANITY.
of surprise and admiration liow nobly the work is done, how
well the weight is borne ; for through many a year it carries on
over ground where others before have fallen ; still it travels on.
Yet the good steed tires at last; his head droops, his flank heaves,
he would fain be at rest; but the rider cares not for rest?the
race is not yet won, and with impatient spur he urges onward ;
alas! the steed is spent, it can go no further, and sinks on the
track. Have we not an example of this in the latter end of
Southey and Walter Scott? But a highly sensitive nervous
system is not necessarily conjoined with great mental power, for
we find this even in persons of very ordinary intellectual capacity ;
and in such cases, when the mind is deficient in that general
amount of tone and vigour proper to natural health, there is, if
anything, still greater reason to apprehend the decay and loss of
reason. We have not here a master-hand at the helm, but the
vessel rides rudderless at the mercy of the waves: naturally
weak, unstable, and infirm?little calculated to war with the ele-
ments, or to join conflict in the battle of life?the poor helpless
craft soon becomes a wreck ; the first heavy storm shakes her to
the keel, and soon the shattered hull is tossed upon the shore.
It is sometimes difficult to discriminate between the cause and
effect of mental maladies ; thus, it not unfrequently happens
that persons, from whose psychical idiosyncrasy particular caution
should be observed in their daily habits of life, are unhappily
prone to take the very road to destruction. One, who has per-
haps in early life exhibited a disposition to convulsive affections,
as he grows up, in spite of warnings, entreaties, and example,
will obstinately persist in a career which must ultimately destroy
him. It would seem, indeed, as if such unhappy individuals,
though at the time in apparent enjoyment of their reason and
right understanding, yet lack the self-governing faculty necessary
to keep them from harm. In the case supposed, when a delicate
infancy is safely passed and childhood ripening into youth?when
health seems firm and danger far removed?then, as though in
obedience to an uncontrollable impulse, by a spell which cannot
be unbound, habits are taken up and pursuits greedily followed?
sensual gratification becoming the sole object of life?till appa-
rently from a course, either longer or shorter, of sustained pro-
fligacy, the mind breaks down.
In this case, the cause and effect may be easily misplaced;
it is an example of the difficulties attending a correct elucidation
of mental disease ; indeed they can hardly be overrated. So
insidiously planted are the seeds of insanity, that the manner
and time of sowing it is often impossible to tell. A mother may
rear a healthy family of five or six children, and the seventh
ON THE INCREASE OF INSANITY. 515
shall prove ail idiot from birth, or quickly lapses into a state of
helpless fatuity.
Both parents may he healthy, and their ancestry, so far as is
known, for too little is generally known in these matters by all
parties whom it concerns. Well, the child is a mental cripple,
and so he remains through life; but possibly, if the secret was
discovered, it would show no fault with the forefathers of this
infelix proles; it may have simply resulted from a transient
abnormal, or at least unhealthy, condition of the mind in one or
other parent, most probably the husband, nine months before
birth. This affection, resulting perchance from inordinate anxiety,
or intemperance, or some other weakness, has long since passed
off and been forgot, but the print has been laid, the die cast, the
seed sown.
On looking over most registers of causes, it will be observed
that the exciting causes are more frequently chronicled than
those that are simply predisposing ; it is only natural that the
post hoc, ergo propter hoc, argument should be followed in these
cases ; and, indeed, this is almost always the rule : such as are
predisposing being often of the same kind, yet failing to produce
a manifest effect are liable to pass unnoticed. In some instances
110 cause can be assigned; probably this often arises from igno-
rance and want of observation.
Anxiety occurs both as a predisposing and exciting cause ; in
most cases it is the latter, frequently supervening on the death
of a husband, the sole support of the family, and generally arising
from the difficulties that spring up to share with grief the bosom
of the bereaved. Occasionally it is a predisposing cause, as
anxiety to obtain a livelihood, coupled with the natural dread of
poverty, a fear which, like the basilisk of old, draws its trembling
victim to his doom. Poverty and want! What else could be
expected ? What more to the point for filling a pauper asylum ?
The tendency of dissolute habits towards inducing aberration
of the mind has been already mentioned ; if prolonged habits of
dissipation frequently predispose toward insanity, fits of intem-
perance prove not seldom the immediate exciting cause. There
is little occasion for wonder that it should be so, when we take
into consideration the peculiar influence exercised by alcohol on
the general nervous system. The property which this substance
possesses of inducing that delirious feeling of enjoyment that pre-
cedes absolute intoxication, together with its acknowledged
virtues in restoring the failing force of life, in reviving, that is to
say, the dying, anil assuredly in many cases keeping death itself
at bay, has gained for it such an universal ascendancy over the
widely-differing tastes and habits of mankind, that it is to him.
51G ON THE INCREASE OF INSANITY.
at one time a fostering nurse, at another a cheering friend, again,
a powerful ally, and lastly, an oppressive and cruel enemy. It
cannot be gainsaid that alcohol is a great boon; through its
power of quickening nervous energy it fans, so to speak, the
fading spark of life into a warm diffusive glow, and though this
may prove, too often, but the expiring gleam, it affords valuable
time, oh how precious! to the dying person. Its restorative
virtues are daily exercised in the sick, expediting their recovery;
its genial influence in wholesome moderation may cement the
bands of friendship and gain a noble cause; but abused, serpent-
like, it bites the heel of those who unwittingly tread thereon;
not the destroying pestilence nor the invader's sword shall prove
so devastating, so relentless a foe. From being a gift, hallowed
by divine authority, it becomes a fearful instrument in the hands
of the devil for the destruction of the human race; truly may
the advocates of temperance exclaim, " if war has slain her thou-
sands, drink has slain its tens of thousands;" no longer an
emblem of peace and prosperity, it becomes the dread token of
misery and crime. What more lamentable, more pitiable vice
can there be, than that by which man's proudest gift, his reason,
is dethroned from its high seat by a cruel and enslaving tyrant,
whose end is accomplished when that reason is for ever cast out;
and what words of horror and surprise can describe the height
and depth of folly that invites this king of terrors to come and
take possession ? Intemperance is a fertile source of insanity ;
it is not like sorrow, or disappointment, or, in fact, any other
cause which may eventually be lived down, but in the habitual
drunkard burns an inward, consuming fire. When one has aban-
doned himself wholly to this vice, it is impossible to say he may
ever recover; the more urgent symptoms of disease may indeed be
subdued, and to casual observers he may seem a new man ; but
should he be removed from those wholesome restraints, which
have of necessity been placed on his appetite, he is sure to relapse,
and in the emphatic language of Scripture, " the last state of that
man is worse than the first." Superstition does not appear to be
so common a cause of insanity as might be supposed among
the lower classes of society. The prevailing superstitions of the
day?spirit-rapping, table-turning, mesmerism, and animal
magnetism?exercise their banef ul influence on more susceptible
minds than belong to the labouring population. These are rocks
in the fathomless sea of mysticism, on which many an empty
head has split, and many a shallow mind been stranded; but
happily in this country these causes are rare, though so frequently
met with in the wards of American asylums; instances in which
the precocity of intellect, the hardihood of ignorance, with the
recklessness of presumption, are brought into juxtaposition
ON THE INCREASE OF INSANITY. 517
without the healthy counterpoise of sound knowledge, humility,
and piety. The English mind, speculative, somewhat sceptical,
but eminently practical, has turned away from such puerile
fancies and silly diversions as our Transatlantic brethren have
taken up and still practise. We care not to tickle our brains
with such unnatural, irrational pursuits.* Society has shown
herself slow to learn mere physical hygiene, and how much more
that which is mental. But is not this as needful as the other ?
The robust, uncultivated mind may smile at the props and pre-
cautions so necessary for the highly wrought intellects of the
educated and brain-tasked men of to-day, just as a wilderness,
swept by the winds of heaven and unsullied by man's breath, can
afford to dispense with well planned sewers and skilful officers of
health, though for the closely populated town these are indispen-
sable. And as among the crowded abodes of man, all adjuvants
to sickness should carefully be expunged, so among the labyrinths
of intellectual pursuit must we as sedulously remove, or at least
avoid, those dangerous and insidious provocatives of disease that
are broad-cast through all ranks of the people. With these few
comments on the perils of vain, unphilosophical, and superstitious
inquiries, I now proceed to the consideration of religious excite-
ment, or ecstasy, in its various kinds, as a fertile source of mental
derangement and decay.
A morbid state of the feelings, characterized by their transient
exaltation, arising often by force of imitation, sometimes, it may
be believed, involuntarily and under the unhealthy influence of
intense fervour of a spiritual kind. Such is " religious excite-
ment/' as it is commonly and vaguely termed. This description
of phrensy has been met with in many ages, and under widely
different forms of religion. Its symptoms are very varying and
inconstant; the reaction which ensues may completely over-
shadow the preceding excitement and render its existence doubt-
ful ; in many cases it may be questioned if the mind is really
affected till the second stage of depression has set in ; in others,
whether the extreme excitement may not be ascribed to actual
and positive insanity, passing away with the cause, and leaving
the individual sane, though more prone to subsequent attacks
under similar circumstances, each one less likely than its prede-
cessor to subside, and thereby increasing with their return the
danger of a settled malady. I have said in all ages the pheno-
mena of spiritual or religious excitement have been observed.
We see a similarity between the proud feat of Marcus Curtius,
who " loved his Rome so well,' and the self-sacrificing homage
* Since this was written, I see a paper lias been started in Yorkshire, as an
organ for spiritual manifestations, &c.
518 ON THE INCREASE OF INSANITY.
of the worshippers of Juggernaut; we can trace in the career of
the Flagellants and the victims of the dancing mania of the
middle ages, points of comparison with the whirling Dervishes
and the " Ranters " of our own land. If in the dark ages and
among the most benighted people religious fanaticism, or phrensy,
has been most frequently observed, so may we conclude, from a
priori reasoning, it will, in like manner, be found in certain sects
no less remarkable for the wild fanaticism, gross ignorance, and
unscrupulous presumption of their leaders, than for the perverse
enthusiasm and mental darkness of their misguided followers.
The giddy, weak-minded members of such communities, led away
by the impassioned, reckless teaching of their fire-brained pastors,
seek to gratify their diseased religious feelings in listening to
those tumultuous bursts of language, turbid streams of blasphemy
and folly, which, stimulating the hearers, excite them to those
disgusting and disgraceful exhibitions of maniacal fury, that may
remind us indeed of the worshippers of pagan altars, who " cried
aloud and cut themseives with knives and lancets," shrieking in
dreadful concert, and proclaiming with hideous cries their hopes
and assurance of salvation. I have been told by eye-witnesses that
some of the congregation fall senseless and convulsed, others, with
their eyes lit up with the fire of insanity, prophesy, leaping on
benches, while the rest, in dismal wailings and prayers, signify their
wants or fears. Is it at all wonderful that actual and permanent
insanity should result from these wild doings ? I am sure a great
part of the misery and spiritual depression among the ignorant poor
arises from the pernicious teaching of ranting preachers, combined
with the extravagant, unmeaning, and blasphemous form of wor-
ship common to their communities. It is a significant and very
instructive fact that whereas the large bulk ol the inmates of
public asylums may be members of the Church ot England, yet
it will, I believe, generally be found, at least in my experience of
two public asylums it has been so, that those suffering from
religious despondency, arising from religious excitement, are most
frequently, if not almost invariably, members of some dissenting
body?Methodists, Wesleyans, Baptists, or those, in popular
phrase, termed " Ranters."
And this terminates the notice of some of the more common,
and, I believe, most important causes of insanity among the
poor, from the consideration of which we arrive at the inevitable
conclusion, that there are certain natural laws, however unwilling
man may bo to receive them, beyond or against which whosoever
trespasses thereby becomes subject to penalty. The fact of phy-
sical disease being thus often induced has rendered mankind, to
a degree, sensible of this rule, and, in some case, to recognise the
laws of health, or those general principles by which bodily suffer-
ON THE INCREASE OF INSANITY. 519
ing and sickness may be diminished, if not altogether avoided ;
but it seems a lamentable fact that so many fail to observe, or
obey, those general rules of living that form the best safeguards
to mental health and integrity. Thus, for instance, the student
who sustains great intellectual labour too often succumbs to this
mental strain for want of relieving his brain from severe thought,
and renewing his bodily vigour by active physical exercise.
Cases of intemperance, again, show the numerous instances in
which mental disease results from debauchery in social life. The
votary of pleasure in his carnival hour may delude himself he is
the least likely ever to become insane, and yet the records of any
asylum prove with how little impunity such a course of life can
be indulged. To take another case; the poverty-pinched and
over-wrought mechanic, whose dreary hours of toil are spent
from day to day in the same small, dingy room, unpurified by the
breath, unillumined by the light of heaven, and when night sets
in, exhausted by confinement and want of proper food, he throws
himself on his wretched pallet, and prays for sleep to soothe the
pangs of famine. Could this poor man be protected from those
untoward influences which threaten to destroy him, both soul
and body, it is possible his dark hours would be fewer, his trials
less keen; but there is no escape, and the avengers of nature's
violated laws claim him at last for their victim.
When society has learned the art of preserving life and reason,
we may confidently expect?though disease, whether of body or
mind, will never cease to be present with us?yet its more fear-
ful ravages shall be checked and held at bay. Even as through
the Herculean exertions of humane and scientific men, those
physical disorders which have in times past swept the earth like
the breath of the destroying angel are now dismantled of half
their terrors, and no longer permitted to go forth and destroy, so
may we hope the time will come when, by the wisdom of Omni-
science instructing and guiding our labours, that grim and
hydra-headed monster, for which we now are content to rear
costly mansions, such as few other lands can show, shall become
a shadow and a name?a thing to be spoken of to our children,
and to be had in memorial by our children's children in the day
when they view the deserted abodes of madness and woe, and
speculate "on the nature and character of that terrible king for
whom such palaces were designed. Well may the patriot mourn
and the man of feeling sorrow to see these grisly tokens of their
country's weakness rising up through the length and breadth of
the land.
Let none suppose that such means, commendable though they
may be for the pressing requirements of the times, will really
check the spread of mental disorders. Fever wards and small-
520 ON THE INCREASE OF INSANITY.
pox hospitals may shelter the sufferers of disease, but they
cannot prevent it for a day ; and after all, prevention, says the
proverb, is better than cure; but we appoint officers of public
health, whose business it is to hunt out fever and contagious
maladies, the offspring of ignorance and neglect, and to trace
them to their lair, and to strangle them at birth: this is far
better than waging a weary fight with the full-grown monster
twins, disease and death. It is wiser to go to the root and to
nip the evil in the bud. And now let us think for a moment
how the same principles of prevention may be applied to dis-
eases of the mind.
Individual instances of high attainment and solitary possessions,
well stored with fruitful and pleasant knowledge, will not here
avail. We must have unity of action, and a combination of
resources among all classes of society. For as in a well-
planned arch, each single stone helps to maintain the con-
sistence of the entire structure, so in the social constitution
of our country is seen a fabric, the solid base and sturdy
buttress of which are formed by the stout hearts and strong arms
of the mass of labouring poor, on which firm foundation are up-
reared the well-polished stones, placed by the hands of the Great
Architect himself, each and all in their several positions linked
and bound together for mutual dependence and support, helping
to sustain still higher rows of intellectual power, till the whole
form an emblem of unity and strength, having Royalty for the
key-stone. Until men learn the force of this truth, and recognise
in obedience the principles it enjoins, we may expect to continue,
as heretofore, contributing to build and fill asylums for^ those
whose intellect has been rudely "jostled from its seat" in the
angry bustle of life, unmindful how we suffer as a nation, so that
as individuals we prosper,?careless if the foundations of society
are sapped and destroyed, so long as we can maintain, an artifi-
cial glitter in our respective places, closing, meanwhile, our eyes
and ears to the miseries of those around and beneath us. Let us
rather endeavour to promote mental sanitary reform, combining
to introduce those changes in the social condition, more especially
of the working classes, by which that high pressure system, so
prejudicial to the health of the mind, shall bo slackened, and the
strain which it occasions relaxed. Let these people have those
proper periods for repose and recreation, without which man
becomes a mere machine. Let the hours of labour be abridged,
and let childhood no longer share the curse of the fall. Let the
multitudes who have not the means or opportunities of learning
from books, be instructed by public teachers the first principles
of mental as well as physical hygiene. Let them know the evils
that result from ill-judged matrimonial matches, so fearfully pro-
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FKANCE. 521
lific of insanity; and let not tlie wise examples of previous ages
of the world he disregarded : the healthy manly exercises of the
Olympic games, foot-races, manly contests, wrestling, throwing
weights, &c., should be encouraged: the training of the body
thus called forth engenders a healthy tone of mind. Would that
Government prizes were instituted in every township for the suc-
cessful competitors in the above-mentioned and other similar
sports ! Would that public ground was set apart for these health-
ful practices and diversions ! We should not then have reason to
lament for the premature decay which threatens so many of the
rising generation. The tonic influence of open air would brace
the nervous system, and through it the mind itself, against those
ensnaring and degrading vices into which the youth of our nation
fall. A manly spirit of emulation would arise to preserve their
stamina unspoiled, their physical resources unalloyed, and hence
not to themselves only, but to their posterity would accrue the
advantages of a well-trained body, with the blessing of a strong
and healthy mind. That such a day may dawn, when England's
sons shall learn the prowess and strength of nerve for which their
forefathers were famed,?when, forsaking the tavern and gambling-
table, the low haunts of vice and idleness, they shall acquire a
taste for those spirited and adventurous pursuits by which not
men but heroes are formed, let each one who has the power feel
the responsibility, and seek without delay to bring about so de-
sirable a consummation.
Iy>
