Psychological Quarterly Retrospect
====================================

To extract a stray philosophical or scientific truth from our sports is
one thing; to transform philosophical or scientific truths into sports is
another. By the former method we may break an occasional clod in
the mind of a novice and incite him to learn; by the latter we are too
likely to falsify the truths we may seek to teach, and to lead the
learner into error. " Philosophy in sport made Science in earnest"
is, perhaps, an euphonious, but it is certainly a delusive and mis-
chievous phrase, and a tyro who may have derived his first notions of
philosophy from an indoctrination governed by the principle which the
expression implies, will be apt to suffer the fate of the three unhappy
individuals, two coming from the land of Vain-glory, and one from the
country of Conceit, whom Christian met with in the "narrow way."
" Why came you not in at the Grate, which standeth at the beginning
of the way ?" said he to the two former individuals, and they replied
?" That to go to the Gate for entrance was by all their countrymen
counted too far about; and therefore their usual way was to make a
short cut of it, and to climb over the wall, as they had done." The
latter individual?" his name was Ignorance "?being asked a similar
question, answered,?" As for the Gate that you talk of, all the world
knows that it is a great way off our country. I cannot think that
any men in all our parts do so much as know the way to it, nor need
they matter whether they do or no, since we have, as you see, a fine,
pleasant green lane that comes down from our country the nearest way."
Now, as we all well know, neither the two inhabitants of the land of
Vain-glory, (Formalist and Hypocrisy,) nor Ignorance, attained the ob-
ject at which they aimed. They were fated to remain in outer darkness ;
and the manner in which this came about, teaches a lesson which is as true
in philosophy as in religion. When Formalist and Hypocrisy came to
the foot of the hill Difficulty " they saw that the hill was steep and
high," and that the narrow way lay right up it; but there were two
other paths, one leading to the right and the other to the left at the
bottom of the hill, and the two pseudo-pilgrims supposing that these
two ways might meet again on the other side of the hill" were resolved
to go into those ways." " So the one took the way which is called
Danger, which led him into a great wood; and the other took directly
up the way to Destruction, which led him into a wide field full of dark
mountains, where he stumbled and fell and rose no more." Ignorance,
having entered the narrow way beyond the hill Difficulty, pursued his
XXX
PHILOSOPHIC DOUBT.
journey jauntily, puffed up in his own conceit, until he arrived at the
very portals of Light; but when he sought to enter, he was bound
hand and foot, and led away into darkness.
We have been enticed into these remarks by the publication of
Robert Hotjdin's Memoirs.* The arch-conjuror has unmuzzled his >
wisdom, and if we will we may learn very pleasantly from his lucubra-
tions several important items of psychological truth, and at the same
time also learn how an untiring amusement may aid in soundly tutoring
the mind.
"The unassisted hand, and the understanding left to itself," writes
Bacon, "possess but little power" (iVoy. Org. ApTi. 2); but to obtain
a right comprehension of this fundamental truth in philosophy is the
primary stumbling-block in reasoning ; for the converse of the proposi-
tion, to wit, that the unassisted hand and the understanding left
to itself are all-powerful, is that which is most commonly held in the
world. In our accepted educational systems the doubt expressed by
Bacon of the all-sufficiency of man's unaided powers, which doubt con-
stitutes the only firm foundation of right-reasoning, is made the final
step of preliminary tuition. Thus it happens that that which renders
all education necessary, and which gives vitality and meaning to it, is
taught only after the mind has been drilled automatically, and as a \
matter of course, in the so-called rudiments of knowledge, and, as a con-
sequence, when the mind is confronted with the principle which prompts i
its tuition, it has to unlearn much before it can comprehend those
fallacies which beset both the inlets and outlets of knowledge (fallacies
which have been added to not a little by the previous tuition), and
which necessitate the preliminary doubt. A rational education will be
a reasoning one, tending to develop a knowledge of the modes in and
by which we know, as well as the facility of knowing; thus linking
the method of attainment of the most ordinary knowledge to the
principles which govern the attainment of the highest knowledge, so that
whether little or much be learned, it shall be rightly learned. Indeed,
that which philosophy (le dernier affranchissement, le dernier progres
de la pensee: Cousin,) imperatively demands for its successful study,
should be our guide in teaching or acquiring any knowledge whatever.
" To attain to a knowledge of ourselves," says Socrates, " we must banislx
prejudice, passion, and slothand 110 one who neglects this precept can hope
to make any progress in the philosophy of the human mind, which is only
another term for the knowledge of ourselves. In the first place, then, all
prejudices?that is, all opinions formed 011 irrational grounds?ought to be
* Confidences d'un Prestidigitateur, par Robert Houdin. Une Vie d' Artiste.
Paris : A. Bourdilliat et Cie. 1859.
Memoirs of Robert Houdin, Ambassador, Author, and Conjuror. Written by
himself. London: Chapman and Hall. 1859. j
I
PROVERBIAL PHILOSOPHY.
xxxi
removed. A preliminary doubt is thus the fundamental condition of philosophy;
and the necessity of such a doubt is no less apparent than is its difficulty. We
do not approach the study of philosophy ignorant, but perverted.
" There is no one who has not grown up under a load of beliefs?beliefs
which he owes to the accidents of country and family, to the books he has
read, to the society he has frequented, to the education he has received, and,
in general, to the circumstances which have concurred in the formation of his
intellectual and moral habits. These beliefs may be true, or they may be false,
or, what is more probable, they may be a medley of truths and errors. It is,
, however, under their influence that he studies, and through them, as through
a prism, that he views the objects of knowledge. Everything is therefore seen
by him in false colours, and in distorted relations. And this is the reason why
philosophy, as the science of truth, requires a renunciation of prejudices (prce?
judicia, opiniones prce-judicatia)?that is, conclusions formed without a
previous examination of their grounds. To this, if I may without irreverence
compare things human with things divine, Christianity and Philosophy coin-
cide ; for truth is equally the end of both. What is the primary condition
which our Saviour requires of his disciples ? That they throw off their old
prejudices, and come with hearts willing to receive knowledge, and understand-
ings open to conviction. ' Unless/ He says, ' ye become as little children, ye
shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.' Such is true religion, and such
also is true philosophy."
Thus writes Sir William Hamilton (Lectures, Yol. I., pp. 81, 82)
and every philosopher of note, past and present, concurs in considering
that a preliminary doubt is the fundamental condition of philosophy,
i But it is not a doubt merely, but a method of doubting; for philosophy
may be termed, as Aristotle expressed it, " the art of doubting well"
{Metaphy. ii. 1; Op. cit. p. 92). " Philosophical doubt," says the Scotch
metaphysician from whom we have just quoted, "is not an end but a
mean ; we doubt in order that we may believe; we begin that we may
not end with doubt" (p. 91). We are not, therefore, dealing with
one of those traitorous doubts that
" Make us lose, by fearing to attempt,
The good we oft might win
but with a doubt that is the necessary forerunner of humility, and
which tempers, but does not restrain, zeal; and what we are taught to
be the key to the successful pursuit of philosophy is not peculiar to
that pursuit, but is common to it, and to every other branch of know-
ledge. Indeed, precepts which the highest philosophy lays down may
be found embedded in the proverbial sayings of every language.
" We must recoil a little, to the end that ive may leap better" admi-
rably expresses the object and utility of philosophical doubt; " The
least foolish is wise," conveys a pithy lesson in humility; while a sig-
? nificant hint on well-directed doubt is conveyed in the proverb, " The
first degree of folly is to hold one's self wise, the second to profess it,
the third to despise counselMost wise, also, is the popular saying,
" He that thinks amiss, concludes ivorse." This touches the root of
e
I {
^ |in
7!i ? ?
xxxii
EMPIRICAL INSTRUCTION.
a fertile source of prejudice and error ; and, as a warning against slotli^
we have it sung in our ears that " We cannot come to honours under a
coverlet"?a proverb exquisitely rendered by the great Florentine poet:
" For not on downy plumes, nor under shade
Of canopy reposing, fame is won;
Without which whosoe'er consumes his days,
Leaveth such vestige of himself on earth,
As smoke in air, or foam upon the wave."?(Inferno, cxxiv.)
In short, Spenser's allegory of the entrance to the house of Holiness is
equally applicable to the house of Knowledge ; and by the aid of humi-
lity and zeal alone will the tyro ever enter legitimately within its
portals:?
" Arrived there, the dore they find fast lockt;
For it was warely watched night and day,
For feare of many foes; but when they knockt,
The porter opened unto them streight way.
He was an aged svre, all hoary gray,
With looks full lowly cast, and gate full slow,
Wont on a staffe his feeble steps to stay,
Higlit Humilta. They passe in, stouping low;
For streight and narrow was the way which he did show.
Each goodly thing is hardest to begin;
But entered in a spacious court they see
Both plaine and pleasaunt to be walked in;
Where them does meete a francklin, faire and free,
And entertaines with comely courteous glee;
His name was Zele, that him right well became :
For in his speaches and behaveour hee
Did labour lively to expresse the same,
And gladly did them guide, till to the hall they came."
The Faerie Queene, B. I., c. x. s. vi. and vii.
Now there are some who," by good hap, are early taught that preli-
minary method of doubting which is a necessary condition of all right
knowledge, as well as of philosophy in the purest acceptation of the
term; others are taught the method by bitter experience; but by far
the majority of individuals go through the world in ignorance of it,
thanks to an empirical system of instruction which crams the mind
with results, and neglects to teach the methods by which those results
are obtained; which forces the acquisitive faculty and memory, but
which leaves fallow imagination, the faculty of comparison and^reason;
which is automatic and not ratiocinative. Individuals thus taught
have full confidence in the all-sufficiency of their understandings, and
having no guide in that well-doubting which a knowledge of the fal-
lacies that beset the mind begets, they are reckless in their belief,
reckless in their doubts, and are a ready prey to every delusion, whether
sensational or intellectual?they form, indeed, the great substratum
in which is developed popular delusions of every stamp.
!
SLEIGHT-OF-HAND. xxxiii
To persons of this character the feats of the prestidigitator (presto
digito), may teach a very useful and important lesson, for he, working
upon a knowledge of the limited powers of the senses and understanding
when unaided, furnishes a pleasant method of demonstrating the falli-
bility both of the one and the other. And as the manner in which the
deceptions produced by sleight-of-hand are brought about wittingly, is
the same with that which leads to deceptions unwittingly, and which pro-
duces half the troublesome and noxious errors and delusions of every-day
life, we may well learn from the juggler's tricks, broadly the necessity of a
preliminary doubt as to the truthfulness of our faculties in any direction
to which they are not specifically trained; we shall also learn much
that may guide us clear of many of those grave delusions which haunt
men from time to time, and which often, in an epidemic form, spread
mischief and unhappiness in every direction.
To the psychologist the juggler's feats are of untiring interest, as
the method of their production illustrates several of the most recon-
dite problems o? the human mind.
The key to the prestidigitator's tricks is the limited capacity of the
untrained vision and the necessity that exists, to ensure correct per-
ception, for an accurate co-operation between the understanding and
the senses. The latter may be deceived either by a rapidity of motion}
a sleight-of-hand which the eye cannot follow, or by diverting the
attention, or leading it astray at the moment of the climax of the trick,
so that the sense plays false; and it is this, the mental element, which
constitutes the most important portion of every great deception. Any
ordinary man may cultivate the sleight of movement which the presti-
digitator practises, but it requires a true genius fully to develop the
consequences which may be made to flow from those sleights by an
accurate knowledge of the part which the disposition of mind plays in
correct observation of facts presented to the senses.
Let us first notice the preliminary training of the prestidigitator.
" In the absence of a professor to instruct me, I was compelled to create the
principles of the science I wished to study. In the first place, I recognised
the fundamental principle of sleight-of-hand, that the organs performing the
principal part are the sight and touch. I saw that, in order to attain any
degree of perfection, the professor must develop these organs to their fullest
extent?for in his exhibitions he must be able to see everything that takes place
around him at. half a glance, and execute his deceptions with unfailing dexterity.
" I had been often struck by the ease with which pianists can read and per-
form at sight the most difficult pieces. I saw that, by practice, it would be
possible to create a certainty of perception and facility of touch, rendering it
easy for the artist to attend to several things simultaneously, while his hands
were busy employed with some complicated task. _ This faculty I wished to
acquire and apply to sleight-of-hand; still, as music could not afford me the
necessary elements, I had recourse to the juggler's art, in which I hoped to
meet with an analogous result.
e 2
xxxiv houdin's second sight.
" It is well known that the trick with the balls wonderfully improves the
touch; but does it not improve the vision at the same time ? In fact, when a
juggler throws into the air four balls crossing each other in various directions,
he' requires an extraordinary power of sight to follow the direction his hands
have given to each of the balls. At this period a corn-cutter resided at Blois,
who possessed the double talent of juggling and extracting corns with a skill
worthy of the lightness of his hands. Still, with both these qualities, he was
not rich; and being aware of that fact, I hoped to obtain lessons from him at a
price suited to my modest finances. In fact, for ten francs he agreed to ini-
tiate me in%tlie juggling art.
" I practised with so much zeal, and progressed so rapidly, that in less than a
month I had nothing more to learn; at least, I knew as much as my master,
with the exception of corn-cutting, the monopoly in which I left him. I was
able to juggle with four balls at once. But this did not satisfy my ambition;
so I placed a book before me, and, while the balls were in the air, I accustomed
myself to read without any hesitation.
" This will probably seem to my readers very extraordinary ; but I shall sur-
prise them still more, when I say that I have just amused myself by repeating
this curious experiment. Though thirty years have elapsed since the time of
which I am writing, and though I scarcely once touched my balls during that
period, I can still manage to read with ease while keeping three balls up.
"The practice of this trick gave my fingers a remarkable,degree of delicacy
and certainty, while my eye was at the same time acquiring a promptitude of
perception that was quite marvellous. Presently I shall have to speak of the
service this rendered me in my experiment of second sight. After having thus
made my hands supple and docile, I went on straight to sleight-of-hand, and I
more especially devoted myself to the manipulation of cards and palmistry."?
(lloudin, vol. i. p. 37.)*
This interesting feat gives the cue to one of the most important
powers of deception which the prestidigitator possesses, for while he is
enabled by a studiously acquired automatism to perform liis'sleight-of-
hand tricks, his mind is left entirely at liberty to observe his audience,
and to seize upon any occasion that may turn up which may aid in
deepening the illusion of the senses. He is thus enabled to play upon
the mind, while he professedly occupies himself solely with the
senses, and he most commonly deludes the latter by distracting (but
with exquisite ingenuity) the former. But the feat we have re-
corded was only the first step in a process of study, the ultimate
development of which was that wonderful delusion second-sight, or
clairvoyance. M. Houdin tells us the principal points connected with
the development of this trick, and the account is of great interest, as
well from the curious psychological illustrations it involves, as from
being a sharp lesson to human credulity. Those who plead for the
infallibility of their observations on the truths of clairvoyance may-
read with advantage M. Houdin's details of his second-sight. It is no
discredit not to succeed in unmasking, under ordinary circumstances, the
collusion of professed clairvoyance, for the task is one which requires a
combination of favourable conditions in order to effect it fully.
* The references are to Messrs. Chapman and Hall's translation.
houdin's second sight.
XXXV
" The experiment, however, to which I owed my reputation was one inspired
by that fantastic god to whom Pascal attributes all the discoveries of this sub-
lunary world : chance led me straight to the invention of second sight.
" My two children were playing one day in the drawing-room at a game they
had invented for their own amusement. The younger had bandaged his elder
brother's eyes, and made him guess the objects he touched, and when the
latter happened to guess right, they changed places. This simple game sug-
gested to me the most complicated idea that ever crossed my mind.
" Pursued by the notion, I ran and shut myself up in my workroom, and
was fortunately in that happy state when the mind follows easily the combina-
tions traced by fancy. I rested my head in my hands, and, in my excitement,
laid down the first principles of second sight.
"It would require a whole volume to describe the numberless combinations
of this experiment; but this description, far too serious for these memoirs,
will find a place in a special work, which will also contain the explanation of
my theatrical tricks. Still, I cannot resist the desire of cursorily explaining
some of the preliminary experiments to which I had recourse before I could
make the trick perfect.
"My readers will remember the experiment suggested to me formerly by the
pianist's dexterity, and the strange faculty I succeeded in attaining; I could
read while juggling with four balls. Thinking seriously of this, I fancied that
this ' perception by appreciation' might be susceptible of equal development, if
I applied its principles to the memory and the mind.
"I resolved, therefore, on making some experiments with my son Emile, and,
in order to make my young assistant understand the nature of the exercise we
were going to learn, I took a domino, the cinq-quater for instance, and laid
it before him. Instead of letting him count the points of the two numberss
I requested the boy to tell me the total at once.
"'Nine,' he said.
" Then I added another domino, the quater-tray.
" ' That makes sixteen,' he said, without any hesitation.
" I stopped the first lesson here ; the next day we succeeded in counting at
a single glance four dominoes, the day after six, and thus at length were enabled
to give instantaneously the product of a dozen dominoes.
" This result obtained, we applied ourselves to a far more difficult task, over
which we spent a month. My son and I passed rapidly before a toy-shop, or
any other displaying a variety of wares, and cast an attentive glance upon it.
A lew steps further on we drew paper and pencil from our pockets, and tried
which could describe the greater number of objects seen in passing. I must
own that my son reached a perfection far greater than mine, for he could often
write down forty objects while I could scarce reach thirty. Often feeling vexed
at this defeat, I would return to the shop and verify his statement, but he.
rarely made a mistake.
My male readers will certainly understand the possibility of this, but they
will recognise the difficulty. As for my lady readers, I am convinced before-
hand they will not be of the same opinion, for they daily perform far more
astounding feats. Thus, for instance, I can safely assert that a lady seeing
another pass at full speed in a carriage, will have had time to analyse her
toilette from her bonnet to her shoes, and be able to describe not only the
fashion and quality of the stuffs, but also say if the lace be real, or only machine
made. I have known ladies do this.
" This natural, or acquired, faculty among ladies, but which my son and I had
only gained by constant practice, was of great service in my performances, for
while I was executing my tricks, I could see everything that passed around me,
and thus prepare to foil any difficulties presented me. This exercise had given
xxxvi houdin's second sight.
me, so to speak, the power of following two ideas simultaneously, and nothing
is more favourable in conjuring than to be able to think at the same time both
of what you are saying and of what you are doing. I eventually acquired such
a knack in this, that I frequently invented new tricks while going through my
performances. One day, even, I made a bet I would solve a problem in
mechanics while taking my part in conversation. We were talking of the plea-
sure of a country life, and I calculated during this time the quantity of wheels
and pinions, as well as the necessary cogs, to produce certain revolutions re-
quired, without once failing in my reply.
" This slight explanation will be sufficient to show what is the essential
basis of second sight, and I will add that a secret and unnoticeable correspon-
dence existed between my son and myself, by which I could announce to him
the name, nature, and bulk of objects handed me by spectators.
"As none understood my mode of action, they were tempted to believe in
something extraordinary, and, indeed, my son Emile, then aged twelve, pos-
sessed all the essential qualities to produce this opinion, for his pale, intellectual,
and ever-thoughtful face represented the type of a boy gifted with some
supernatural power." (Yol. ii. p. 4?8.)
We can only refer to the hard, unrelenting study which was requi-
site both for M. Houdin and his son, in order to store the well-
developed memory with the knowledge of things necessary in order to
meet every possible attempt to baffle the clairvoyant in public exhibi-
tions?study which extended even to coins and antiquities. But one
example may be quoted to show how the combined powers of memory
and acuteness of sight were brought into play in the so-called second
sight.
" But that power of memory which my son possessed in an eminent degree
certainly did us the greatest service. When we went to private houses, he
needed only a very rapid inspection, in order to know all the objects in a
room, as well as the various ornaments worn by the spectators, such as chate-
laines, pins, eye-glasses, fans> brooches, rings, bouquets, &c. He thus could
describe these objects with the greatest ease, when I pointed them out to
him by our secret communication. Here is an instance :?
" One evening, at a house in the Chaussee d'Antin, and at the end of a per-
formance which had been as successful as it was loudly applauded, I remem-
bered that, while passing through the next room to the one we were now in, I
had begged my son to cast a glance at a library and remember the titles of some
of the books, as well as the order they were arranged in. No one had noticed
this rapid examination.
"' To end the second sight experiment, sir,' I said to the master of the
house, I will prove to you that my son can read through a wall. Will you
lend me a book ?'
"I was naturally conducted to the library in question, which I pretended
now to see for the first time, and I laid my finger on a book.
" ' Emile,' I said to my son, ' what is the name of this work ?'
" ' It is Buffon,' he replied, quickly.
"'And the one by its side?' an incredulous spectator hastened to ask.
" c On the right or left ?' my son asked.
" ' On the right,' the speaker said, having a good reason for choosing this
book, for the lettering was very small.
" ' The Travels of ' Anacharsis the Younger,' the boy replied. ' But,' he
added, ' had you asked the name of the book on the left, sir, I should have
vaucanson's canard. xxxvii
said Lamartine's Poetry. A little to the right of this row, I see Crebillon's
works; below, two volumes of Fleury's Memoirs;' and my son thus named
a dozen books before he stopped.
" The spectators had not said a word during this description, as they felt
so amazed; but when the experiment had ended, all complimented us by
clapping their hands." (Yol. ii. p. 28?30.)
The foregoing illustrations will be sufficient to show the quality of
the instructive material which may be gathered from M. Houdin's
Memoirs, in so far as that relates to his doings as a prestidigitator?
the character in which he is best known in England.
But M. Houdin is an ingenious mechanist as well as sleight-of-hand
professor, and his mechanical genius contributed not a little to his
success as a conjuror, several of his most striking deceptions being
brought about by mechanical contrivances. We refer to this feature
of M. Houdin's? character, because, as a mechanist, it happened that he
had once under hand Yaucanson's celebrated duck, and, moreover, he
is able to throw some light upon Kempelen's no less celebrated chess-
player?two of the most noted automata that ever perplexed the
civilized world.
A more provoking delusion, in one respect, than the duck, never
existed. Sir D. Brewster tells us (" Natural Magic," c. xi.), that
this duck?
"Was perhaps the most wonderful piece of mechanism that was ever made.
Yancauson's duck exactly resembled the living animal in size and appearance.
It executed accurately all its movements and gestures; it ate and drank with
avidity, performed all the quick motions of the head and throat which are
peculiar to the living animal, and, like it, puddled the water which it drank
with its bill. It produced also the sound of quacking in the most natural
manner. In the anatomical structure of the duck, the artist exhibited the
highest skill. Every bone in the real duck had its representative in the auto-
maton, and its wings were anatomically exact. Every cavity, apophysis, and
curvature was imitated, and each bone executed its proper movements. YYhen
corn was thrown down before it, the duck stretched out its neck to pick it up,
it swallowed it, digested it, and discharged ii in a digested condition. The
process of digestion was effected by chemical solution, and not by tritu-
ration, and the food digested in the stomach was conveyed away by tubes to the
place of its discharge."
Now M. Houdin tells us that the duck having been sent to him for
repair, in 1844, he was initiated into the famous mystery of its digestion.
He found that Yaucanson had been guilty of a trick which a conjuror
would have been proud of. The digestion, indeed, was " a mystifica-
tion?a real canard in fact."
"The trick was as simple as it was interesting. A vase containing seed
steeped in water was placed before the bird. ^ The motion of the bill in dab-
bling crushed the food, and facilitated its introduction into a pipe placed
beneath the lower bill. The water and seed thus swallowed fell into a box
placed under the bird's stomach, which was emptied every three or four days.
The other part of the operation was thus effected:?Bread-crumb, coloured
xxxviii
kempelen's chess-players.
green, was expelled by a forcing pump, and carefully caught on a silver salvev
as the result of artificial digestion. This was handed round to be admired,
while the ingenious trickster laughed in his sleeve at the credulity of the
public." (Yol. i. p. 174.)
There could be no doubt that Kempelen's so-called automaton chess-
player was simply an ingenious screen, beneath which was concealed
an adept at chess, but the difficulty was to explain how an individual
of ordinary dimensions could be concealed within the figure of the
automaton player. Many attempts at explanation were made, but none
were very successful. M. Houdin, however, professes to clear up the
mystery in a story of no mean interest, and one that is well worthy of
perusal. He states that the machine was invented by Kempelen in
order to smuggle out of Russia an officer named Worousky, who
headed a revolt at Riga in 1796, and who lost both, his legs by a
cannon-shot during the struggle. His life was saved by a humane
physician, who chanced to be visited by Kempelen at a time when he
was becoming somewhat uneasy as to the probable consequences of his
honourable action, and also as to the future concealment of the maimed
man. Worousky was an admirable player at chess, and Kempelen
having become much interested in his fate, the idea struck him which
was so successfully carried out in the well-known automaton. The
plan was facilitated by Worousky's short stature as well as by his
truncated state, and it thoroughly answered the original intention of
the inventor. Worousky escaped from Russia, and it is probable that
he travelled along with the ingenious machine during its subsequent
exhibition in England and various parts of Europe.
We have touched upon (without exhausting) those parts of M.
Houdin's memoirs which offer material for a better knowledge of the
rationale of delusions. The conjuror practises systematically upon the
liability of the senses and understanding to err, and by watching
narrowly the method in which he purposely brings about delusion, we
may gain considerable insight into the mode in which we fall inadver-
tently into delusions. One evening with Robert-Houdin, thoughtfully
spent, would probably have taught the advocates of Spirit-rapping and
Table-moving a more useful lesson than all the heavy arguments that
were brought to bear upon them; for the majority had still to learn
that rightful method of doubting which would have led them to dis-
trust themselves rather than to have accepted certain inconsequent
phenomena as evidence of supernatural and novel forces, which ren-
dered it necessary, as a preliminary step, that all recognised methods
of observation should be set aside.
The use, in fact, which we have indirectly endeavoured to make of
M. Houdin's feats, he at one period of his life had to make directly, in
THE AISSAOUA.
xxxix
what constitutes one of the most interesting episodes of his life. He
was sent by the French Government to Algeria in order, by his sleight-
of-hand, to neutralize the irritative effects which were being produced
among several of the Arab tribes by the sorceries of certain holy
Mussulmans who strove to rouse the natives to revolt. Sorcery was to
be exposed to sorcery, and little doubt was entertained that the exotic
magic would cast the indigenous far into the shade; and thus while
t overawing the natives, would afford an opportunity of exposing the worth-
lessness of the magical pretensions of the Marabouts, by showing that
no magic was concerned in the matter. The occasion of M. Iioudin's
first appearance before a native audience was at an annual gathering of
chiefs of tribes in Algiers, and he succeeded to admiration, outshining
beyond comparison the native professors of magic.
While in Algeria, M. Houdin naturally was interested in witnessing
the performances of the juggling Marabouts, and his account of their
doings will be listened to with all the more interest as in several
recent works on Algeria there have been recounted at length the mar-
vellous doings of a certain fanatical sect of Arabs, the Aissaoua.
Lieut.-Col. H. Mulleneux Walmsley tells the following legend of
this sect, of whose rites he gives a long and interesting account:?
" Allah once led liis children into the desert, and as food was not plentiful
there, he nourished them with snakes, scorpions, sticks, and stones, as_ tid-bits.
The miracle was not in their relishing the food, but that they got fat on it, which
it is asserted they did. To celebrate this miracle a certain night is set apart as
a religious festival, and after previous prayer and fasting, the true believer is
placed by Allah's will in the same position as the children of the desert were
formerly in; that is to say, his stomach will receive and extract nourishment
from anything, nor can venomous reptiles have power over him."?(" Sketches in
Algeria during the Kabyle War." London, 1858, p. 157.)
Lieutenant-Colonel Walmsley's recital of the doings of what he pro-
fanely terms the Arab jugglers, when taken in connexion with M.
Iioudin's account, forms so interesting a contribution to the history of
popular delusions, that we shall not hesitate to quote it in part. The
exhibition took place in an old ruinous temple:?
" We were allowed to enter a kind of large court-yard, from which led off
two small rooms, and above which ran some latticed galleries. The whole was
vaulted over, and round the interior of this court-yard, leaving the centre part
quite free, were squatted a number of spectators. The floor was covered with
mats, and the lookers-on?all Arabs?were pressed close one upon another,
while in the centre were the musicians, some six or eight in number, partly
black men, each of whom held in his hand a large kind of tambourine, which
they heated over a brazier. Before this rude orchestra was placed a low
table, standing only about a foot from the ground, on which lay a yataghan, a
long bayonet-looking poniard, with a round ball-like handle?such as I have
described as used by the sect of Howling Dervishes in my 'Journal of a Bashi
Bazouk'?a brazier of live charcoal, on which the priest, who was walking
about the room, cast incense from time to time; and a long taper, lighted.
Let the reader then imagine the centre matted space clear of people, the musi-
xl THE AISSAOUA.
cians striking from time to time their tambourines, which gave forth a hollow
reverberation, the Arabs grouped around in their tattered houmous, the smell
of the incense diffused about the place, and the whole dimly lighted up by the
single taper; and he will understand the spectacle which greeted my eyes as
the massive door closed on me, and I stepped across the matted space, and
seated myself cross-legged on the ground, beside the musicians, so as to be in
close proximity to the performers. This position would not have been allowed
me as an ordinary spectator; but coming with the Commandant of the
place, I was a privileged person; though, for all that, I was not allowed to i
enter the two rooms which led off from the court-yard, which were filled
with Arab devotees, and had their walls covered with verses of the Koran.
" The latticed gallery above was, I found, as soon as my eyes became accus-
tomed to the dim light, filled with veiled women; coffee was served, and imme-
diately afterwards the priest and several of the community, raising their hands
before their eyes, and looking fixedly into the open palm, began prayers. The
tambourine-players now struck up a loud but not unpleasant melody, pausing
every now and then to recite a quick and rather musical chant, which was
taken up and responded to by the congregation. At the close of each verse
the tambourine took up the measure, gradually quickening the time until the
beating became fast and loud. Incense was plentifully thrown upon the live
charcoal, and its fumes rising in thick clouds, perfumed the furthest nooks and
crannies of the old building with a peculiar and delicate smell. Now, the
music grew still faster and more furious, while the spectators kept time by
clapping their hands, and the females in the latticed galleries, seeming to feel
the contagious excitement, uttered a curious and shrill sound, which I can
liken to nothing except a succession of squeaks. For fully half-an-hour did
this mad concert continue : and I became weary of wondering how long the
tambourine-players would hold out, when suddenly a young Arab next to me
changed the course of my meditations by administering two or three sharp
pokes with his elbow. Turning towards him to remonstrate, I noticed that his
features were deadly pale and convulsed, while his limbs were working as
though drawn by wires. Uttering two or three sharp yells, he at once bounded
into the clear space in the centre, and while the aged priest arranged his
bournous in some particular form, he began gesticulating and dancing like a
madman, flinging himself about the place until lie more than once extinguished
the lighted taper, and left us almost in darkness. Then suddenly approaching
the brazier, he would inhale the incense, taking in long breaths of it, but still
continuing his capers and gesticulations until foam and saliva poured from his
mouth. The old priest?whose long silver beard reached down nearly to his
feet?now approached the dancer, holding by a long handle a large piece of
red-hot iron, which he offered to him; but he refused it with horror. The hot
iron was therefore returned to the fire, the tambourines were beat more loudly
and furiously, more incense was thrown on the brazier, and the females in the
gallery made their short, sharp squeaks more audible than ever. The perspi-
ration stood thick on the devotee's forehead as he continued his insane
practice, and the foam flowed down his head as the priest again approached
him with the iron glowing red in his hands. This time, though with motions
and groans of horror and repugnance, the man took it in his left hand, several
times passing his right hand over the face of the red-hot metal. He really
looked a shocking sight as he stood there burning himself, his long hair
hanging down his shoulders, his eyes starting from their sockets, the loam
trickling from either side of his mouth, and the most horrible and guttural
sounds proceeding from his heaving chest.
The old priest stood watching him, as, with a wild yell, the poor devotee
took the burning iron between his teeth, and holding it firmly agitated his lips
against the scorching metal. Quitting his hold of the handle which supported
r
THE AISSAOUA. xli
it, he sustained the whole simply by the grip of his teeth, and thus holding the
red-hot mass lie walked across the floor to the priest, who took hold of the
handle and relieved him from the burthen. As he walked, the sickly odour of
burning flesh overpowered even that of the subtle incense, and yet no trace of
the fire was to be noticed on his hands or lips. All at once he threw himself
on all-fours, and furiously howling and growling, like a wild beast, made insane
dashes and snaps at the spectators, uttering the most horrible noises. I could
see, as he snapped at me, that the man's eyes were open, but they looked dead
and inanimate; and the priest now placed in the hand of an old Arab sitting
next me the broad, thick leaf of a cactus covered with its long dangerous
spikes. The old Arab had a young child on one arm, who seemed a little?but
only a little?alarmed at the sight before it, while with the other he held out
the cactus towards the human form which was howling, barking, and growling
on all-fours.
" Approaching him, the devotee rubbed his thin swarthy cheeks against the
long spikes, and then, with continued quarrelsome growls, and short sharp
snaps, he tore the cactus to pieces, bit by bit, eating it like a wild beast. The
prickles of this cactus are long, sharp, and irritating. If one enters the flesh,
it rankles there for days, and yet this man ate it without any apparent pre-
caution. Spikes and leaf alike disappeared, were well masticated and swal-
lowed, without seeming to harm him in the least. I was so close to the ope-
rator, that the milky juice mixed with the foam spirted over me as he rolled the
cactus in his mouth, growling and groaning the while; and reaching out my
, hand, I touched the leaf, when the sting I received from its long sharp prickles
fully convinced me of its perfect authenticity.
" The devotee next proceeded to singe his hands and arms with the candle,
and taking some pieces of live charcoal from the brazier, he placed them in his
mouth, and walked round the room blowing sparks all about him. All this he
did with the most perfect impunity, as far as I could see, and I was close to
him the whole time.
The music continued all through these performances, sometimes with great
violence, at others more softly cadenced, the smoking incense streamed up
towards the roof, and the sharp squeaking of the women never quite ceased;
but eventually nature became exhausted, and the poor fellow suddenly fell back
on the ground, as though he had been shot, after a loader howl and a higher
leap than usual.
" Turning him on his face, the priest kneaded the patient's back with his
ieet, which process seemed at once to revive him; for a few seconds later he
stepped past me, a little out of breath, it is true, but otherwise none the
worse for his late exertions." (Pp. 179?185.)
Other and even more formidable doings followed; but we pass on
to M. Houdin's account. He quotes the following from Colonel
Neveu's work on " The Religious Orders among the Mussulmen of
Algeria,"?M. Houdin being present at the scene described:?
ll
" ' The A'issaoua entered, formed a circle in the court-yard, and soon began
> their chants. These were at first slow and solemn chants, that lasted a long
time; then came the praises of Sidi-Muhammad-Ben-A'issa, founder of the
order; after which the Brethren and the Mokaddem, taking up cymbals and
tambourines, gradually increased the speed of the chanting.
" ? After about two'hours, the songs had become wild cries, and the gestures
of the Brethren had followed the same impulse. Suddenly some of them rose
and formed a line, dancing, and pronouncing as gutturally as they could, and
with all the vigour of their energetic lungs, the sacred name of Allah. This
xlii
THE AISSAOUA.
word, issuing from the mouths of the Aissaoua, seemed rather a savage growl
than an invocation addressed to the Supreme Being. Soon the noise increased,
the most extravagant gestures began, while turbans fell off and exposed their
shorn heads, which look like those of vultures; the long folds of their red
sashes became unfastened, embarrassing their movements, and increasing the
disorder.
" ' Then the Aissaoua moved about on their hands and knees, imitating the
movements of wild animals. They seemed to be acting under the influence of
some muscular force, and they forgot they were men.
"' When the excitement had readied its height, and the perspiration was ^
running down their bodies, the Aissaoua began their juggling. They called
the Mokaddem their father, and asked him for food; he gave to some, pieces
of glasses, which they champed between their teeth; he placcd nails in the
mouths of others, but instead of swallowing them, they carefully hid their
heads in the folds of the Mokaddem's burnous, in order not to let the audience
see them remove them. Some devoured thorns and thistles; others passed
their tongues over a red-hot iron and took it in their hands without burn-
ing themselves. One man struck his left arm with his right hand : the flesh
appeared to open, and the blood poured forth abundantly; then he passed his
hand over his arm, the wound closed, and the blood disappeared. Another
leaped on to the edge of a sabre held by two men, and did not cut his feet;
while others produced from small leathern sacks scorpions and serpents, which
they boldly placed in their mouths.'" (Vol. ii. p. 211?213.)
Upon the so-called miracles described, M. Houdin lias the following-
remarks :?
>
" The principal miracles are as follow :?
" 1. Running a dagger into the cheek.
" 2. Eating the leaves of the prickly pear.
" 3. Laying the stomach on the edge of a sabre.
"4. Playing with serpents.
" 5, Striking the arm, causing the blood to flow, and stopping it instan-
taneously.
"6. Eating pounded glass.
" 7. Swallowing pebbles, bottle-heels, &c.
" 8. Walking on red-hot iron, or passing the tongue over a white-hot plate
of iron.
"Let us begin with the most simple trick, that of thrusting a dagger
into the cheek.
" The Arab who performed this trick turned his back on me; hence I could
get very near him and watch his movements. He placed against his cheek the
point of a dagger, which was round and blunt as that of a paper-knife. The
flesh, instead of being pierced, went in for about two inches between the
molars, which were kept apart, exactly as a cake of india-rubber would do.
" This trick is best performed by thin and aged persons, because the flesh
of their cheeks is peculiarly elastic. Now, the Aissaoua fulfilled these con-
ditions in every respect.
" The Arab who ate the prickly pear leaves gave us no opportunity of in-
specting them, and I am inclined to believe that the leaves had been prepared
so as to do him no injury, otherwise he would not have neglected this impor-
tant point, which would have doubled the merit of the miracle. But even had
he shown them to us, this man went through so many unnecessary manoeuvres,
that lie could very easily have changed them for harmless leaves. In that case
it would be a fifteenth-rate trick of conjuring.
" In the following experiment, two Arabs held a sabre, one by the hilt, the
THE AISSAOUA. xliii
other by the point; a third then came forward, and after raising his clothes so
as to leave the abdomen quite bare, laid himself flat on the edge of the blade
while a fourth mounted on his back, and seemed to press the whole weight of
his body on him.
" 1 his trick may be very easily explained.
"Nothing proves to the audience that the sabre is really sharpened, or that
the edge is more cutting than the back, although the Arab who holds it by the
point is careful to wrap it up in a handkerchief; in this imitating tlie jugglers
who pretend they have cut their finger with one of the daggers they use in
their tricks.
Besides, in performing this trick, the invulnerable turned his back on the
audience. lie knew the advantage to be derived from this circumstance;
hence, at the moment when about to lay himself on the sabre, he very adroitly
pulled back over his stomach that portion of his clothing he had raised.
Lastly, when the fourth actor mounted on his back, he rested his hands on the
shoulders of the Arabs who held the sabre. The latter apparently maintained
his balancc, but, in reality, they supported the whole weight of his body.
Hence, the only requirement for this trick is to have the stomach more or less
pressed in, and I will explain presently that this can be effected without any
injury or danger.
" As for the Aissaoua who place their hands in a bag filled with serpents, and
play with those reptiles, I will rely on Colonel de Neveu's judgment. This is
what he says in his work already quoted:?
"'We often pushed our incredulity and curiosity so far as to order the
Aissaoua to come to our house with their menagerie. All the animals they
stated to us were vipers (lifd), were only innocent lizards (hanech), and when we
offered to put our hand in the bag holding their reptiles, they hastily retired,
convinced that we were not duped by their tricks.'
"I will add that these serpents, even had they been of a dangerous
character, could have had their teeth pulled out, so as to be harmless. In
support of this assertion, I noticed that these reptiles left no wound where
they bit.
" I did not see the trick performed of striking the arm and making the blood
issue; but it seems to me that a small sponge filled with ruddle and concealed in
the striking hand, would be enough to accomplish the prodigy. On wiping
the arm, the wound is necessarily cured.
" When I was a boy, I often made wine come out of a knife or of my finger,
by pressing a small sponge full of the liquor which I concealed in my hand.
" I have often seen men champ wine-glasses between their teeth, and not
hurt themselves; but not one of them swallowed the fragments. Hence, it
was difficult for me to explain this trick of the Aissaoua, till, by the assistance
offered me by a physician, I found in the Dictionnaire des Sciences Meclicales
for 1810, No. 1143, a paper written by Dr. Lesauvage on the liarmlessness of
powdered glass." Yol. ii. p. 251?255.
M. Houdin tried the experiment upon himself without any evil
results. The trick of swallowing bottle-heels and pebbles, was per-
formed, M. Houdin believes, by sleight-of-hand under the burnous,
but at the same time he mentions a celebrated sabre, nail, and pebble
swallower of France. The walking over hot-iron is not extraordinary.
The heel is quickly glided along the iron, " but the lower-class Arabs,
who all walk with naked feet, have the lower parb of the foot as hard
as a horse's hoof, hence this horny part burns without occasioning
the slightest pain" (vol. ii. p. 262). Moreover, may not the Aissaoua
xliv
BOISMONT ON HALLUCINATIONS.
have discovered, M. Houdin asks, certain precautions known to more
than one European juggler who paced over hot iron ?
M. Houdin's remarks will furnish useful hints to travellers in ob-
serving religious jugglers ; and the whole of the chapter in which the
remarks are contained is of considerable interest.
M. Houdin's "Memoirs" throughout form a most curious, interest-
ing, and instructive work, and one that we are most glad to see in an
English guise; the original having been excellently rendered by Mr.
Wraxall.
"We have noted M. Houdin's work in reference to its bearing upon
errors arising from the limited powers of the senses and understand-
ing ; we have now to notice briefly a very different style of work,
which treats of those more formidable errors which arise out of
the perverted senses and brain. "VVe refer to a translation of Brierre
de Boismont's imoprtant work on "Hallucinations," published by Mr.
Eenshaw.* The original work, when it first appeared, was reviewed
at length in this journal, and its merits are too universally acknow-
ledged to need additional comment. Mr. Hulme's translation is most
admirable, and although in several instances the original has been
abridged, in order to render the work better adapted for circulating
beyond the narrow circle of professional readers, the translation has
the advantage of being published with the author's consent, and of
containing the corrections and additions prepared by him for a Third
Edition of the original work. Other advantages of Mr. Renshaw's
publication are, that it is of handy size and capital typography?
irresistible settings to an acknowledged standard work.
Apropos of hallucinations, a patient?a feeble, sensitive lady, suffer-
ing from a uterine affection?writes to us as follows, concerning the
influence of three or four sixteenth of-a-grain doses of hydrochlorate of
morphia.?" After taking a few doses of morphia, I felt a sensation of
extreme quiet and wish for repose, and on closing my eyes, visions, if I
may so call them, were constantly before me, and as constantly changing
in their aspect; scenes from foreign lands?lovely landscapes, with tall,
magnificent trees, covered with drooping foliage, which was blown
gently against me as I walked along. Then in an instant I was in a
besieged city filled with armed men. I was carrying an infant, which
was snatched from me by a soldier and killed upon the spot. A Turk
was standing by with a scimitar by his side, which I seized, and
attacking the man who had killed the child, I fought most furiously
* " On Hallucinations : History and Explanation of Apparitions, Visions,
Dreams, Ecstasy, Magnetism, and Somnambulism." By A. Brierre de Boismont,
M.D. Translated from the French by Robert P. Hulme, F.L.S. H. Renshaw.
1869.
1
| HALLUCINATIONS FROM MORPHIA. xlv
with him and killed liim. Then I was surrounded, made prisoner,
carried before a judge, and accused of the deed ; but I pleaded my own
cause with such a burst of eloquence (which, by the way, I am quite
incapable of in my right mind), that judge, jury, and hearers acquitted
me at once. Again, I was in an Eastern city, visiting an Oriental
lady, who entertained me most charmingly. We sat together on rich
ottomans, and were regaled with coffee and confectionary; then came
soft sounds of music at a distance, while fountains were playing and
birds singing, and dancing-girls danced before us, every movement
being accompanied with the tinkling of silver bells attached to their
feet. But all this suddenly changed, and I was entertaining the
Oriental lady in my own house ; and in order to please her delicate
taste, I had everything prepared, as nearly as possible, after the fashion
with which she had so enchanted me. She, however, to my no small
surprise, asked for wine; and took not one, two, or three glasses, but
drank freely, until at last I became terrified that she would have to be
carried away intoxicated. While considering what course I had better
adopt, several English officers came in, and she at once asked them to
^ drink with her; which so shocked my sense of propriety that the
scene changed, and I was in darkness.
" Then I felt that I was formed of granite and immoveable. Suddenly
a change came again over me, and [ found that I consisted of delicate
and fragile basket-work. Then I became a danseuse, delighting an
audience and myself by movements which seemed barely to touch the
earth. Presently beautiful sights came before me, treasures from the
depths of the sea; gems of the brightest hues ; gorgeous shells ; coral
of the richest colours, sparkling with drops of water, and hung with
lovely seaweed. My eager glances could not take in half the beautiful
objects that passed before me during the incessant changes the visions
underwent. Now I was gazing upon antique brooches and rings from
buried cities; now upon a series of ancient Egyptian vases ; now upon
* sculptured wood-work, blackened by time; and lastly, I was buried
amidst forests of tall trees such as I had read of, but never seen.
" The sights that pleased me most I had power, to a certain extent,
to prolong, and those that displeased me I could occasionally set aside,
and I awoke myself to full consciousness once or twice while under the
influence of the morphia by an angry exclamation that I would not
-? have it. I did not once lose my personal identity."
This lady almost invariably suffers more or less from hallucinations
of the foregoing character, if it becomes necessary to administer to her
an opiate; and on analysing her visions, she can generally refer the
principal portions of them, notwithstanding their confusion and dis-
tortion, to works that she has recently read.
xlvi
A PRESENTIMENT.
M. Boismont has a notion that there is more in certain of the so-
called presentiments than is commonly dreamt of. We may quote the
following from the Athenceum, May 21, 1859.
"Kilmacud Manor, Dublin.
"I find the following curious paragraph among a number of newspaper
cuttings which I made a year or two ago:?CA letter, written by Humboldt,
was lately read in one of the Prussian law courts. It excited some sensation
from its containing the declaration that "My death will take place in 1859,"
and that it would be better to postpone a certain publication of his work till ;
then.'?The manner in which Humboldt's presentiment has been verified is, to
say the least, a very remarkable coincidence.
"William John Fitzpatkicic" <
Pity that the truth of the declaration having been made was not
verified before the grand old man's death !
