Sussex Lunatic Asylum
======================

HOW THE INMATES WILL BE LODGED, FED, CLOTHED, EMPLOYED, AND AMUSED.
During the two years that this structure has been in course of erection, we
have taken occasion to give Brighton people?and it must be remembered
that our town alone contributes one-fifth to the cost of it?an idea both of its
character and extent. Our readers know that it stands on a farm of 120
acres, in the parish of Wivelsfield, at the southern extremity of Hayward's
Heath, and about a mile from the station. They know it is a building in
what we suppose must be called the Italian style, to which a degree of novelty
is imparted by the use of parti-coloured bricks, conveying the idea of simple-
chromatic decoration. They are aware, also, that the frontage is 850 feet in
extent; that the structure consists of a centre-building and two wings; and
that there is, in addition, a detached church, which rumour speaks of, and
without exaggeration, as the prettiest in the county. This and much more
having already been explained, we do not at present intend to detain the
reader with that kind of information which is derived from plans and sections
and architectural " viewsbut rather to convey an idea or two of the accom-
modation which the inmates of this asylum are to receive?how, in fact, they
will be housed, fed, clothed, taught, amused, and, in many cases, let us hope,
cured.
Lunatic accommodation in the olden times was a simple matter enough.
Such and such strength of dungeon, so much length of chain, such and such
allowance of straw, of bread and of water; and there was an end of it. If the
poor wretch raged, they tortured him ; if he pined, he might, if it pleased him,
pine to death. The asylum was like that place of horror over the door of
which the Italian poet wrote that those who entered were to abandon even
Hope. How all this has changed in our day, we need hardly say. The expe-
riment first tried at Hanwell, of discipline without restraint, has produced
results alike cheering and overwhelming. Half the horror of the most
horrible of human calamities has passed away since it no longer exposes its
victim to the brutality of ignorance, but renders him an object of generous
and enlightened solicitude. And it is to this change in the aspect of the
question that we owe our Sussex Asylum, and all the arrangements and pro-
visions we are about to describe.
On visiting this building the other day, our first desire was to see the ordi-
nary living and sleeping rooms of the inmates. This will probably be the first
object of curiosity with our readers also. Supposing that to be the case, and
that they were being shown over by Mr. Mortlock, the intelligent superin-
tendent, he would probably say to them as to us?" You will form a rough
idea of the building by remembering that the central portion is chiefly devoted
to the various offices connected with the institution; the whole of the west
wing is devoted to the females ; and the whole of the east wing is devoted to
the males. We will proceed, first, to the west wing." ...
With this we enter a suite of rooms, one room opening into another, ana
the suite extending the entire length of that wing on the ground-floor. These
are the day-rooms for the patients. Here they will sit and read, or sew, and
will take their meals?for 110 dining-liall has been provided, it being iound
better thai the patients should dine in their own wards?not in solitude, but
in families of greater or less magnitude, according to the stage, condition, or
peculiarities of the malady of each. These rooms are all roomy and cheerful;
and all command a wide country view, not through gratings or loopholes, but
from glazed windows, constructed so that the safety of the inmate is secured
without the idea of'confinement being conveyed. _ The rooms are simply but
comfortably furnished, each article of furniture being grained in imitation of
oak. What took us more by surprise than any other circumstance was, that
L
464
SUSSEX LUNATIC ASYLUM.
these rooms, and, indeed, those throughout the building, are heated, not by
any arrangement of steam or hot air, lout by means of open grates similar to
those in ordinary drawing-rooms. " But," -\ve exclaimed, seeing these open
grates, and chests of coals beside them ready for use, " can you trust the
patients with fire ? Is it safe ?" " It is considered perfectly safe," was the
reply; " and is both more healthful and more cheerful than auy system of
heating by means of pipes."
Out of these wards or day-rooms, open bed-rooms, to be used by the patients.
These are of two kinds: there are single rooms for one inmate each, and dor-
mitories which will accommodate six or eight. Both kinds are light and airy;
the fittings arc similar; but as the single rooms are intended for the more
violent or dangerous patients, they are not quite so amply furnished. In a
single room there is a birch-wood bedstead with sacking-bottom, hair mattress,
and the usual bedding, &c. The floor is bare ; but beside the bed lies a strip
of carpet. The windows of these rooms can be secured by shutters on the in-
side. The dormitories, or larger rooms, have 110 shutters, and are in every
respect like ordinary bed-rooms. The inmates of these rooms are furnished
with washstands for their use, though there is a lavatory attached to each
ward for general purposes, fitted in the most complete manner. It has rows
of basins, with hot and cold water taps to each; a bath, either hot or cold; a
shower-bath?in fact, every means has been adopted to secure the perfect
cleanliness of the inmates. We should have mentioned that between each
sleeping-room is a nurse's room, with a window on either side, overlooking the
patients; obviously a very necessary precaution. In answer to a question, we
were informed that there are two or three attendants on these wards ; but that
the bulk of the work necessarily arising out of the daily life of so many persons
will be chiefly performed by the inmates. Under proper guidance, they are quite
capable of light work, and it is better that they should be employed than re-
main in listless idleness.
The wards we have inspected will be occupied by those properly designated
" patients;" but a large number will come under the category of " con-
valescents," and though unable to be sent abroad, or, at least, likely to benefit
by remaining in the Asylum, they are quite capable of following the occupa-
tions to which they have been accustomed, or others which they may be taught.
Tor the use of this class, the upper story of this wing is devoted to what is
called a sleeping-gallery, but which is, in fact, a corridor, flanked with bed
rooms like those on the first floor. These rooms, for the most part, contain
eight beds. Among the most necessary occupations in the building will be
those connected with the laundry, and in these the convalescent among the
female inmates will be largely engaged. And the laundry arrangements (at the
extremity of the wing) are very perfect. There are two iarge apartments filled
with washing apparatus?with troughs, into which water, hot or cold, is ad-
mitted by taps, with boiling coppers, &c. In one of the wash-houses a
" wringing-machine" has also been provided?a most ingenious contrivance, by
which some of the hardest work in connection with the washing is saved. The
linen is put wet into a cylindrical sieve, the sides of which are formed of wire,
and by means of a handle and wheel this cylinder is made to revolve so rapidly
that all the moisture from the linen is, in fact, whirled off. "When wrung, the
clothes are taken into a spacious drying-yard, fitted with copper-wires in place
of clothes'-lines. There are also three hot closets, heated by means of pipes,
for drying and airing clothes; a sorting-closet; in fact, every necessary for
carrying on this branch of domestic economy in the most expeditious and
satisfactory manner.
Thus much for the western wing, devoted to the female inmates. The cast
wing, for the men, is similar in its fittings in all respects, until you reach the
extremity, and there, in place of the laundry, you find provision made for pur-
suits adapted to the male convalescent patients. There is the tailors' shop,
SUSSEX LUNATIC ASYLUM. 465
(witli its indispensable board), the shoemakers' shop, the upholsterers' shop,
the carpenters' shop, a bakehouse with its oven, a brewhouse, stables, and so
forth. Thus many, if not all, the necessities of the Asylum will be supplied
from lunatic labour. This also will extend beyond the interior. Already there
are eleven acres of land under cultivation as a kitchen-garden, and in time the
rest of the 120 acres on which the Asylum stands will constitute a farm in
which every branch of labour will be performed by the insane, of course under
proper training and surveillance. It will be a curious, yet a gratifying sight?
all these farming operations progressing quietly .and in perfect order, in the
hands of those who but a few years since were deemed incapable of anything
but violence and destruction !
In the little world of the Asylum, however?and a strange, fantastical little
world enough it will be?labour must have its relief. There must be repose.
There must be amusement. There must be devotion. And for each of these
exigencies provision has been made.
For repose, as well as exercise, pleasant-terraced grounds have been pro-
vided for the use of the inmates. These spread out before the southern front
of the building, and are ingeniously formed, so that, while really surrounded by
a high wall, they do not appear to be enclosed. The grass .plat rises in ter-
races, one above the other, and each terrace is raised above the wall, and com-
mands a prospect, taking in the whole range of the South Downs from Lewes
to the Dyke, a pleasant wooded country, dotted here and there with well-
known villages.
These airing-grounds, as they are called,?and we may observe that there is
one for each sex?will conduce both to repose of mind and invigoration of
body. But it is found that the insane require something more. They need
society and amusement; and with this view a .Recreation Hall has been erected
in the centre of the building, which will be used for lectures, music, dancing,
and such modes of entertainment as are adopted in all the modern Asylums.
The Hall is spacious, capablc of holding some 300 persons, and presents
a cheerful and pleasing appearance; the only drawback being that the roof,
which is supported by pillars, is too low. In this Hall both sexes will mingle
in the dance, or listening to music, or witnessing entertainments, and perhaps
on the occasions of these reunions the poor unfortunates will be seen under the
most favourable circumstances. Accounts have so often been given of the
soirees at St. Luke's, Hanwell, and other large Asylums, that this is a phase of
lunatic life with which the public are now quite familiar.
Less has been written upon the lunatic at church ; but that also is a strange
as well as a solemn spectacle. In this Asylum unusual attention has been paid
to this matter, and the consequence is, that the Asylum Church is, as we have
said, the most beautiful for its size of any in the county. And next to its
beauty, one is struck bythe factof the simple means by which it has been obtained.
The difference between a beautiful and an ugly structure is often put upou the
ground of difference of cost. There is no greater fallacy.^ It is to taste rather
than to money that we owe everything in architecture as in the rest of the arts.
Now, the taste evinced in this matter by the architect (Mr. id. L. Kendall, of
Brighton, we believe), is exquisite, and the result is, that we have a gem with-
out extravagant outlay. The material of the church is brick; but it is of
various colours, and those colours are artistically worked up. 1 he architecture
is simple; but the proportions are such as to please the eye. _ So, again, in
regard to ornamentation and fittings?all is simple, but in keeping. ^ As points
that arrested our attention, we may note the open loot, stained in imitation of
ancient oak and satin wood; the chancel, with the transparent roof ot purple
glass, through which stars appear to be shining. The painted windows, inex-
pensive, but serving to give a subdued "religious light," mwhich the homely-
sculptured stone is?as effective as marble would, be under other circumstances.
The chief specimen of sculpture, by the way, is the altar-piece, representing
I
L
466
CASE OF MR. RUCK.
Christ among; the Disciples, with the legend, " And He was known to them
by the breaking of bread." Other points might be specified; but we must
only add that this church will accommodate about 300, and that the seats are
open, in a manner precisely similar to those of most modem Gothic churches.
One side of the sacred edifice will be devoted to the males, the other to the
females, but they are not even separated by a central aisle.
Those curious as to the economy of the Asylum may ask?" How do the
inmates dress ?" Well, there is no uniform dress, as, in fact, the different
classes of patients require different clothing; but the prevailing colours for
garments are blue and grey, and the style is that ordinarily adopted by persons
m the humbler walks of life.
" And as to culinary utensils, and so forth ?"
They are of the customary description. We saw a large store of crockery,
all of it white, with the Asylum stamp on it, and comprising plates, dishes,
jugs, &c. Among other articles which arrested our attention were some dozens
of earthenware spittoons. "You permit smoking in the Asylum?" we re-
marked. "Yes," was the reply, "many of the inmates of these establishments
find great relief in the pipe." " You do not regard it as one of the predis-
posing causes of that state of mind which sends them here ?" " No ; or after
what I have seen of madness I would never touch a pipe again." From the
extensive beer-cellar disclosed to us, we gathered that the poor inmate is not
denied the simple luxury of a glass of beer either. ?
We have almost exceeded the due length of our article ; and have now left
unnoticed various points, such as the lighting of the building from gas manu-
factured on the grounds; the water supply, by means of a well, water-towers,
&c.; the extensive kitchen and storage arrangements necessary for the supply
of the daily wants of 450 persons; the medical department, and so forth. We
should also allude to the Infirmaries. These are two in number, one at either
extremity of the building, and are furnished with every care for the comfort of
those sick in body as well as in mind. While inspecting the male infirmary,
we ventured to ask, upon an idea which had suddenly struck us?" In all that
we have seen there is no provision for restraint: now, however perfect your
system, you must sometimes have violent patients whose paroxysms it is im-
possible to restrain.- How do you act?" Our guide answered the question
fairly and promptly, by leading us into a room similar to the ordinary bed-
rooms. " This," said he, " will be padded: the walls, to a height of eiglit feet,
and the floor will be covered, with a sort of mattress padding, against which
the patient may even dash his head without sustaining any injury." There
will be no furniture here. A second room of a like kind was shown us, and we
also saw two rooms in which there were wooden " cribs" instead of bedsteads,
designed for epileptic patients, who are apt to be seized with paroxysms in the
night.
With an acknowledgment of the courtesy with which we were received and
shown over the Asylum, we must conclude this article ; first, however, adding,
for the public information, the names of the heads of the staff already appointed
for the management of the Asylum. They are as follows:?
Medical Superintendent?Dr. Robertson. Steward and Clerk?Mr. Mort-
lock. Assistant-Surgeon?Mr. Guynne. Housekeeper?Mrs. Stroude.?
(Brighton Herald, June 4.)
