The Human Mind in its relations with the Brain and Nervous System
===================================================================

134
REVIEWS.
.By Daniel Noble, M.JD. London, 1858.
A good handy-book on physiological psychology would be a boon to
the public, but although the work now lying before us might in bulk,
style, and in some respects intention, be considered as a handy-book,
it could scarcely be denominated good; for the main object of the
author is to set forth certain views on mental physiology which he
entertains, but which have not met with general acceptation among
physiologists.
Dr. Noble's special opinions on mental physiology are well known
among English physiologists, and in a previous number of this
Journal (No. XXVIII.) we had occasion to notice their merits as
suggestive of inquiry; but now that these opinions are republished in
a more elaborate guise, it behoves us rather to examine their demerits,
more particularly as the present work is addressed to the amateur and
general student as well as to the physiologist and psychologist.
We object to the views which Dr. Noble takes of the position of
psychology in scientific research. He writes:?
" In order that a system of analytical psychology should be attained, stand-
ing in true scientific relation with our knowledge of the brain, we ought to be
able to appreciate the varying phases of consciousness, in watching their
outward manifestation, with some of that readiness and accuracy wherewith
we can estimate physical conditions. Were this within our power, considerable
advances might be made towards a correct and detailed psychology, duly
associated with our information concerning the structures within the head.
But the inevitable absence of objective standards by which to measure the
value of mental facts, materially reduces their comparability among themselves,
and with other facts; on this account psychical phenomena do not admit of
any natural or perfect system of classification, neither do they allow themselves
to be linked-on to physical facts with anything like philosophical exactitude.
Yet, of course, scientific induction demands very distinct recognition of the
comparable worth of all the circumstances which lead to it."?(pp. 3, 4.)
In this paragraph neither the actual nor the probable position of
psychology is, we believe, correctly stated. Recondite and difficult as
researches into the nature of psychical phenomena may be, still it
does not follow that they will ever stand without the pale of precise
and systematic knowledge. Eecent progress in psychological research
has been such as to warrant the assertion that the conditions upon
which it must be followed are becoming clearly known. This is a
fundamental condition of scientific research, without which no positive
and satisfactory advance can be made. " Psychology holds," as
Morell observes, " its proper place in the logical co-ordination of the
sciences at large, and will only be perfected when all the under-lying
data shall have been duly explored and comprehended." Moreover,
REVIEWS. 135
notwithstanding Dr. Noble's opinion that psychical phenomena do not
allow themselves to be linked on to physical facts with anything like
philosophical exactitude, yet he subsequently proceeds to give a sum-
mary of what he deems to be "the probable, and the more than
probable, physiology of the nervous system and the various portions of
the encephalon, pointing out the correspondence in some detail between
it and the more prominent facts of psychology."?(p. 34.)
Again, Dr. Noble writes:?
"In a very early stage of physiological inquiry, the seat of the Soul, or
Conscious Principle, was a theme of elaborate and ingenious hypothesis. Hippo-
crates and Hierophylus place it in the fibres of the brain; Dernocritus, in the
region of the temples ; Strabo, in the space between the eyebrows ; Epicurus
allocated it in the breast; Diogenes, in the left ventricle of the heart; the Stoics,
with Chrysippus, in the whole heart; Empedoclcs placed it in the blood; Plato
and Aristotle, with the more elevated schools of philosophy, connected the soul
with the whole body; and Galen suggested that each part of the body had its
particular soul. In later times, however, conclusions nave been attained with
regard to the functions of the Encephalon?the structures within the head?
which leave no reasonable doubt that the conscious principle has its special
seat in that region; conclusions abundantly sustained by evidence from all
sources."?(pp. 5, 6.)
Here the soul is confounded with a mode of its manifestation,
consciousness: a weighty error, we conceive, in psychology.
Common sensation, Dr. Noble defines to be " a sense consciousness
not limited to any particular organ, but referring itself more or less to
the whole frame This sense resides principally in the skin ; it
is especially acute at the mucous orifices; it exists, however, in the
interior tissues, but in a degree less intense. It is best illustrated by
the simple notion of existence."?(p. 48.) It would seem that under
the designation of common sensation, Dr. Noble includes the special
sense of touch, and the common sensibility of some authors and the
caencestliesis of others; but of this latter form of sensibility more here-
after. Dr. Noble conceives that it is through common sensation that
we appreciate the state of the muscles, " experience the muscular
sense.'''' He then proceeds :?
" This fifth sense (common sensation) is, presumably, awakened through the
vesicular extremities?the peripheral expansion?of fibrous filaments. Whether
the grey substance and white fibres originating and conducting common sensa-
tion be the same as those which subserve the spinal reflex function^ is
uncertain. But this much may be admitted, the communicated impression
ascends along the posterior columns of the spinal cord, and attaining gray
vesicular centres, produces a consciousness of common sensation.
"Physiologists are not agreed as to the identity of these ganglionic structures ;
tliev may be expected, however, like the other sensory ganglia, to be somewhere
at the base of the encephalon; and I am, myself, disposed to think that the
vesicular nuclei within the lateral lobes of the cerebellum?the corpora dentata
?constitute the encephalic site of this sense. Many years ago, Foville assigned
this function to the aggregate cerebellum ; and others, with great plausibility,
have advocated this opinion. Dr. Carpenter, however, in his Human Physiology%
argues against it, on the ground that neitiier ablation of the organ by opera-
136 REVIEWS.
tion, nor the destruction of it by disease, have been found to involve tlie loss of
any sensorial capacity. But there may be considerable doubt as to whether, in
recorded cases of this kind, the ganglionic extremities of the upper and posterior
portion of the spinal cord?the cerebellic termination of the so-called restiform
bodies?were actually lost, even though the lobes and their cortical vesicular
investment should have disappeared. I doubt if the extension of disease or of
experimental excision to structures so closely contiguous to the medulla
oblongata as these corpora dentata, would be compatible with the maintenance
of functions essential to life; although the removal or destruction of the bulk
of the cerebellum, might suggest no such difficulty. Besides, it is notorious
that, in the case of animals, movements purely reflex will sometimes be mis-
taken for those indicative of common sensation. But, probably, the cases
already observed with respect to this point, are too few for any decisive
conclusion."?(pp. 49?51.)
*?&?. M. -V- X -V* ?V-
"7t- Zff -?v* -A* W -7?*
" The anatomical connexion which exists between the corpora dentata and
the posterior columns of the spinal cord, through the corpora restiformia,
favours the hypothesis which I have advanced; and various physiological and
pathological facts would appear to strengthen it. The experiments of Magendie
and Longet show that the slightest touch of the restiform bodies induces
violent pain. Hutin relates a case in which the sense of touch was so exalted,
that, upon the least contact, intolerable pain and restlessness ensued, with
corresponding muscular contractions, resembling those produced by an electric
discharge. The patient ultimately died in the most terrific convulsions, pros-
trate and exhausted. On examination after death, there was found, amongst
other changes, atrophy of the cerebellum. ' Its medullary centre, as compared
with that of another subject, was a third less in size in either hemisphere. The
white substance, which in the normal condition occupies the centre of the
corpus rhomboidale, had ceased to exist, so that the fimbriated margins of this
portion approached the centre, and only formed a small pyriform, very hard,
grayish brown body.'
" Mr. Robert Dunn, of London, a very acute and reflecting practitioner,
published a few years ago an interesting and instructive case of tubercle in
the brain, wherein there was noticed, amongst other phenomena, imperfect
paralysis of tlie right arm and leg, consisting in failure of common sensation.
The patient was a little girl about two years old. ' She could move her arm
about,' says Mr. Dunn, ' and could grasp anything firmly enough in her right
hand, when her eyes and attention icere directed to it; but if they were diverted
to something else, and the volitional power withdrawn, she would let the object
which she had been holding fall from lier hands, and without being conscious of the
factDescribing the post-mortem appearances, Mr. Dunn states, ' On making
an incision through the lateral lobes ol the cerebellum on the left side, I found
I had cut through a tubercular deposit, a little to the outer side of the median
line (the site of the corpus dentatum), in a state of softened degeneration.5 "
?(pp. 52?54.)
The experiments of Dr. E. Brown-Sequard seem to afford conclusive
evidence against the anatomical arguments of Dr. Noble in favour
of the corpora dentata of the cerebellum being the ganglionic centres
of common sensation. The former gentleman has satisfactorily
shown that the posterior columns of the spinal cord are not channels
by which sensitive impressions are transmitted to the encephalon.
Neither division, nor removal of a portion of the posterior columns is
followed by a diminution of sensibility, but, on the contrary, by a
marked increase of sensibility in the parts below the portion of the
columns incised or removed; and ablation of the restiform bodies is
REVIEWS. 137
followed by the same results, sensibility being in nowise diminished,
but conspicuously increased in the parts below. The conclusions at
which Dr. E. Brown-Sequard has arrived from experimental and patho-
logical research, respecting the relations of the posterior columns to
sensibility are as follows :?
" The posterior columns of the spinal cord are not, as it has been imagined,
a bundle of fibres, from the posterior roots of the spinal nerves going to the
encephalon.
" The restiform bodies are not a collection of fibres, chiefly from the sensitive
nerves of the various parts of the body, going up to the encephalon, and there-
fore the cerebellum is not the recipient, through the restiform bodies, of most
of the sensitive fibres of the trunk and limbs.
" Deep injuries to the posterior columns of the spinal cord are always fol-
lowed by a degree of hypersesthesia greater than after the laying bare of the
nervous centres, hypersesthesia which appears in all parts of the body behind
the place injured.
" All the parts of the encephalon which are situated in its posterior or supe-
rior side are like the posterior columns of the spinal cord in this respect?
that a marked degree of hypersesthesia always follows a transverse section
upon any of them. If a complete transverse section is made upon any part of
the restiform bodies, sensibility becomes very much increased m every part of
the trunk and limbs. Hypersesthesia is also, but at. a less degree, one of the
results of a transverse incision of the cerebellum, in the processus cerebelli ad
testes, and in the tubercula quadrigemina.
" The posterior columns of the spinal cord are much less sensitive than they
are said to be, and it even seems that the apparent sensibility depends upon
the fact, that when they are irritated, the posterior roots, which are sensitive,
are also more or less irritated.
"The restiform bodies seem to be deprived of sensibility to mechanical
excitation."?(Lancet, August lth} 1858, p. 137.)
Passing over the additional evidence, as well pathological as experi-
mental, which might be adduced to show that the centre of common
sensation, or the path of sensitive impressions to the sensorium can-
not be in the cerebellum, we would merely add Dr. E. Brown-Sequard's
remarks on the case related by Mr. Dunn, and quoted by Dr. Noble.
" The case," writes Dr. Brown-Sequard, referring more particularly to
the opinion expressed by Dr. Carpenter, that the cerebellum might be
the seat of the so-called muscular sense, " certainly seems to be a
valuable one ; but what can it prove, when we know that movements
have remained regular, and, consequently well guided, in many cases in
which tubercles, or other morbid products, or various alterations, have
existed at the same place where the deposit was found in Mr. Dunn's
case."?(Lancet, August 28th, 1858, p. 220.)
Dr. Noble appears to regard the Ccences thesis and Emotional Sensi-
lility as one and the same phenomenon :?
" There is yet a sensibility more elevated in the psychical scale than either
external sensation or the physical appetites ; I refer to that all-pervading sense
of substantive existence which German psychologists have named, in some of
its phases, Ccencesthesis ?general feeling, and sometimes self-feeling (Selbst-
Gefuhl). It connects itself, apparently, with the peripheral termination of
138 REVIEWS.
sentient nerves throughout the whole body, but particularly of those supply-
ing the thoracic and abdominal viscera.
"Emotional Sensibility, as in the whole of its modifications it may not be
inappropriately designated, is experienced in an especial manner about the
precordial region. Its local intensity, indeed, would seem to correspond very
much with the prevalence of the vascular system. Under appropriate in-
fluences, this sensibility, although more or less general, is always most acutely
experienced in the neighbourhod of the large vessels, and most of all about the
centre of the circulation; and hence we have the popular as well as poetic
localization of ' the feelings' in the heart. Yet emotional sensibility is not,
like _ external sensation, of a quasi-physical character; it certainly is not the
tactile sensibility of the vascular tubes, which may be affected by many causes
influencing the circulation, without there being any resultant effect upon the
' spirits'?another form of popular phraseology which sufficiently indicates, in
certain respects, the varying states of this so-called coensesthesis." (pp. 60, 61.)
We have already seen that in the term common sensation Dr. Noble
seems to include the coensesthesis properly so called. To make, how-
ever, the term coensesthesis equivalent to emotional sensibility must
have the effect of confusing or rendering valueless the signification of
a tolerably well understood word. By coensesthesis we have always
been accustomed to understand that modification of sensibility which
is usually referred to the ganglionic nervous system, and which is
familiarly spoken of as common feeling. But, as Feuchtersleben
remarks, the word feeling in this term only stands for sensation.
Moreover, the term self-feeling differs from the term common feeling
in signification, inasmuch as a psychical element is involved in the
former.
There is no reason to believe that the relation of the coensesthesis to
emotion differs from that of any other form of sensation; that is to say,
that the psychical relations of the coensesthesis are brought about in a
different fashion to those of other forms of sensation. This Dr. Noble
himself appears to admit, for. in his chapter on " The Emotions and
their Composition," he writes:?
"If, as I have supposed, the misnamed optic thalami and the corpora striata
constitute the ganglionic centres of the several kinds of emotional sensibility,
we must in these processes regard them as acted upon from above?from the
region of intelligence, the hemispherical ganglia?through the medium of
intercommunicating white fibres; just as in coensesthetic phenomena dependent
upon more physical states, the same centres are supposed to be acted upon from
below, through nervous filaments distributed to the organs and structures very
generally."?(p. 129.)
Elsewhere, howevei', throughout the book, Dr. Noble uses the term
coensesthesis as equivalent to emotional sensibility. Indeed, there is a
want of clearness in the mode in which he makes use of the last men-
tioned term, and also of the term common sensation.
It is not necessary to dwell upon the opinion that the optic thalamus
and corpora striata are the ganglionic centres of the so-called emotional
sensibility. This conclusion forms a sort of Qorollary to the opinion that
the seat of common sensation is in the corpora dentata oi the cere-
bellum, and it is rendered in a great measure untenable by the evidence
EEVIEWS.
139
in favour of that opinion altogether failing. In addition, the vague-
ness of Dr.Noble's use of the term "emotional sensibility" vitiates
the more specific arguments by which he seeks to determine its seat.
Dr. Noble's remarks on Dr. Carpenter's theory of Unconscious Cere-
bration are of considerable interest; but does the phrase which Dr.
Noble makes use of, " elaboration and perfecting thought without
thought'''' rightfully express Dr. Carpenter's idea; or the subsequent
phrase, "involuntary and inattentive thinking," satisfactorily account
for the phenomena sought to be explained in the theory of unconscious
cerebration ? Dr. Noble writes thus:?
" I conceivethat the particular facts, which seem to countenance the theory
of unconscious cerebration, will certainly admit of some more obvious and
simple interpretation than one which renders it necessary to regard nerve-
substance as elaborating and perfecting thought without thought; a process, it
appears to myself, which would not be altogether unlike the production of
melody by a notoriously unmusical instrument without the sensible manifesta-
tion of sounds.
_ "I would here propose to the reader's attention a fundamental considera-
tion bearing upon this question, which is, that the human consciousness, apart
from other analyses of which it is susceptible, is traceable under the two
forms of direct and reflex. In the former case ideas are in some sense
automatic, and for the most part transient; in the latter they are in their
origin to some extent voluntary ; or, springing up spontaneously, they become
designedly retained in the consciousness, and constitute the material, so to
speak, of an objective regard. In solitary musing, when there is no intentioned
application of mind to any subject, but rather a passive contentment in our
emotional states, consciousness is mostly of the direct character; and, under
such circumstances, thoughts and feelings evolve themselves involuntarily?
without any sort of effort or purpose. Prom time to time, however, these
mental products are arrested by a reflex act, and the mind voluntarily turns in
upon its own thoughts and feelings, thus contemplating not only that which it
knows and feels, but its very self at the same time as knowing and feeling.
"Now, although we ordinarily remember facts and mental processes, very
much in proportion as they have engaged the attention and a certain reflex
consideration at any time, this rule is by no means absolute. Ideas and feelings
once experienced may at any time revive in the consciousness, and yet not
always be recognised as having previously had existence; particularly when
at former periods they have never been subjected, by attention, to a reflex
mental process. Undoubtedly, under these latter circumstances, numberless
thoughts, and reasonings, and ideas of external occurrences, pass for ever from
the _ consciousness; but this is far from being always the case; a^ain and
again will they return, without any systematic identification. And are not
most of the phenomena cited by Dr. Carpenter, in support of his theory of
unconscious cerebration, explicable by these laws of spontaneous thought,
according to which our mental operations are frequently unremembered when
repeated. ' Of the thoughts which occur to us suddenly, and which seem
to us purely spontaneous, not a few are reminiscences, more or less faithful, of
what we have before read, heard, or thought; and consequently they proceed
from a preparatory fact which we do not remember' (Balmez).
"And yet this recovered thinking, when attentively regarded, will sometimes
seem to have the lucidity and perfection of a special revelation, and may well
seem as though it were the product of some unconscious operation of the
mental organ. Still, by careful consideration and examination, we shall at
140 REVIEWS.
times procure demonstration of tlie contrary. In composition we frequently
liit upon an idea, or a word, or the turn of a phrase: it strikes us as a happy
thought, and appears to be the spontaneous evolution of our own minds. We
afterwards discover, possibly by an accident, that we had heard or read it, yet
we had forgotten all about it, and had believed it to be our own. And can
we doubt that, in the same way, we sometimes recall our past thinking, deem-
ing it to be new, because we have no conscious remembrance of it ? Through
ignorance of these laws of thought, or inattention to them, unjust accusations
of plagiarism are sometimes made ; but ' a writer is not a plagiarist, although
he makes ideas his own which have originated with others. But it is often
true that man imagines he creates, when he only recollects.3
" In more particular illustration of these phenomena, it may be noted that a
book shall be read and soon laid aside ; the reader may then pass on to some-
thing else, and in a very brief period be unable to render any very clear
account of what he has read. Some months afterwards, when the subject of
the work becomes a topic of conversation, he is probably surprised that he has
derived considerable information from it. How do we explain facts of this
kind ? Why, in many of such cases, the person situated, as supposed in this
illustration, will discover, upon attentive self-examination, that m his passive
musings the contents of the book had been in his spontaneous thoughts; and
that, under such circumstances, an acquaintance with its subject had been
gradually, but still consciously, perfected. This mental process may probably
be with some accuracy designated involuntary and inattentive thinking, but not
with justice an unconscious action of tlie brain. I am decidedly of opinion,
myself, that the explanation now offered of these well-known phenomena will
more or less cover all the psychical processes that have been cited to establish a
doctrine of Unconscious Cerebration." (pp. 94?99.)
In a chapter on the " Physiological Potency of Ideas," Dr. Noble
illustrates his subject by several singularly interesting cases; and in a
subsequent chapter he demurs to pleasure and pain being made the
last analysis of emotion. He writes :?
" The inward feelings called forth, as emotion, by the agency of thought,
may, of course, be pleasurable or painful; but any account which represents
the ' Emotions' as merely the pleasure or the pain which accompanies certain
intellectual states, constitutes a very incomplete description. Yet the
late Mr. James Mill, the Rev. Sydney Smith, and many others, would seem to
reduce them to so_ very simple a character; although in practical and extended
discussion, other views become implied, in disregard of strict logical consistency.
Benevolence, considered in this way, becomes the pleasure experienced in con-
templation of the happiness of others, and the pain at witnessing their misery;
and fear, again, as the pain that ensues upon the expectation of calamity; an
analysis being thus attainable with all our emotional states ? passions,
affections, and sentiments alike.
"Now, I think it will be conceded, upon reflection, that we must admit the
specifically distinct character of our varying states of consciousness, as recog-
nised in Hope, Tear, Grief, Pride, Vanity, Love, and other such inward
experiences. ' Sentiment/ says Rosmini,' has various states, pleasurable and
painful, with gradation and variety of pleasure, and with gradation and
variety of pain.' And, somewhat more explicitly, in another place, he
observes :?' The sentiments correspond with orders^ of reflection ; so that there
are as many orders of feeling (pleasurable or painful) to be noted as there
are orders of reflection exercised by man, and the number of these is indefinite.'"
(pp. 130?132.)
In this opinion of Dr. Noble's many psychologists will concur.
REVIEWS. 141
We have confined our attention to the portions of this work in which
Dr. Noble's opinions are most prominent, and we have thought it our
duty to state in what respect we differ from him. This course was
more necessary in regard to a work which will probably find its way
largely into the hands of amateurs and general students, by whom Dr.
Noble's opinions will most likely be received, from the authority of his
name, as of higher value than he himself would desire ; for the learner
is not always apt in distinguishing hypothesis from ascertained fact,
even when, as in the case of Dr. Noble's hypotheses, he is duly
cautioned by the author.
Of the whole of Dr. Noble's work, it may be said that it is most in-
teresting to read, and that it contains no small amount of information
very agreeably set forth.
