Psychological Quarterly Retrospect
====================================

The practical psychologist will find much matter of interest in
several events which have happened during the past quarter. The
occurrence in the north of Ireland of an outbreak of religious enthu-
siasm, accompanied by certain physical and ecstatic phenomena, com-
mends itself particularly to his attention. In other pages we have
noticed briefly the nature of the physical phenomena which have been
manifested in many individuals who have been influenced by the Irish
"revival;" but as yet our information is too meagre to admit of a
full consideration of the psychological aspect of the movement. We
would, however, in the name of science, if from no other consideration,
protest against a notion that has been too thoughtlessly emitted, that
the whole phenomena of the revivals are to be regarded as the results
of a mental malady. If intensified religious emotion of itself is to be
regarded as a symptom of mental disease, why not intensified vicious
emotion ? Upon what ground is it assumed that highly excited
religious emotion will not follow the same physiological laws as
exaggerated emotion from any other source ? The broad facts of the
"revival" point to a heightened religious sentiment, increased by
sympathy, in the districts within which the " revival " prevails; and
among other and as occasional results of powerful and protracted, self-
contained emotion, we find certain familiar, hysterical, and ecstatic
phenomena, particularly among young people. These phenomena are
mainly explicable upon physiological grounds ; and except in so far as
they may be misinterpreted and misused by enthusiastic professors of
religion, they cannot be legitimately paraded as arguments either for
or against the purity of the " revival." The same remarks are applicable
also to the instances of insanity which are reported to have occurred
during the progress of the " revival." In these exceptional phenomena
we see the indications of emotion which has overleaped its normal
bounds, which in the present instance has in too many instances been
misunderstood, and which, if not checked, may lead to a plentiful crop
of visionaries, ecstatics, and so-called demoniacal possessions,* as in
* According to a letter of the Times' Correspondent at the seat of the revival,
written since the foregoing was penned, the movement has already produced a
plentiful crop of visionaries. He writes :?
. . There has been witnessed in this ultra-Protestant and enlightened com-
munity a series of visionaries, wonderful sleeps aud trances, deafness and dumb-
ness, spiritually induced, and, worst of all, cases of evident but clumsy imitation of
xlviii THE IRISH "REVIVAL."
several of the more ardent outbreaks of religious enthusiasm in
the past century. It is the tendency towards such a result which has
to be dreaded in Ireland, and which has to be guarded against, for
history and experience alike teach us how apt the healthy progress of
religious feeling is to be disturbed and perverted by those who see
visions and dream dreams ; how rapidly such characters multiply when
once developed ; and with how much greater avidity the multitude
will listen to the fantastic revelations of a morbidly excited intellect,
than to the more sober teachings of the Gospel. Already we learn
that, in some instances, the visions and trance-like attacks of hysterical
girls have been held up as manifestations of the Holy Spirit by one
party, and evident signs of the diabolical character of the whole move-
ment by another ! Surely, it might be said to the former advocates, a
more probable and natural explanation being open to them, that
Christianity needs no extraneous assistance of this kind; and to the
other, that it is best to keep Satan in the background as a primary
causative agent in an upheaving of feeling, which, if the accounts we
possess be true (and the statements that have been made to us in con-
firmation hardly permit a doubt respecting them), is certainly charac-
terized by more marvellous examples of moral improvement, in several
districts of Ireland, than have been witnessed in Europe for many years.
A clear recognition of the abnormal character of trance-like and
convulsive seizures, by the ministers conducting the revival, and firmly
setting the face against manifestations of exaggerated excitement,
would soon eliminate this accidental and perturbing influence from the
movement.
It is worthy of note that an outbreak of religious enthusiasm has
occurred in Scotland, Wales, and in the North of England, but with-
out ecstatic phenomena accompanying it.
So clearly does physiology teach us the influence of emotion upon
man, that we venture to make a prediction that before long we shall
witness a " revival" among the religious bodies in London. Those who
have watched the influence of the great religious services to the work-
ing classes, held in Westminster Abbey, St. Paul's, and the principal
music halls ; who have noted the effects produced by the sermons
preached by the many eminent ministers who have conducted the
services ; and who have marked the active exertions which have been
made, particularly of late, to push religion into the innermost recesses
the grossest kind of Romish imposture, pretended miracles; sacred names and
words were marked on the bodies of women, in the manner of the stigmata often
heard of in Catholic countries. The ' marks' said to have been made by the Spirit
have been exhibited for money, and some of the filthy alleys and courts of Belfast
have just reproduced scenes rivalling the imposture of the Cock-lane ghost."?
{Times, Sept. 23.)
A NASCENT "REVIVAL."
xlix
of the metropolis, cannot but be aware that a gradual heightening of
religious sentiment has been taking place?that the tension of religious
feeling has been increasing. When this culminates (and we have little
doubt that it will, and the culmination may be brought about very
quickly by the increased fervour produced by sympathy) we shall
witness in London what the religious world calls a " revival." Indeed
it would be a poor compliment to the zeal of those ministers of diffe-
rent denominations who for some time, in the special religious services
referred to, have been preaching with renewed energy no vapid system
of morality, but an active personal religion, to suppose otherwise. And
truly there is not such a surplusage of godliness in the world that we
can afford to quarrel with it if it comes upon us suddenly, in an old-
fashioned, well-authenticated manner?with the sound as of " a mighty
rushing wind."
Our clerical friends will doubtless think that we have taken a very
grovelling view of this subject, but we keep to our functions, and
seeking to remove a stumbling-block out of their way (over which we
fear some have already tripped, if not fallen), and not east one in it,
we would caution them in the event of any religious enthusiasm be-
coming manifest, or existing among their congregations, to check at
the very outset, as may be done by kindly firmness, all those abnormal
manifestations of emotion?all tendencies to trance, ecstasy, visions,
and convulsions?which are commonly characterized as hysterical, and
which would, in the majority of instances, prove in the end most in-
jurious to morality and religion.
From religious enthusiasm to murder and suicide may be a start-
ling, yet for our Retrospect it is a necessary step. We cannot, how-
ever, avoid a passing allusion to the curious and interesting study of
the intellectual status of the working-class, afforded by the present
" strike" among masons, carpenters, and others engaged in the build-
ing trades of the metropolis.
The quarter has been surcharged with records of murder, some of
which, from the confessions of the murderers, are of considerable in-
terest as illustrating the etiology of crime; and others derive their
chief value from the mode in which they bear upon the question of
criminal responsibility. The instance worthy of most attention in
the latter respect is one that was brought to trial before Mr. Baron
Bramwell, at the Winchester Summer Assizes. The following is the
Times' report of the case:?
Henry Benjamin Haynes was indicted for the wilful murder of Mary
M'Gowan, at Aldershott.
The prisoner, when called upon to plead, said he did not wish to plead, he
wished to be tried.
1 HOMICIDAL MANIA OR MURDER?
The judge told him he must plead "Guilty," or "Not Guilty."
The prisoner, after some time, pleaded " Not Guilty."
Mr. H. T. Cole was counsel for the prosecution; and Mr. Edwards defended
the prisoner.
It appeared that the prisoner was a private in the 9th Regiment of Foot,
stationed at Aldershott. On the 5th of March last, the prisoner and a com-
rade named Callender were confined to the barracks, but about 10 o'clock in
the evening they broke out of barracks, and went to a public-house called the
London Tavern, where women of low character resorted; they there met
several girls. Callender selected one named Emma Turner, and the prisoner
took the deceased, and they went upstairs to two different rooms, they re-
mained there some time, when Turner left Callender, and went into the
room where the prisoner and the deceased were. Turner told them it was time
to get up; the prisoner left the bed and went into another room for a minute
ana returned; the deceased was then washing her arms; the prisoner went
up to her, put his arm round her neck, and kissed her. The deceased then
Avent into another room and the prisoner followed her, and in less than a
minute, Turner and Davis, another girl who had come upstairs, heard the cry
of "Murder!" They ran into the room and saw the prisoner and deceased
standing together, but she was apparently sinking on the ground; the prisoner
was taking his hand from her neck, and in that hand was a razor. They then
observed that she was bleeding profusely from a wound in her throat. The pri-
soner walked to the table, put the razor in a case, and walked out of the room.
The deceased said, " Lord, have mercy on my soul; I hope my poor mother
will forgive me, I have been a wicked sinner," and died in less than five minutes,
in consequence of the wound in her throat. The prisoner was taken into cus-
tody. lie said his mind had been uneasy ever since he had left America, as he
had seduced a young woman there, and she had a child by him, and he left her.
He was asked what had made him kill the deceased. " I don't know; poor
girl, she never did me any harm. It was not her I intended to kill, it was
Margaret Cheltenham, who caused me to be kept in the hospital, and it was the
devil did it." Margaret Cheltenham lived in the adjoining house.
Callender stated in cross-examination that he had come with the prisoner
from America. He appeared to have something on his mind, and was not like
what he had been before he went. He seemed at times hardly to know what
he was doing. He went about his ordinary duties.
Mr. Edwards addressed the jury on behalf of the prisoner. He urged
them to dismiss from their minds everything they had before heard or read. If
the simple question was whether the prisoner had committed this act, he should
not address them or take up their time ; but he must ask them to consider
whether the prisoner's state of mind at the moment was of such a character
that he was not conscious of what lie was doing. It was one of the most ex-
traordinary cases he had ever heard; it was involved in the greatest mystery.
People did not commit murder without some motive or reason; if they did so,
it was a proof that their mind was not in its proper-state?it was disordered.
Could they conceive a person in his sane mind without any motive committing
such an act ? It might be a dangerous doctrine; but at the same time it was a
true one in an instance like the present. If there was not this state of insanity,
then there must have been provocation, so as to reduce the offence to that of
manslaughter.
Sergeant Herman.?I have known the prisoner four years. I was with him
in America. After his return I observed a great alteration and peculiarity in
him. When he took a drop of drink he appeared rambling in his mind ; and
also at other times, very often. He was a tailor, and therefore did not do
much duty.
Cross-examined.?He used to be talking about a woman in America. He
V'
HOMICIDAL MANIA OR MURDER?
li
seemed sorry tliat he could not marry her. He said, " Oh, my head !" He
appeared quite out of spirits. One time he had drink he went away to York
and came back very honourably, and gave himself up. He used to say, " Oh,
my head! that poor girl!" He did not appear to know what he was doing.
While he was a prisoner for desertion, if he was told to do a thing, he would do
quite the contrary. He bore an excellent character in the regiment.
Mr. Cole replied, observing that it would be dangerous indeed if a prisoner
were to be relieved from his responsibility upon such evidence as that which
had been produced for the prisoner in this case. It was frequently impossible
to discover or fathom a motive. Was there anything to show that the prisoner
did not know the act he was committing P As to any provocation, there had
not been time for it.
Mr. Cole then said that for the satisfaction of his lordship he had sent for
the surgeon of the gaol, who was in attendance and ready to give evidence.
The judge doubted whether, after the speeches, it would be right to put the
witness in the box, but he would consult Mr. Justice Crompton.
Mr. Baron Bramweil, upon his return, said his learned brother agreed with
him that it was better to be regular, and, therefore, he should decline to have
this gentleman examined.
The learned judge then proceeded to sum up the case. There could be no
doubt that the prisoner had killed the deceased; it had been proved over and
over again; that being so, he was guilty of murder, unless some cause was shown
to reduce the crime, or to show that the prisoner was not responsible for his
act. There was no evidence of any quarrel or provocation so as to reduce the
offence to manslaughter. The only question, then, really was as to the state
of mind of the prisoner at the time he committed the act, and he should not
flinch from the discharge of his duty, and he trusted the jury would not, for he.
thought that although it might be a painful thing to find the prisoner guilty,
yet it would be equally painful?it would be a most painful thing for a jury to
consider that they had violated their oaths. The learned judge then stated to
the jury what the law was, and read to them the opinions given by the judges
upon this pomt. As to the question of malice, he said malice might be either
expressed or implied, and if a deliberate act was committed by one person
against another, the law would imply malice. It would be a most dangerous
doctrine to say that because you could not show a motive a man was to be
acquitted. The question was whether this prisoner had a sufficient degree of
reason to know that the act was wrong. If he knew what the act was, and
that the act was wrong, the prisoner was punishable for the act. When a man
committed murder, the influence of religion, the law, and humanity had been
overcome, but that was not to relieve him from punishment. Did the woman
die by the hand of the prisoner ? If so, he was guilty, unless he did not know
the nature of the act, or did not know that it was wrong. Those were the
only two matters for their consideration. It was to the advantage of all to
obey the law, and every improper acquittal was detrimental to the interests of
society.
The jury retired for upwards of two hours. They then sent a note to the
judge to state that some of the jury had doubts as to the state of mind of the
prisoner, and therefore requested some further explanation of the law as re-
garded insanity.
The judge directed the jury to be sent for, and on their coming into court
asked them~if they had any observation to make.
One of the jurors said the prisoner seemed to have acted under an uncon-
trollable impulse.
The judge said that did not make the offence the less mnrder. Malice was
implied when there was a deliberate cruel act committed, however sudden it
might be. It was no matter how sudden the impulse?whether it was the
lii
HOMICIDAL MANIA OR MURDER?
result of long previous deliberation, or whether it was the impulse of an instant
?it would be as much murder in one case as in the other. No jury could
properly acquit on the ground of insanity if they believed the accused was
conscious of the act he was committing, and that he knew that act was
contrary to law. If they gave a verdict contrary to this, the result would be
to increase the number of cases of uncontrollable impulse. The object of the
law was to prevent an impulse from being uncontrollable. If the man was
conscious of what he was doing, and that it was contrary to law, he was
punishable.
The jury, after putting their heads together for a minute, returned a verdict
of Guilty.
The judge, having put on the black cap, addressed the prisoner: I don't
think that the jury could properly have given any other verdict. No doubt
you killed that young woman, and there is no doubt that you were in a state
of mind which would not have justified an acquittal. My duty is a short one.
I don't desire to reproach you, or to give you pain, because I can't help
feeling sorry for you. You bore a good character, and you had a sort of regret
for what you had done abroad, which makes one sorry for you; but, without
saying anything to give you pain, it is my duty to warn you that the sentence
will be carried into effect, and it is my duty to tell you that it was a very cruel
and a very bad act, for you went out with a determination to do some mischief,
and this unfortunate creature came in your way, and you took her life, and you
cannot expect your own to be spared. Therefore, make your arrangements
and preparations, and you will have all the advice you may require as to what
you ought to do?it is not my duty to enforce it upon you?my duty is to pass
the sentence of the law. His lordship then passed the awful sentence of the
law on the prisoner, who was then removed from the dock.
The judge omitted the usual concluding prayer.
Soon after the trial, the murderer was respited?a result which
confirms the conclusion to be derived from the history of the case,
that, although the summing-up of the judge and the verdict of
the jury might satisfy the strict requirements of the law, they did not
satisfy those of justice. The evidence adduced in favour of the
prisoner, scanty though it was, clearly indicated the existence of
mental derangement immediately prior to the deed, and the observa-
tion he made after committing it was exceedingly significant. When
asked what had made him kill the deceased, he answered : " I don't
know; poor girl, she never did me any harm. It tvas not her I
intended to hill, it was Margaret Cheltenham, who caused me to be
kept in the hospital, and it was the devil did it." This remark would
make it highly probable that the act was performed under the direct in-
fluence of a delusion, which, if it had been proved, would have established
the man's irresponsibility strictly within the law. But no medical
evidence was produced, and the man was left to take his chance upon
the general evidence. This, however, as we have already remarked}
was so strongly indicative of mental derangement, that the jury, after
long deliberation, came back into court to ask guidance from the judge
as to the doubt which beset their minds respecting the criminal's sanity.
A juror thought that the prisoner had acted under an uncontrollable
LAW V. JUSTICE.
liii
impulse; but to this the judge replied, that supposing such were
the case, it would not make the offence less murder; and he then
proceeded to speak, not of an uncontrollable impulse?the question
put?but of an unrestrained impulse, confounding the uncontrollable
+ k impulse of insanity with the unrestrained impulses of vice! His
lordship next restricted the legal irresponsibility of insanity to those
cases in which the lunatic was not conscious of the act he was com-
mitting, and of its being contrary to law?a dictum the insufficiency
of which, to deal with the facts of homicidal insanity, has been again
and again felt on the bench, and the use of which has again and again
rendered it necessary, in order to avoid unjust consequences, to have
recourse to expedients similar to those used in this case. As a species
of apology for, or justification of the dictum, the judge added,?" If
they (the jury) gave a verdict contrary to this, the result would be
to increase the number of cases of uncontrollable impulse." Here,
again, we presume the judge meant unrestrained for uncontrollable.
Well, a-verdict of "Guilty" is given, the murderer is sentenced to
death, and in another week he is respited ! And why ? If the man
were sane when he committed the deed, he was guilty of as bloody and
deliberate a murder as the annals of crime can show; if he were in-
sane, why should the extreme sentence of the law be turned into a
meaningless exhibition ? Which course of action is most likely to
beget an increased number of pleas of uncontrollable impulse, that
which slurs over the plea, or attempts to crush it beneath an arbitrary
legal dictum, and which, when unjust, has to be systematically re-
medied by an appeal to the Crown for mercy, or if not unjust, leaves
the subject liable to be seized upon at any moment by a capricious
philanthropical sentiment, and paraded as an injustice ? Or, that
course which thoroughly and effectively analyses the plea in a public
court, which clearly exposes its fallacy, if it be fallacious, in respect to
the case tried, and not deductively from an imperfect rule, or stamps
with certainty its correctness if right; and which, having so done,
records a conclusive and indisputable sentence : or, any doubt being
present, that doubt is recorded in open court, for the prisoner's benefit,
and pursued to its consequences by the judge himself, and not left
to the public ? We have little doubt that the public would unhesita-
tingly pronounce the former course to be the most dangerous to law
and morality.
A case somewhat similar to that of Haynes's, but which has not
yet come to trial, occurred near Gloucester, on the 31st of October
last. The following report is from the Daily Telegraph (Sept. 1)?
" A fearful tragedy was enacted yesterday morning at the town of Lydney,
on the South Wales Railway, between this city and Chepstow. It appears that
liv
HOMICIDAL MANIA.
an elderly gentleman of tlie name of Pownall, a retired physician, and a native
of Wroughton, Wilts, has been residing with Mr. Leete, surgeon, of Lydney,
for the last three weeks. He had formerly been an inmate of North woods
Asylum, near Bristol, but had recently been discharged as cured, with a certi-
ficate to that effect from Dr Davey, the medical superintendent. During his
residence at Lydney he had been quiet and gentlemanly in his habits and
conduct, and has never shown any symptoms of unsoundness of mind. About
six o'clock yesterday morning he knocked at the servants' bedroom door, and
called them up. Oue of them?a girl named Louisa Cooke, aged fifteen years
?dressed herself quickly and went out. In a minute or two, the other girl,
who had not risen, heard a scuffle on the stairs, and a cry of ' Murder.' She
got up and looked out, but could see nothing; and having called out, ' What is
the matter ?' received no answer. She returned into the room to dress herself,
leaving the door partly open, and in a minute or two Dr Pownall, in his shirt
sleeves, looked into the room and said, ' Make haste, get assistance, some one
has murdered her;' and then retired to his own room, locking the door.
Sergeant Pope, of the police, was immediately called in, and on going to Mr.
Leete's bedroom he found the poor girl Cooke lying dead upon the floor, with
a fearful wound in her throat, from which a large quantity of blood had flowed.
The poor girl had rushed into the room, exclaiming, ' Master, he has murdered
me; I must die;' having repeated which two or three times, she fell down
dead. The policeman immediately proceeded to Dr Pownall's bedroom, which
was locked; and as he could get no reply on requesting that the door might be
opened, lie burst it open. He found Dr Pownall sitting on the bed, partly
undressed; his shirt was spotted with blood, and lying on the dressing-table
was a razor, with blood on the blade and handle. Pope apprehended him on
the charge of murdering the girl, to which Dr Pownall made 110 reply, but
quietly dressed himself and proceeded to the police station. Information was
immediately conveyed to James Teague, Esq., the county coroner, who issued
his warrant for an inquest, which was held last night at the Feathers Hotel,
Lydney, the Rev. H. Philpot/the vicar, acting as foreman of the jury.
at of the deceased, and the policeman Pope
" Dr Pownall, who had not hitherto spoken, but sat at the table shading his
eyes with his hands, said slowly, and in a deep voice, ' I can tell you; 1 un-
fortunately did it. I can hardly assign any motive. I felt I was bound to do
something, and I could not resist it.'
" Mr. Charles Lydiat Leete deposed: I am a surgeon, residing at Lydney,
and deceased was in my service. This morning she rushed into my bedroom
with her throat cut, and died in a few minutes. When she came in, she ex-
claimed, ' Master, lie has murdered me; I must die.' I have known Dr.
Pownall for the last three weeks. He has been residing with me that time.
He has all along appeared sane and reasonable, and I saw no change in him
when I parted from him last night. He showed me a certificate from Dr.
Davey, which certified that he left his lunatic asylum cured.
" The coroner having summed up, the jury immediately returned a verdict of
wilful murder, and Dr Pownall was committed for trial at the next assizes.
He was removed to Gloucester County Prison this morning.
" The unfortunate girl is the only child of her parents, who are poor persons
residing near Berkeley."
There can be no doubt that this is an instance of homicidal mania,
and hardly any doubt that Haynes's case belongs to the same category.
Let us contrast these two examples of murder committed by lunatics
with two committed by sane men, as recorded by themselves.
THE ETIOLOGY OF MURDER. lv
Matthew Francis, aged twenty-six years, tailor and hawker, was
charged before Mr. Justice Willes, at the Monmouth Assizes, on the
6th August, with the wilful murder of his wife, Sarah Francis, on the
12th March, 1859, at Newport. The following statement, made by the
prisoner before the magistrates, was put in as evidence against him:?
)
" Last Monday fortnight I got up and lit the fire. I got the breakfast ready
against my wife came downstairs. I had a bloater roasting by the fire. Some-
thing was not right about the bloater, and she took it and flung it at me. I
asked her what she did that for, and she told me to ask her  , &c. I said
that was a very pretty expression for a woman to make use of. She told me it
w was good enough for such a bloody animal as I was. I told her not to say that
or I would give her a smack on the head. She said, ' What, a   son
like you!' I told her I was no son. She said. 'If you ain't, you are a
cow's drop.' She rose the fire shovel, and struck me on the shoulder. I ran
to the door, and laughed at her. She said, ' Don't laugh at me, you thief.'
She ran after me, got me by the hair of the head, and scratched my face. Mr.
Richards came in, and asked what was the matter, and told my wife that she
ought to be ashamed of herself to make use of such expressions. She ran at
me again, and struck me. I struck her. She wanted to go out. I would not
allow her. She told me she would put me in prison. I told her that was a
foolish idea, as I could prove it was her fault. Then I let her go out into the
* passage. I went after her, and asked her to come back. She sat down in the
passage. I pulled her, to pull her into the house again. I went into the house,
and in about half-an-hour she came in. Mary Townsend came in. She made
tea. She wanted to go out with Mary Townsend. I would not let her go.
She took a knife from the table, and said. she would cut my throat if I would
not let her go out. Then I let her go. I watched where she went. I found
her at Hawkins's. She said she would never rest her bones alongside me again.
v I saw her frequently, She refused to come back to me. On Friday evening I
went to Hawkins's. She insulted me as soon as I went in. I told Mrs. Hawkins
she ought to be ashamed for keeping her. I sent for some jugs of beer and
eggs, and my wife made egg-flip for herself." I offered her my glass to drink
out of. She would not take it out of my hand. She did after I had persuaded
her. I asked her if she intended to live with me or not ? She rose up a pint
jug to throw at me, and said not to put such a question to her. She began
cheeking me. I said a few words. I told her to come home, that my life was
a misery to me, and that I would sooner go to the gallows than be separated
from her. I told her to make up her mind by the morning, and then I left. On
Saturday morning, at about nine o'clock, I went to her again. She told me to go
out, that she did not want to see me. She cursed me. I told her not to put
herself in a bad way. I sat down by her. I asked her to go home. She said
she would not rest alongside of me. There was a knife on the table. I asked
Mrs. Jones to lend it to me and I would kill her with it. I rubbed it along
the pan on the table and I touched my wife on the back, and she said, ' Don't
put your hands on me.' She called me many disgraceful things. I went out
into the closet and sat down. I began to cry. Then, when I thought to myself
about the razor I had in my pocket, I was not thinking of it before; I brought
it out with the intention of having it ground. I took it out of my pocket and
tied a piece of thread I had in my pocket round it. Then I went into the house
again. I begged her to come home, and not to make a fool of herself and me
too. I rose up and told her I was determined to kill her if she would not come
home with me. She began to sing a song. I told her not to sing songs, there
was more need for her to sing hymns. She laughed aloud when I said that.
Then I caught her by the forehead, and said, ' Now, Sarah, will you come
lvi
THE ETIOLOGY OF MURDER.
home or not ?' She said, ' I will not.' I said, 'What! never come home?'
She said, 'No; never!' Then I drawed the razor across her throat. She
caught the razor on the palm of her hand. She let it go again, and caught on
my wrist, and drew my hands down, and the razor caught on her cheek as she
drew mv hand. She heaved her two arms up and caught me round the neck,
and pulled my face to her and kissed me. I told her ' I had murdered her, and
was willing to die for her.' The last word she spoke was, ' Oh no ! you shan't
die.' I suppose she did not think it was done to the purpose. That is all. f
"Matthew Francis, his x mark."
g
The perpetrators of the brutal murder of Mr. Stephenson, at Sibsey,
in Lancashire, on the 16th of March last, when lying under sen-
tence of death in Lincoln Castle, made the subjoined confession to
Mr. Rushton, a dissenting minister. Carey's statement was read to
Pickett, and Pickett's to Carey ; they were both pronounced to be cor-
rect, but they differ materially from the statements previously made
by the murderers.
pickett's statement.
"Lincoln Castle, 2nd Aug., 1859.
" On leaving the Ship Inn, at Sibsey, Northlands, on the 16th day of March,
the night of the murder, between ten and eleven o'clock, the first word Carey said '
to me, after leaving the public-house was, 'We will go and rob old Stephenson.'
I said to him,' He will know us.'' Carey said, ' No : I will stop him from that.' f
I was before Carey; we took two sticks from Mr. Teesdale's fence; I pulled
one, and the other was picked up by Carey. We went to Mr. Coates' gate \
and altered our dresses, walked some distance, and laid down on the road-side,
with the sticks beside us. The old man came down the road, crossed over to
us, touched me over the head, and said, ' What are you doing here, my boys ? 4
I don't know you. Who are you? David, is it you?' I suppose he meant his
grandson. Carey got on his knees, and pulled the old man down. Stephenson
struck Carey with his walking-stick while falling. I held his head while Carey <
robbed him. I got up and struck him on the ground until my stick broke all to
pieces. Carey got off when he had robbed him and beat him about the head;
then carried him into the sewer. Carey went back across the road to fetch his
stick, and struck the old man eight or nine times over the head until his stick
broke all to pieces. Then the old man stood up in the sewer; Carey shoved
at him with the broken part of his stick, trying to push him down into the
water. Mr. Stephenson got from him, and walked to the other side of the
sewer. Carey then threw the broken part of his stick into the sewer, and said
to me, ' Go round to the other side and kill him.' I went round to Mr. Coates'
yard, got a piece of a rail, and went to the old man. Mr. Stephenson had the
thorn stick produced in court on his shoulder, and appeared to be going home. ^
Carey said, ' Make haste, or he will get home.' I went behind him and struck
him on the side of the head, and knocked him down; I hit him till my )
stick broke all to pieces (this was the rail or broad stick). I then took the
stick Mr. Stephenson had, and hit him about the head till he was dead. I
dragged him to the hedge; I was trying to throw him into the sewer, but could
not. I told Carey I could not throw him over by myself, and he must come and
help me. Carey said, 'Try again; you can get him over.' I then took hold
of his legs, reared him up on end, and tumbled him over into the sewer. After I
that we both left, one on one side of the sewer, and the other on the other.
We went on till we got to my father's seven-acre gate. Carey had the papers
produced in court, and threw the old man's tobacco-box into the river opposite
THE ETIOLOGY OF MURDER.
lvii
the gate. We went across the river in my father's boat, and went on till we
got to my brother John's house. We were going to George Sands' hovel to
sleep. Carey said, ' We had better go across brother John's garden, or the police
will meet us.' We slept together in Sands' hovel till morning; got up about
four o'clock. Carey said,'We had better look if there be any blood on our
clothes.' We could not find any, but I had some blood on my face, which
Carey washed off. We laid down again till six o'clock. Mr. Sands came into
the hovel to feed his beasts; he tumbled over my legs, and said, ' What are you
doing here ?' Carey said, ' We were locked out last night.' Mr. Sands asked
Carey if he would sow him some onions. We got up and went to the Ship
Inn; on the road Carey gave me the sovereign. Carey put a stone into the
old man's bags, and threw them into Richardson's pit. We went round to
"Richardson's back door to see if they were up. I went home, and Carey went
to his brother's. We did not think of robbing or doing anything else to
Mr. Stephenson when we left the public-house. My father has often told that
if I kept company with Carey I should be either transported or hung. I did not
do as advised by my parents or friends. I was very much frightened the night
it thundered and lightened; I thought Mr. Stephenson was coming to me in
the cell. I am truly sorry for what I have done. The sentence passed upon
me is a just one, and I deserve it. I feel for my parents, particularly my poor
mother. I have no person to blame but myself. I felt relieved when the
chaplain visited me on Thursday, after the sentence was passed; and I earnestly
pray to God to forgive me for murdering the poor man. I believe J struck
the blow which caused death. The reason I made the statement at Spilsby
was to clear myself. If Carey had been present at the examination before the
magistrates I should not have made that statement. The judge has done
justice; if there was no justice there would be no living. I have been kindly
treated during my confinement; I feel resigned to my fate, and hope to have
forgiveness; I am striving for it as well as I can. I hid the money?one
sovereign?which Carey gave me in the thatch of David Bank Richardson's
furnace house, about 18 inches from the end wall on the west side, between
the first and second spar; and his knife, that Carey had, is just outside the fur-
nance at the corner by the chimney, which I should like to be given to Mr.
Stephenson's son. We never had any handkerchiefs, and Carey's statement
about them is false. I have nothing else to state, and the above is the truth.
" (Signed) William Pickett."
caret's statement.
"Lincoln Castle, 2nd Aug., 1859.
" Oh dear Mr. Ilushton, my position is an awful one; I hope I shall be
forgiven: it is all drink. I am truly sorry I did not take your advice. Mr.
Stephenson was always a friend to me; he took me in when I was turned out
of my own house. I hope his friends will forgive me. I hope the old man's
soul is in heaven. I feel reconciled, and the sentence passed is what I deserve.
We was at Richardson's, the Ship Inn; I called William Pickett out of doors,
and asked him if he would go with me to rob Mr. Stephenson. When we left
the public-house we arranged to go into the house and say to the people that
we should sleep in the boat (Pickett's father's boat). We stayed till between
ten and eleven o'clock. The landlord asked if we thought anything about
goin?- home; it was bed-time. I asked him to put a quart of ale into a bottle,
as we were going aboard. He put three gills into a porter bottle. We went
over the river in Pickett's father s boat; we w eut on before Stephenson, got a
stick each, and laid down in the lane where Mi. Stephenson had to go to his
son's. He came up and said, Hallo, my lads, who are you ? Get up and lay
in some of these yards.' I think lie did not know us. We both jumped up
Iviii CRIMINAL IRRESPONSIBILITY AND THE GALLOWS.
on our knees, and threw him backwards. Pickett held his head down till [ got
his money. I struck Mr. Stephenson, and then Pickett struck him while on
the floor several times. Pickett took hold of his head, and I took hold of his
feet, and threw him into the sewer. Mr. Stephenson cot up on his feet while
in the water, and we both struck him again. He turned to go across the sewer,
and get out on the other side. I said to Pickett, ' Go round.' Pickett went
round, got another stick, and struck him on the side of the head, knocking him
down on the floor. I told Pickett to throw him into the sewer, which he did.
I never went to the other side of the sewer. I know that 1 am the worst, and
persuaded Pickett into it. "We slept in Sands' hovel till half-past five o'clock.
Sands found us. "VVe left there. Pickett took a sovereign; I kept a knife and
three shillings and sixpence. The two little bags were sunk in Richardson's
pit; the pocket-knife I hid in the corner of Richardson's potato-house by the
rivy. 1 don't know what Pickett did with his money. It is false about
aving any handkerchiefs. That is all I have to say, and the above is the
truth."
[This statement was witnessed by Mr. James Foster and one of the warders.
Carey signed it with his mark.]
How remarkable tbe difference in the self-assigned motives for the
perpetration of the deed in the two former and in the two latter in-
stances of murder! Yet neither the motive which led Haynes, nor
that which impelled Dr Pownall to do murder, could be allowed for *.
one moment as a plea for exemption from the consequences of the act,
any more than the statements of Francis or of Pickett and Carey. What
then constitutes the differential element in the cases justifying and calling &
for the exemption of any of tbe murderers from the extreme penalty of
tbe law ? Simply the existence, in the cases of Haynes and Pownall, prior
to the act, of manifest indications of mental derangement, of insanity;
and their probable connexion with the act, and the absence of any such
symptoms in the other cases. Mental disease being unequivocally pre-
sent in the instance of Haynes and Pownall immediately before the
murder, and the anomalous motives assigned by them and the cir-
cumstances under which the act was performed, being, as experience
(putting aside physiological reasoning) tells us, more consistent with
the workings of the insane than the sane mind, justice demands that
these most probably irresponsible agents should not be consigned to
the gallows. Not that they should he acquitted and given back to
society. The law, righteously and for public safety, retains in dur-
ance all persons acquitted of capital crimes on the ground of insanity. J-
The question is solely one of hanging or not hanging an agent who
may be irresponsible for his act by reason of mental disease. The law
admits the plea, but the judges persist in dealing with it almost entirely
by deduction from rule and precedent, neglecting the necessary adjunct
of induction by fact and observation.
A curious confession of self-restraint gradually succumbing under
the influence of continued domestic irritation, and of passion taking a
EPISODES OF MURDER, SUICIDE, AND THE GOOD GENII, lix
murderous bias, occurred at the Westminster Police Office, on the 23rd
August last. There was some similarity in the case of the applicant
to the magistrate and that of Matthew Francis before he murdered
his wife.
A powerfully-built labouring mail solicited the magistrate's assistance and ad-
vice, when the following dialogue occurred:?Applicant: I want you to do some-
thing wit h my wife.?Mr. Arnold : What is the matter with her ? Applicant:
Why she robs my children, pawns everything I've got in the place, and gets
drink with it; and if she don't reform, I shall have to do something with her
that will bring me here. I shall do something to her that'll get me transported
or something.?Mr. Arnold : I hope you will not be driven to do that. What
do you want me to do for you ? Applicant: I want you to separate us, and let
one or the other of us take the children.?Mr. Arnold: I cannot assist yon in
that matter. Under the circumstances, the best thing you can do is to separate,
you to allow her something per week, which, added to her industry, will keep
her, but I have 110 power to interfere. The arrangement must be entirely be-
tween yourselves.?Applicant: Well, all I've got to say is, that as you will not
interfere there will be murder committed very soon.?Mr. Arnold : I hope there
will not be.?Applicant: Wont there ? You will have me here before you be-
fore long for murdering her, and then I shall be hung, or something. I'll kill
her if things do not alter.?Mr. Arnold: I think, after that, the safest thing I
can do is to endeavour to prevent your resorting to violence. I shall order you
to enter into your own recognizances in 201, to keep the peace for six months.
?Applicant, who for the moment was struck speechless with astonishment,
entered into the required recognizances.?Standard.
An equally curious case apropos of suicide is also contained in the
police records of the quarter.
A striking case occurred here on Wednesday last. It appears that a man
named Francis Duncan, a shiprigger, belonging to Dundee, called at the shop
of Mr. Burrell, chemist, about midday, and asked for some prussic acid for
killing rats. He was informed by Mr. Burrell that the article was not usually
applied to such a purpose, and was refused. Duncan then went to a second
shop of Mr. Burrell, at the High-street Port, where he asked for oil of vitriol
(sulphuric acid) from Mr. John Clark, the young man in attendance, who
questioned him as to the intended use of it, and who, in answer to a question,
informed his customer that it was poisonous, but that it was a very cruel and
torturing method of killing vermin. This appeared to excite doubts in the
man's mind, for immediately he inquired for prussic acid instead, and Mr. Clark
retired for a minute and returned with a bottle duly labelled with the article
required, but which meantime, he had filled with pure water and a few grains
of Rochelle salts, to give it a flavour. A small bottle being filled therewith,
the man asked if it would kill, and was informed that such a phial of acid
would kill half-a-dozen people. Having dipped his finger in the liquid, and
applied it to the tongue, he expressed himself satisfied, as he used it often to
cure toothache ; and 011 being cautioned as to its use he left the shop. Mean-
while information had been lodged at the police office of the theft of a silver
watch from the house of Mrs. Reid, lodging-house keeper, Shore Wynd, the
property of one of her lodgers, and it was suspected that Duncan, who had
been lodging there, was the thief. ^ The police, after an active search, had
succeeded in recovering the watch in a pawnbroker's ; and having their sus-
picions confirmed as to the guilty party, set out in his track, and succeeded in
apprehending him. Just, however, before the officers seized him he drew forth
the fatal phial, and instantly swallowed its contents, and then placidly informed
(J
THE CHURCH V. SUICIDE.
the officers that he had taken poison, and would in a few minutes be beyond the
reach of human law. The consternation ensuing was immediate, and a medical
gnitleman was promptly sent for, who had the satisfaction of finding emetics
and other appliances, suggested by the probable nature of the supposed poison,
followed in a few minutes by the revival of the poor man, who, under the im-
pression that he was really dying, was no less astonished himself at being so
easily rescued from otherwise inevitable death. He has since been examined
and committed to gaol, and is none the worse for the dose. The good judgment
and discretion shown by Mr. Clark in this instance deserve the highest com-
mendation, as, unquestionably, had he not exercised the tact displayed, the poor
man's life in all probability would have been sacrificed.?Montrose Standard.
We may mention also, as an example of one of the horrible eccentrici-
ties of suicide, an instance which occurred very lately, of an insane patient
(a ladv) who deliberately set fire to her clothing, and endured all
the fierce scorching of the flames " without a shriek or cry of any sort."
Death resulted, and it is stated that the patient had once before at-
tempted to commit self-destruction in a similar maimer.
The point of greatest interest, perhaps, in connexion with suicide,
during the quarter, is a threatened collision between the Law and the
Church on the question of the interment of self-murderers. The cir-
cumstances are thus stated by the _iEnglish Churchman, July 28th :?
" In our Parliamentary Report, last week, we gave the substance of a peti-
tion presented by Lord Brougham, complaining that a clergyman in Leicester-
shire had refused to bury one of his parishioners who had committed suicide,
while in a state of 'temporary insanity,' according to the verdict of the
coroner's inquest. The Lord Chancellor (Lord Campbell) is reported to have
stated that there could be no doubt whatever that the clergyman was wrong in
point of law?that he had no right to form and act upon his own opinion contrary
to that of the coroner's jury?and that the deceased was entitled to Christian
burial according to the rites of the Church of England. In other words, we
presume, the law of the matter is declared to be, that a clergyman must accept
the verdict of the coroner's jury as decisive of the matter, and that unless that
verdict be one of felo de se, the deceased is entitled to Christian burial, even
though the evidence in the case, or the clergyman's own knowledge of the cir-
cumstances and character of the deceased, may convince him that the verdict
was an untrue one.
"We must confess our ignorance of the statute or common law upon which
the Lord Chancellor's opinion is founded, but we do know that when we turn
to our prayer books we find it distinctly declared in the rubric prefixed to the
burial service, that c the office is not to be used for any that .... have laid
violent hands upon themselves.' From this it would appear that the clergy . >
have nothing whatever to do with the state of mind of those who have died by v "*
their own hands. Whether they were in their right senses or whether they
were not?whether their insanity was temporary or permanent?whether they
were responsible for their actions or whether they were not?-all this is clearly
beyond the scope of the rubric, which is confined to this single and simple
question?-Did the deceased lay violent hands upon himself?in other words,
did he die by his own hands? If the clergy are bound by the letter of the
rubric, we must be excused for hesitating to receive the dictum of even a Lord
Chancellor, when it contradicts that rubric. Tor the same reason, we cannot
implicitly receive the assertions of Dr Burn?that ' the proper judges, whether ? f
THE CHURCH V. SUICIDE.
ixi
persons who died by their own hands were out of their senses, are the coroner's
jury On acquittal of the crime of self-murder by the coroner's jury, the
body in that case not being demanded by the law, it seemeth that a clergyman
may and ought to admit that body to Christian burial.5 In considering this
subject we cannot lose sight of the fact that serious temporal penalties, in-
cluding the forfeiture of property, may be legally enforced in cases where a
verdict of self-murder has been returned; and that formerly this was followed
by a degrading mode of burial, in unconsecrated ground. It is quite notorious
that these circumstances have materially affected the traditions and habits of
coroners' juries. This mode of burial having been abolished, and exchanged
for burial by night, without service, but in consecrated ground?which is quite
consistent with the rubric?it appears to us that so far as coroners' juries deal
with the state of mind of the deceased, they do so in respect of the temporal
penalty alone, and that their opinion upon that point is not an essential part
of their verdict, and certainly cannot interfere with the plain and simple rubric
of the Prayer Book, which points to no condition of the kind.
" There is much truth and common sense in the following observations by
Wheatley. Speaking of the degrading mode of burying suicides which formerly
prevailed, he says :?
" ' This indignity, indeed, is to be only offered to those who lay violent hands
upon themselves, whilst they are of sound sense and mind; for they who are
deprived of reason and understanding cannot contract any guilt, and therefore
it would be unreasonable to inflict upon them any penalty. But then it may
be questioned, whether even these are not exempted from having this office
said over them; since neither the rubric nor old Ecclesiastical laws make any
exception in favour of those who may kill themselves in distraction, and since
the office is in several parts of it improper for such a case. As to the coroner's
warrant, I take that to be no more than a certificate that the body is not
demanded by the law, and that therefore the relations may dispose of it as they
please. For I cannot apprehend that a coroner is to determine the sense of
a rubric, or to prescribe to the minister when Christian burial is to be used.
The scandalous practice of them and their inquests, notwithstanding the strict-
ness of their oath, in almost constantly returning every one they sit upon to be
non compos mentis (though the very circumstances of their murdering them-
selves are frequently a proof of the soundness of their senses), sufficiently show
how much their verdict is to be depended on. It is not very difficult indeed
to account for this. Wc need only to be informed, that if a man be found
felo de se, all he was possessed of devolves to the King, to be disposed of by
the Lord Almoner, according to his discretion; and no fee being allowed out
of this to the coroner, it is no wonder that the verdict is generally for the heirs,
from whom a gratuity is seldom wanting. They plead, indeed, that it is hard
to giveaway the subsistence of a family; but these gentlemen should remember
that they are not sworn to be charitable, but to be just; that their business is
to inquire, not what is convenient and proper to be done with that which is
forfeited, but how the person came by his death; whether by another or
v himself; if by himself, whether he.was felo de se, or non compos mentis. As
the coroner indeed summons whom he pleases 011 the jury, and then delivers to
them what charge he pleases, it is easy enough for him to influence their judg-
ments, and to instil a general supposition, that a self-murderer must needs be
mad, since no one would kill himself unless he were out of his senses. But
the jury should consider that if the case were so, it would be to no purpose for
the law to appoint so formal an inquiry. For, according to this supposition,
such inquiry must be vain and impertinent, since the fact itself would be evi-
dence sufficient. It is true, indeed, there may be a moral madness, i.e., a mis-
application of the understanding in all self-murderers ; but this sort of mad-
ness does not come under the cognizance of a jury 5 the question with them
]jtfi DECREASE OF GRAVER CRIMES.
being, not whether the understanding was misapplied, but whether there was
any understanding at all. In short, the best rule for a jury to guide them-
selves by in such a case, is to judge whether the signs of madness, that are
now pretended, would avail to acquit the same person of murdering another
man; if not, there is no reason why they should be urged as a plea for acquit-
ting him of murdering himself. But this is a little wide from my subject.
However, it may be of use to show what little heed is to be given to a
coroner's warrant, and that there is no reason, because a coroner prostitutes
his oath, that the clergy should be so complaisant as to prostitute their
office.'
"Under all the circumstances of the case, then, and in the absence of any
proof that the rubric has been set aside by any subsequent and equal authority,
we cannot see that the clergyman in the present instance acted illegally in
refusing to read the Burial Service over the deceased. If, however, all the
allegations of the petition presented are true, he went beyond this, and refused
to allow the deceased to be buried at all in the churchyard, even without any
service ; and this we believe to be decidedly illegal, and certainly of question-
able propriety; but the statements are as yet ex parte. . . ."
We must content ourselves with recording this expression of
opinion.
If we were disposed to rest satisfied with a rough guess, from news-
paper reports, of the state of serious crime in the kingdom, we might
be induced to conclude that it was on the increase, so numerous of late
have been the accounts of bloody and brutal murders and assaults.
Our chief authority on these matters, however, Mr. Samuel Redgrave,
of the Home-office, in his report on Judicial Statistics for 1858, gives
us the following gratifying and hopeful information on the decrease of
graver crimes:?
"The offences prosecuted in 1858 prove generally a decrease of the gravest
crimes, both in the offences against the person, Class 1, and in a very marked
degree in the violent offences against property, Class 2. The same may be
said of the most serious offences comprised in Class 3 (offences against pro-
perty without violence). And the returns evidence a very general decrease of
offences arising probably as well from the preventive action of the newly-
enlarged police system as from the improvement of the classes from which
criminals spring. The malicious offences (against property) in Class i arc a
corroboration of this view. Such olfences result from the revengeful and mis-
guided passions of an ignorant population, and present many difficulties to
detection and punishment. Fifty years since, frame-breaking was an offence of
frequent occurrencc in the manufacturing towns, but has long since disappeared.
Later, threshing-machine-breaking prevailed throughout the agricultural dis-
tricts : it is no longer heard of. Incendiarism was at the same time an alarming
crime : it has since lost the class character which it then possessed, though it
still lingers in constantly diminishing amount. I mentioned last year the
absence of all offences of a political character, and the remark still applies to
the criminal records." (p. xvi.)
The following remarks from the Times (Sept. 10) upon the Judicial
Statistics of the past year are of considerable interest, and they present
an ingenious view of crime as a profession :?
"The Judicial Statistics just published contain, amid some encouraging
symptoms, the usual facts relating to crime. Everything seems to show what
professional criminals. lxiii
we technically call crime to be not the offspring of society at large?the aggregate
of a quantity of isolated offences committed by individuals here, there, and
everywhere, of all classes of the community?but that it is the production of a
class which may not be improperly called the criminal class?a professional
class living upon crime, as our trades and professions live upon their respective
occupations. People are apt to think, when they take up a criminal return,
that every crime is the first offence of some fresh man, and that the return
represents the lapses of the community at large, and is fed by a constant supply
of victims of first temptations, who have hitherto been tolerably respectable
men. But everything shows that this is a mistake. The report before us only
gives about 25,000 out of the number of criminals of last year as persons openly
and apparently ' without occupations'?overt members of the trade or pro-
fession of crime; but there can be no doubt that this list extends really much
further, and that crime is the profession of thousands who maintain the show
of some regular calling, the overt sample showing only the real composition of
the whole class. It has been calculated, indeed, that a good deal more than
100,000 persons live by crime in this country.
" It may naturally be asked how we are to account for this most gloomy aud
disastrous of all professions under the sun being the choice of thousands who
have abundant talents, bodily and mental, to earn a prosperous subsistence by
some regular calling. This class is by no means deficient in body or mind. A
great deal of cleverness is required for crime, much more than for many a more
profitable occupation. A burglar must be not only a bold and active, but a
clever fellow. He has to choose his house, in the first place, with reference to
various tests of advantageousness?nature of the household and establishment,
vicinity of police, look of walls, doors, and windows, facilities for escape, &c.
Thus crime requires what is a rare gift?the sudden concentration of mind, the
power of urging it for a short time to the greatest quickness, vigilance, self-
possession, decision. The commonest pickpocket, if he falters, is lost. Your
good, honest labourer can get on very well with his wits always at an average
height, which they never exceed by any chance ; but the criminal must not go
by clockwork, or let his mind operate quietly and regularly by the laws of
nature?the happy privilege of many a good fellow who earns twenty or thirty
shillings a week. It is quite true that many who enter the profession are not
clever enough for it, and get caught soon, as a punishment for their presumption.
Nor can the cleverest surmount all the chances?he gets caught at last; but
there can be no doubt that there is a great deal of cleverness actually at work,
and successfully at work?according to a certain standard of success?in the
profession of crime.
" How, then, is it that these clever fellows?born, one would think, from
their peculiar gifts, to shine in the world?select such a calamitous calling as
that ot crime, which, after terrors, alarms, and hair-breadth escapes innumerable,
is almost sure to land them in penal servitude ? All we can say in the matter
is, that there is no accounting for tastes. It seems to be an ascertained fact
that some people will do anything rather than do regular work, Regular work,
so far from being distasteful to the majority of mankind, is, happily, the pleasure
of life; they would not know what to do with themselves without it; they
would be quite lost; even where there is a preliminary falter at starting, it is
got over immediately. But some natures certainly show a remarkable repug-
nance for regular work?a repugnance which cannot be mistaken, but is a
decided phenomenon of mind which we must recognise. It is difficult to ana-
lyze this condition of mind: it is quite different from that of common indolencc,
which is only a lazy way of working. We can no more get to the bottom of
it than we can to the shying of a horse, or any other mysterious affection of
animal nature. Men who have it look upon regular work as a mystery of which
they do not know the end?a dreadful secret and nightmare. Upon the
J
.
lxiv PROFESSIONAL CRIMINALS.
slightest actual entrance upon it they have sensations of despair, as if they
were locked up in a dark room to wrestle with some strong monster. They arc
oppressed with the idea of an interminable struggle, which they do not sec
their way out of. They shrink from the abyss, as if they would never come
out of it again in this hemisphere. It is this sort of blind?nervous, animal
repugnance to steady employment which, in a large proportion of cases, makes
the criminal. He will do anything rather than dig potatoes for a week running.
He will exert himself, if he can do so, by fits aucl starts, in obedience to some
strong momentary impulse; lie will watch an opportunity eagerly; when the
prey is coming he will listen breathlessly for a sound, and strahi himself to
apprehend quickly every circumstance; but there must be the sharp stimulus
of cunning, the hurry of excitement to bring him out.
" Many of our criminals would not have been criminals at all if they had been
born Red Indians. They would not have had to work. Labour, regular
labour, is the trial of civilization, the criterion by which society now tests its
respectable poor. There arc many, however, who appear, unluckily for them-
selves, to be born for a different world or age of the world than that in which
they live; there are wild, headstrong aristocrats, who spend their lives in a
rebellion against society, but who would have made very good crusaders ; and
there are many criminals who would have made respectable Mohawks. We do
not presume to enter into the mystery of Providence, which brings about this
apparent incongruity, nor do we wish, of course, to protect anybody against the
responsibilities of life. A man who lives in the 19th century must have the
trials of civilization?not the trials of barbarism?and it is doubtless his own
fault if he does not sustain them. His blind, animal shudder at the provi-
dential trial of labour is a sensation which may be got over, and we have no
doubt that thousands of persons who have had it have got over it by simply going
to work in spite of it. This has dispelled the evil charm and set them free;
they have found what a mere dream of the imagination their previous idea of
labour was. But the selfish, undisciplined nature, that never will do anything
the least disagreeable to it?the rebel, the brute, the slave of impulse who dis-
owns his conscience, are overpowered by the gloomy and odious nightmare;
they are fairly taken captives, and they sink deeper and deeper into the moral
impotence to which it consigns them. They take refuge in a life of crime, as
flic only alternative left by which to gain a subsistence, and the more they
habituate themselves to the guilty stimulants of that life, the more revolting
does a life of steady labour appear. Their conviction brings an additional
difficulty?character is gone, nobody will employ them ; and the criminal life?
as a case in our police courts singularly illustrated the other day?which was
a choice before, is almost a necessity after. Thus, in the case to which we
refer, you have two criminals actually entreating the judge to transport them,
as the only way of giving them a chance of recovery. ' What will be the good
of our doing six years on the home stations, and then have 110 chance but to do
the same thing again!' The criminal class thus gets more and more com-
mitted to its original choice, and crime grows more and more into a trade and
profession, the regular occupation of life."
We cannot close our Retrospect without directing attention to the
statements which have recently appeared in the Times concerning the
abominable state of the solitary lunatic asylum which exists in Jamaica,
and the wretched condition of its inmates, as well as the general mis-
management of lunacy affairs in the island. In a letter to the journal
just named, a correspondent who signs himself " B," writes thus :?
i
j
LUNACY AFFAIRS IN JAMAICA. lxV
" In Jamaica there is the most distinct evidence that the insane members of
its population are grossly neglected and cruelly treated. Their wretched con-
dition is even admitted in the Colonial Assembly; but, though it has called
forth propositions to investigate and to remedy it, yet the petty differences of
the island politicians, the plea of limited resources, and the prevalence of
jobbery have thwarted every plan, and perpetuated the acknowledged grievance.
" There is but one institution professing to be a place of treatment and a
refuge for the mentally disordered residents of the island. It is situated at
Kingston, where it forms a section of the Public Hospital, and is under the
\ same medical and general government with it. Its position is hygienically
bad; it is within the town, overlooked by neighbouring streets, and enclosed
within a high wall?conditions, one and all, condemnatory of its use as an
asylum. Its structure lias certainly the merit of simplicity. Two parallel one-
storied buildings, each consisting of a row of 12 cells, constitute the institu-
tion ; a wooden fence placed between the two rows is supposed to separate the
male occupants of the one from the female of the other. At least, such was the
sesthetical idea of the managers for the time being ; but in practice it is frus-
trated by the lodging of female lunatics by night in some of the cells on the
male side.
"As lunatics will multiply by accumulation in the course of years, it so hap-
pens that the 21 cells provided half a century ago for the accommodation of
the lunatics in the island at that time, and under the influence of the views of
treatment then in vogue, are utterly unfit and insufficient for present wants.
" Within those 21 cells?some 13 feet by 10 feet in area each?120 or more
patients have been habitually crammed. Nay, the crowding is worse-than this
statement represents, for we have to deduct three, four, or more cells occupied
by violent or by single patients of the more respectable class of society lrom
the accommodation available for the 120 poor unfortunate creatures condemned
to this vile prison-house. The consequence is that from 3 to 13 human beings,
the victims of mental derangement, are crowded together in a room of the
j ' dimensions intimated, or thereabouts, locked in by night and left to themselves.
A small aperture or window, which can be closed by a shutter, serves as the
' sole means of ventilation. An official report tells us what quantity of air is
supplied to each occupant. It varies from 211 to 197 cubic feet; but the larger
modicum is partaken by few. What must be the lot of a dozen poor wretches,
mostly of the coloured races, shut up in a cell within the tropics with only 200
cubic feet of air each for respiration?air, too, most imperfectly renewed and
laden with human exhalations F What it must be can be but indifferently con-
ceived, yet its wretchedness is aggravated by every concomitant of misery.
Bedsteads and bedding are provided only for a portion of the patients in the
building; the rest have to repose on a fixed inclined wooden shelf, or on the
stone floor of the cell, stripped of their clothes, and without even a mat beneath
them. Add to this that they are virtually unwatclied during the night, for the
presence of a woman, called a nurse, lodged in one of the cells of the female
division, and the occasional appearance at the outer gate of the establishment of
one of two watchmen, having the general security of the hospital and asylum in-
trusted to them, along with duties as attendants on the male patients in the
former, are worthless for the purposes of supervision.
" Who can tell what may pass within the narrow limits of this place of con
finement, miscalled an asylum, during the night among the groups of lunatics-
some vicious, some desponding, others violent, shut out from inspection,
and well nigh out of hearing ? V\ ho could express astonishment on learning
of fierce quarrels and of injuries among them ? ^ Or who could be surprised at
learning that in the densely-crammed building, with its adjuncts, high enclosing
f
if
lxvi LUNACY AFFAIRS IN JAMAICA.
walls, large cesspools, and open drains, diarrhoea and dysentery are constant
visitants of the population ?
" It is impossible within the limits of a letter to go into details, whether to
finish the picture of the establishment by night, or to portray its aspect by
day. Suffice it to say, the latter is the counterpart of the former; that classi-
fication is impossible in the building, and that medical and moral treatment are
totally out of the question. Such a condition of the insane, in any region
where civilization is found, in however feeble a degree, is scarcely supposable.
Were it not a fact beyond dispute, one would hesitate to credit its existence in
an English settlement, and still more so in one so long administered under the
British Crown, and now boasting its Free Constitution, its Elective Assembly,
and Legislative Council. It is a disgrace, a blot upon the civilization of the.
people of Jamaica, allied as they are to the British nation.
"It would have been more marvellous than the state of things sketched, had
not its evils been to some extent recognised in the island. I have already re-
marked that this has been the case. So long ago as 1843, the proposition to
erect a new and fitting asylum was entertained, and after elaborate inquiries,
the grant of money by the Legislature, and the reception of a plan from Eng- ?
land, the new edifice was commenced in 1847. At the end of 1851, however,
so leisurely was the progress, less than one-third of the building intended for
only 300 patients had been crected, although little short of 21,000?. had been
expended, besides convict labour of the estimated value of 10,000Z. In other
words, mere living snace for 100 patients, within a building without fittings or
furniture, was all that was obtained at the extravagant outlay of 300/. per
head.
" Having achieved thus much, the local authorities appear to have taken
fright at the proposition to build for the insane population of their island, for
they stayed further operations, and delivered over to the owls and bats the work
already completed. In fact, except for a few weeks, during the ravages of
cholera in Jamaica in 1851 and 1854, the unfinished new asylum has been
uninhabited between eight and nine years."
The English Commissioners in Lunacy have endeavoured to rouse
the Home Government to action upon this subject, but, it would
appear, according to another correspondent of the Times (Sept. 8),
with only slight success, for?
"... Although Sir E. B. Lytton, as Colonial Minister, stated in the
House of Commons that it was not the intention of the office to send out any
commission, he subsequently, in answer to the suggestions of the Commis-
sioners in Lunacy, admitted the necessity of such a commission; and that
since his Grace the Duke of Newcastle took office, he (the Duke) has ex-
pressed the strongest, though non-official, opinions to the same effect. I
know all this, but the old complaint, ' circumlocution,' presents its slouch-like
expanse to retard the progress of immediate action. The Colonial-office still
insists that the Governor and the House of Assembly of Jamaica (which, by the
way, will not meet till the end of October) must again be consulted on the
subject."
