Literary Fools? Guillaume Postel Christopher Smart, And Others
===============================================================

THE JOURNAL
OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND
MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
APRIL 1, 1859.
Abt. I.?,
 *
t? Infirmity-, that decays the wise, doth ever make the better
fool," sagely remarks the vanity-stricken Malvolio, in the " Twelfth
Night," how truly, we may learn best from the writings of those
fools who have been impelled to wield the pen. " I venture to
affirm," writes Nodier, "that if a curious book in bibliography
has still to be written it is the bibliography of fools, and if a
singular, piquant, and instructive library has still to be formed, it
is of their works." This observation forms a fitting epigraph to
a second essay by M. Delepierre on Literary Fools, than which a
happier illustration of the opinions both of the poet and the
bibliographer could not well be conceived.
But the bibliographer needs to hasten slowly in the tempting
field which a literary history of fools opens out, for fools are of two
classes?the positive and the relative. The folly of the former
absolute, and results from the infirmity that decays them ; the
folly of the latter is relative to the higher degree of wisdom
which is supposed to judge. The wise man, however, if he be as
prudent as wise, will hesitate before he places his finger upon this
?r that work, and says this is the result of folly, for it has hap-
pened, and might perchance happen again, that the folly of one
age has become the wisdom of the next. The bibliographer
must therefore take heed that he does not with his pen torture
the memory of some unhappy individual in a manner inore
lasting than that which Campanella underwent at the hands of
the Inquisition. " I have been shut up in fifty prisons," writes
that philosopher in the preface to his Atheism Vanquished, " and
submitted seven times to the most severe torture. On the last
. * " Essai Biographique sur l'Histoire Littdraire des Fous." Par Octave Dele-
pierre. (Privately printed.)
NO. XIV.?NEW SERIES.
170 LITERARY FOOLS.
occasion the torture continued forty hours. Bound with tight
cords that broke my hones, suspended, my hands tied behind my
back, above a sharp piece of wood which devoured the sixteenth
part of my flesh and drew away ten pounds of blood, cured by a
miracle after six months of sickness, I was thrown into a ditch.
Fifteen times have I been placed in judgment. The first time
when it was asked: How then does he know what he has never
learned ? Has he a demon at his command ? I replied : In order
to learn what I know, I have used more oil than you have drunk
wine. At another time I was accused of being the author of the
book The Three ImposTors, which was printed thirty years before
my birth. I was again accused of entertaining the opinions of
Democritus, I who have written books against Democritus. I
was accused of fostering bad sentiments against the Church, I
who have written a book on the Christian monarchy, wherein
1 have shown that no philosopher could have imagined a republic
equal to that which was established at Rome under the Apostles.
1 have been accused of being a heretic, I who have composed a
work against the heretics of our times. . . . Finally, I have been
accused of rebellion and heresy for having said that there are
spots upon the sun, the moon, and the stars, contrary to Aristotle,
who makes the wrorld eternal and incorruptible. ... It was for
that they cast me, like Jeremiah, into the dungeon where there
was neither air nor light."?(Cousin :?Cours de I'Histoire cle la
Philosophic, t. ii. p. 287.)
Moreover, we must not too hastily add to the list of fools men
who have so fretted themselves or been fretted with their zeal for
learning and the enemies they had made thereby, that they may,
as Pomponatius described himself, be compared to Prometheus
bound to Caucasus, devoured by the need of study as by a
vulture, unable to eat, drink, or sleep, an object of derision to
the foolish, dread to the people, and umbrage to the authorities.
? If the wise erred not," says the old proverb, " it would go hard
with fools."
M. Delepierre in his present essay confines himself to the class
of fools which we have termed positive, and which is formed of
individuals who were truly insane. It is not, however, an easy
task at all times to draw clearly a line of demarcation between
those eccentric and silly authors who crop out in every period,
and those authors whose works have been prompted Jay, or are
tinctured with, insanity.
Literary fools may be separated into four divisions?the theo-
logical, the literary, properly so called, the philosophical, and the
political. Let it not, however, be supposed that the literary
records of these fools are invariably fantastical, for not unfre-
(juently they contain fragments expressed, as Polonius would
LITERARY FOOLS. 171
1
have said, with " a happiness that often madness hits on, which
reason and sanity could not so prosperously he delivered of."
The author or authors of The Spiritual Squirt for Souls Con-
stipated in Devotion, and The Spiritual Snuff-Box to make
Devout Souls Sneeze, might well have had a niche in the theo-
logical division of literary fools; hut these mystical extrava-
gances are out of the direct line of our subject. Coming more
strictly within its hounds are the records of one named Paoletti.
He was a Jesuit, and was deranged a long time in consequence of
his arduous labours as a missionary in South America. He had
been in confinement on account of his madness five years,
when he composed a work confuting the doctrines of Thomas
Aquinas, and he endeavoured to prove that God used the sym-
bolical instruments of the Jewish rites to determine who should
or who should not receive the divine favour. He designed a
diagram purporting to show the mode in which the holy vessels
employed in the Tabernacle were made use of in order to indi-
cate the future lot of the children of Adam relatively to pre-
destination. In an engraving accompanying the work, God is
represented surrounded by angels, and presiding at the manipu-
lation of the symbolical vessels: the divine and the human will are
represented astwoballs moving in a circle, but indifferent directions,
and in the end finishing by meeting in a common centre. Paoletti
wrote also another treatise during his madness. In this work he
argues that the aborigines of America are the direct descendants
of the devil and one of the daughters of Noah; consequently
that it is impossible for them to obtain either safety or grace.
More noted than Paoletti is Guillaume Postel, who lived in the
sixteenth century. Once a Jesuit, he was dismissed the Order
by St. Ignatius on account of his fantastical notions. He was
imprisoned many years in Rome ; fled to Venice; was accused of
heresy before the Inquisition ; was declared innocent, but insane ;
and afterwards made a second journey to Constantinople and
Jerusalem. At Rome he was infatuated with an old woman
whom some deemed a courtezan, and whom he called his Grand-
mother Jane. He maintained that Jesus Christ had redeemed
man only, and that the redemption of woman would have place
by the Mother Jane. He endeavoured to prove this opinion in a
work written in Italian, and entitled La Vergine Veneta (The
Venetian Virgin) ; and in another work in French, printed at
Paris, and entitled, The Three Marvellous Victories of the Women
of the New World, and how they ought in justice to command
everybody, even those who have the Monarchy of the Old
World.
He pretended that the angel Gabriel had revealed to him
divers mysteries, and he believed that the soul -of St. John the-
172 LITERARY FOOLS.
Baptist had been transfused into him. He asserted also that
when he wrote another of his works (De Nativitatc Mediatoris),
he was inspired by the spirit of Jesus Christ, and that he acted
only the part of the copyist. He was condemned to be burned
alive, by a decree of the Parliament of Toulouse, but he died in
1581 at the Monastery of St. Martin des Champs, leaving be-
hind him many works, some of which are devoted to the fancies
which beset him.
About the same epoch lived Geoffroy Vallee, who became a
monomaniac when young. He is said to have had as many
shirts as there were days in the year, and he was accustomed to
send them to be washed in Flanders, at a spring famous for the
purity of its waters. In Paris he gave way to dissipation, and
when his reason became manifestly altered, his family placed him
under guardianship. He then wrote a book, a tissue of non-
sense, but for which he was condemned as an atheist, and, with
his book, he was burnt at the stake on the 9th February, 1574.
But one copy of the book is known to exist, that which formed
the basis of the process which led to the author's death. It was
made manifest at his examination that he was insane, because he
was questioned before a physician.
The title of his work contains several barbarous anagrams, and
it scarcely admits of translation. It runs thus?La Beatitude des
Chretiens, on le Fleo de la foy, par Geoffroy , Vallee, Jils de
feu Geoffroy Vallee et de Girarde le Berruyer, ausquels noms
de pere et mere assemblez il s'y treiive : here, gem, vrey fleo de
lafoybygarree,etaunomdnfilz: va fleo regie foy, aultrement
guerela fole foy. "The Beatitude of the Christians, or the
Flower of the Faith, by Geoffroy Vallee, son of the late Geoffroy
Vallee and of Girarde le Berruyer, which names of father and
mother together will be found in it: Bind, take charge of (?) faith
true flower of the lapsed faith, in the name of the Son : go
flower control faith, else cure mad faiih."
Antoine Fusy or Fusi, a Doctor of Divinity of the University
of Louvain, takes his place in the category of literary fools, on
account of the unintelligible extravagances of his works, one of
which is entitled The Sharp-shooter of the True Church against
the Abuses and Enormities of the False. In a work having the
title of Mastigophorus, or the Precursor of the Zodiac, he de-
fends a wild medico-physical discovery which he believed that he
had made, but which is scarcely fitted for quotation.
Simon Morin, an ignorant and illiterate man, was possessed
with the errors of the illuminati, and composed several works, one
of which, written in 1601, was entitled, An Evidence of the
Second Coming of the Son of Man, and in it he asserts that
he himself was the Messiah. He was condemned to be burned
LITERARY FOOLS. 173
alive, and he suffered at the stake, his works being destroyed with
him, on the 14th of March, 1C63. The President de Laraoignon,
having demanded of Morin if he had written that the new
Messiah would pass through the fire, he answered yes, and that
it was of him that the prophet had spoken in the fourth verse of
the sixteenth Psalm, " igne vie examinasti, et non est inventa
in vie iniquitas." He had promised to rise on the third day,
and a multitude assembled at the place of execution to witness
the resurrection.
In the theological category we find also Frangois Dosche,
who tells us at the termination of the title-page of one of his
books, that, " not having the means to print it entire, he has,
in order to give it to the light, begun with the end, being as anxious
to bring forth the truth of God in him as a pregnant woman is
to give birth to her infantJohn Mason who proclaimed the
visible reign of Christ (whose temporal throne was to be esta-
blished at Water-Stratford, near Buckingham) and who believed
that be received a visit from the Lord: and Jean P. Parizot, who
attempted to demonstrate that in Genesis and the Evangel of St.
John it was announced that the three elements of the Trinity
were found everywhere in nature. Salt, the generator of all
things, represented God the Father; mercury, in its extreme
fluidity, God the Son, spread throughout the universe; and
sulphur, from its property of uniting salt and mercury, God the
Holy Ghost. He was condemned to the stake for the impious-
ness of one of his works. He deserved the sentence, not for the
impiety of the work, but for the excesses which arose out of it.
Other instances might be cited of writers whose brains have
been turned by theology anterior to our own time; but, to come
nearer to the present day, we may mention J. A. Soubira, the self-
called Apostle of Israel, Messiah of the Universe, Poet of Israel,
Lion of Jacob, &c. Among his works are found The Second Mes'
siah to the Whole World, (1818. 8vo.); Counsel to all the Powers
of the Earth, (1822. 8vo.); The End of the World Predicted by
Soubira, its Epoch fixed, that of the Coming of the Messiah of
Israel, and of the first day of the Age of Gold, or of the Neio
Terrestrial Paradise, (8vo.) ; The Wandering Jew to his
Bankers, (8vo.j 2 pages); "666," (1828. 8vo.), &c. The
pamphlet having the sole title of " 666," is composed of prose
and verse, and the number 666 is placed at the extremity of each
line in every stanza. This is the first stanza:?
? " Les bauquiers de la France .... 660
Des organistes de la foi 666
Et des concertes de la cadencc . . . 666
Yont accomplir la loi 666
Et contremenir 1'alliance  666<"
174' LITERARY FOOLS.
Lastly, a merchant named Cheneau of Mennetout-sur-Cher,
made himself notorious, in 1848, by several mad works, one of
which is entitled, Instructions lioiv to obtain Children Healthy in
Mind and Body, and as perfect as may.be. Before publishing this
work, which he designated " the new religious basis and its mode
of organization, in which all will recognise the divine power," he
had affixed to the walls of Paris a posting-bill, containing a pro-
testation against all oppressors, and headed The Will of Jehovah
in Christ Jesus, sole God, -manifested through his servant,
Cheneau, merchant.
After all, was poor Cheneau far wrong in the idea that underlies
his system of moral re-organization, that hereditary transmission
plays a greater part in morals than is commonly admitted ?
If we turn now to instances of literary fools proper, we find, in
the seventeenth century, Nathaniel Lee writing in one of the cells
of Bedlam dramas, and also verses, which latter excited the praise
of Addison, but which indicate the madness of the author. It is
told of Lee that, while writing one of his dramas, a cloud chanced to
overcast the moon, whereupon he cried, "Jove, snuff the moon !"
In the eighteenth century we find Alexander Cruden, the
author of the well-known Concordance of the Holy Scriptures. He
was several times confined in lunatic asylums. His insanity, pro-
bably induced by disappointed affection, was distinguished by ex-
traordinary attempts to do good in ridiculous ways. After being re ?
leased from a confinement in the Bethnal-green Asylum, he wrote
a whimsical pamphlet, retaliating upon his keepers, and entitled,
The London Citizen exceedingly injured, giving an account of
his Adventures during the time of his severe and long Campaign at
Bethnal-green, for nine Weeks and six Days, the Citizen being sent
thither in March, 1738, by Ilobcrt Wightman, a notoriously con-
ceited, whimsical man, where he was chained, handcuffed, strait-
ivaistcoated, and imprisoned, &c. After a subsequent confine-
ment he wrote another singular and wild work, entitled The Ad-
ventures of Alexander the Corrector,?alluding to his principal
employment at the time as a corrector of the press.
About the same period lived Christopher Smart, whose insanity
did not extinguish a high degree of poetical power which he pos-
sessed. He had received a brilliant education at Cambridge, where
he took off the prize for the best poem five years in succession. He
became insane in 1794, and it was necessary to confine him in an
asylum; but although he was deprived of pen, ink, and paper, he
composed there a poem of nearly one hundred stanzas to the
glory of the Prophet King David. These verses were traced with
a key on the wood panels of his chamber. Several of the verses
bear the true stamp of the poet, and M. Delepierre thinks that
they almost warrant the doubt whether the writer was insane when
LITERARY FOOLS. 175
lie composed them. Tlie poem is not included in Smart's collected
works, hnt the following noble stanzas will convey an idea of its
character:?
" He sang of God?the mighty source
Of all things?the stupendous force
On which all strength depends;
From whose right arm, beneath whose eyes
All period, power, and enterprise
Commences, reigns, and ends.
" Sweet is the dew that falls betimes,
And drops upon the leafy limes ;
Sweet Hermon's fragrant air,
Sweet is the lily's silver bell,
And sweet the wakeful taper's smell
That watch for early prayer.
" Sweeter in all the strains of love,
The language of the turtle dove,
Pair'd to thy swelling chord ;
Sweeter, with easy grace endued
The glory of thy gratitude
Respired unto the Lord.
" Strong is the lion?like a coal
His eyeball?like a bastion's mole
His chest against his foes,
Strong the gyre eagle on his sail,
Strong against tide, the enormous whale
Emerges, as he goes.
" But stronger still, in earth and air,
And in the sea, the man of prayer,
And far beneath the tide,
And in the seat to faith assign'd?
Where ask is have, and seek is find,
Where knock is open wide.
" Glorious the sun in mid career ;
Glorious the assembled fires appear;
Glorious the comet's train;
Glorious the trumpet and alarm,
Glorious the Almighty's stretch'd-out arm j
Glorious the enraptured main.
" Glorious?more glorious is the crown
Of Him that brought salvation down
By meekness, called thy Son;
Thou that stupendous truth believed,
And now the matchless deed's achieved,
Determined^ dared, and done."
176 LITERARY FOOLS.
Smart died in 1770. He translated the Psalms, Phasdrus, and
Horace in prose. His poems were published in 1791; Garrick
and Johnson favoured him with their friendship, and the last
wrote his life.
Had Smart been permitted to have the same liberty as Edme
Billard, a literary fool who about the same period amused the
Parisian public, he might have died as tranquilly. Billard wrote
four plays, The Joyous Moribund (1779), Voltaire Appreciated
(no date), The Weeper in Spite of Himself (no date), and the
Suborner (1782). These plays, although evidently written by a
person of diseased mind, are not wanting in gaiety.
Thomas Lloyd was persuaded that he was the most sublime
poet in the world. His Sketches in Bedlam, or Characteristic
Traits of Insanity (London, 1823), is a work which contains a
most extraordinary and heterogeneous melange of malice, pride,
talent, lying, vile failings and great qualities. When, during his
confinement in Bedlam, he was enabled to obtain paper, he began
to write verses; but as it usually happened that they did not
please him, he would throw them into his drink to clean them, as
he said. Whatever he had in his pookets or that came to hand, his
insanity prompted him to mingle with his food: pebbles, tobacco,
bits of leather, bones, coals, were thrown into his pottage, after a
process which he termed scientific. Whatever he cast in lie con-
ceived that it gave some agreeable flavour to the food, and if lie
had not been watched he would have swallowed everything with
the gusto of an Apicius. He announced that his knowledge was
universal in tongues, science, history, and music. Although often
liberated, it was as often necessary to replace him in confinement.
He lived beyond the sixtieth year.
Johan Carl Wezal, born in 1747, and who became insane when
thirty-nine years of age, wrote several works under the delusion
that he was God. Some of these writings were printed under the
title Opera Dei Wezelii W. S. des Gottes.
A very interesting history is cited in the Records of Pennsyl-
vania (Philadelphia, 1802), of a barrister named Milman, whose
reason was overturned by the shock experienced from the awfully
sudden death of a lady lie was about to lead to the altar.
She was struck dead by lightning just before the time ap-
pointed for the performance of the marriage ceremony. It was
necessary to confine Mr.Milman in an asylum; but as he had long
periods of tranquillity he was suffered to make excursions into the
country. He had lucid intervals, but whilst they continued he
could never be left alone three hours consecutively without
danger of relapsing into wildness, or becoming fatuous. Previous
to his insanity he had manifested no marked imaginative powers,
his aptitude being towards the positive and abstract sciences; but
LITERARY FOOLS. 177
during tlie lucid intervals of liis malady lie exhibited no incon-
siderable degree of fancy, and from time to time he committed to
paper certain reflections and descriptions remarkable for vigour
and freshness, and the air of pleasantry which runs through them,
-fhe following is an example:?
"Nobody has any business to expect satisfaction in a pure country
life for two months, unless they have a decided genius for leisure.
If a man expects to live in a country, of course he must have some-
thing to do, and do it all the while. But to gather up yourself and
sit down in a plain country-house, without bear's and lions about it,
without anything to do but to rest; with no marvels or phenomena,
hut only the good, real, common country; if-you mean to be happy
in this, I repeat you should have the element of leisure very full and
powerful within you. You cannot be happy if you are in a hurry.
Y ou must not be in a hurry to get up or sit down ; you must not be
ln a hurry to get up in the morning, or to retire at night: you must
regard it quite the same thing whether you look at a tree ten minutes
or thirty ; if you walk out, never must you look at your watch ; go
till your return; if you sit down upon a breezy fence or wall, it should
be a matter of indifference to you whether it be four o'clock, or five,
or six. There can be no greater impertinence than to say,' It is time
to go!' There is no such thing as time to a man in a summer
vacation.
^ ^ ^
" Yet amid the tranquil, dreaming, gazing life, one cannot always be
quite as serene as one would, For example, this morning, while the
dew was yet on the grass, word came that Charley had got away.
Now Charley is the most important member of the family, and as
shrewd a horse as ever need be. Lately he had found out the difference
between being harnessed by a boy and a man. Accordingly, on several
occasions, as soon as the halter dropped from his head, and before the
bridle could take its place, he proceeded to back boldly out of the
stable, in spite of the stout boy pulling with all his might at his
mane and ears. This particular morning we were to put a passenger
friend on board the cars at 8.10 ; it was now 7.30. Out popped Charley
from his stall like a cork from a bottle, and lo ! some fifty acres there
Were in which to exercise his legs and ours, to say nothing of temper and
ingenuity. First, the ladjr, with a measure of oats, attempted to do the
thing genteelly. Not he ! he had no objection to the oats, none to the
hand, until it "came near his head, then off he sprang. After one or two
trials, we dropped the oats, and went at it in earnest?called all the
boys, headed him off this way, ran him out of the growing oats, drove
him into the upper lot, and out of it again. We got him into a
corner with great pains, and he got himself out of it without the least
trouble. He would dash through a line of six or eight boys with as
little resistance as if they had been so many mosquitoes! Down he
ran to the lower side of the lot, and down we all walked after him?
too tired to run. Oh ! it was glorious fun! the sun was hot, the cars
were coming, and we had two miles to ride to the depot! He did
178 LITEKARY FOOLS.
enjoy it, and we did not. We resorted to expedients?opened wide
the great gate of the barn-yard, and essayed to drive him in ; and we
did it too, almost; for he ran close to it,?and just sailed past, with a
laugh as plain on his face as ever horse had ! Man is vastly superior
to a horse in many respects, but running on a hot summer's day, in a
twenty-acre lot, is not one of them ! AYe got him by the brgok, and
while he drank, oh, how leisurely! we started up and succeeded in
just missing our grab at his mane. Now comes another splendid run.
His head was up, his eyes flashing, his tail streamed out like a banner,
and glancing his head this way and that, right and left, ho allowed us
to come on to the brush corner, from whence, in a few moments, he
allowed us to emerge and come afoot after him down to the barn again.
But luck will not hold for ever, even with horses. He dashed down
a lane, and we had him. But as soon as he saw the gate closed, and
perceived the state of the case, how charmingly he behaved! allowed
us to come up and bridle him without a movement of resistance, and
affirmed by his whole conduct that it was the merest sport in the
world, all this seeming disobedience; and to him I have no doubt
it was!"
Two singular examples close M. Delepierre's instances of
literary fools proper. In 1834 a M. G. Desjardins published in
Paris, under the title of the First Babylon (.Premiere Babylonc),
the first part of a vast drama entitled Semiramis the Great. Tlio
work is composed of five hundred octavo pages, and many passages
are printed in Hebrew, Persian, Arabic, and Chaldee, as well as
other characters. Some notion of this madly extravagant book
may be obtained from the extract which follows, taken from the
fifth Section of Bitterness, vulgarly called Act, part of which
is in verse and part prose. Voices innumerable and cavernous
are heard issuing from the profundities of the earth, and the
Prince of Prophets, God's-Judgment, says to them:?
Arise! shake from a vast and sluggish wing,
The eloquent night-dust of three thousand years,?
and from the bottom of the sepulchres in which this vast accumu-
lation of generations lies, comes forth the myriad-voiced answer?
Behold, in horizontal ranks we raise us !
" Then the kings, princes, and chiefs innumerable of nations com-
mence, helter-skelter, a kind of round or immense chain, supported
behind by the stampings and acclamations of the nations. In the
ranks are found mingled and carried along both beasts and brutes con-
temporaries of the ancient actors of this Apocalyptic scene ; all creation,
every generation of beings brought forth, reptiles, birds, quadrupeds,
all flesh multiplying and moving, great lions in the ranks of gigantic
warriors, dromedaries, ostriches, giraffes, boas, elevating'their long
necks, or advancing spirally in the midst of travelling men ; lofty ele-
phants, colossal mastodons their eldest brothers, erecting the mon-
strous serpent of their trunk above the heads and horns of ancient
races, princely, royal, and antediluvian. And above all, the stork, the
LITERARY FOOLS. 179
ihis, and great vultures fly, all rolling together the thick waves of their
I'ound, all lightened in the travel of their whirling chain, by rays from
the red and flaming face of Grod; and muttering, roaring, and shriek-
uig these words, each in his tongue, whilst revolving :?
" We represent both the storm and the dreadful thunder
Which grumbles around the mount, which corrupts the earth!
During the long horror of a day of chastisement,
We imitate the rigours of the last judgment," &c.
It seems to us, although it does not appear to have struck
M. Delepierre's mind, that this scene of Soubira's has been inspired
by the Oriental legends respecting the great Solomon, King of the
Genii, and the Maliommedan legends of the condition of man in
the interval that exists between tlie resurrection and the judgment.
Solomon is described as having at his command the whole of the
heasts and birds that have destructive powers, and when he con-
tended with the evil genii on the earth, advanced the beasts of
Prey>?lions, tigers, leopards, wolves, &e.,?together with ele-
phants, and every other kind of animal capable of taking part in
a struggle; in mid-air sailed Solomon sitting upon his magic
carpet, and accompanied by myriads of good genii; and above
all flew an army of eagles, vultures, and other birds. Tlie Ma-
hommedan legends tell us that at the resurrection of mankind, the
genii, and every variety of animal, will be collected on a vast plain
(commentators differ as to its locality), and there for a space,
some think of forty years, others of fifty thousand, all created
heings, rational and irrational, will experience in advance the lot
which will be theirs at the last judgment.
The last example of literary fools proper is a M. Paulin
Gagne, author of several poems, one of which entitled L'Uniteide,
?r the Woman-Messiah, of which the action is placed in the two
thousandth year of the Christian era, was published in 1858. It
contains a ridiculous agglomeration of fantastic names and ab-
surd verses. Among the dramatis persona are L'Ane-Archide,
" daughter of Despotism and of Liberty Demounias, the fore-
runner of Antichrist; Panarchie, the Dive Insania, the Bceuf
Apis, Archimonde, and his illustrious spouse La Presse, Patati-
culture, and many other extraordinary personifications, the names
?f which are even less extraordinary than the verses and ideas
accompanying them. For example, turning into anagrams the
names of modern socialistic reformers he places them all in pre-
sence of L'Ane-Arcliide, who says to them?
Speak!
Wide awake, if I can, I to your dreams will listen.
Speak Pierre Xourd, Nodourp, Urdel Nillor,
Louis Cnalb, George Nas, Narredisnoc without gold,
Tebac, Ogu without fear, and all ye great apostles,
Who on the head of others aspire to march.
180 LITERARY FOOLS.
Then the poet expresses, through their mouths, the different
systems of these gentlemen in so far as he somewhat loosely com-
prehends them. The first canto terminates by the entry of the
Woman-Messiah into Paris.
The second canto contains the same personifications as the
first, with the addition of ambassadors from the sun and the
moon, inhabitants of the stars, Auritheocratie, JRatiotheie, See.
The comet Trouble-tout (Trouble-all) comes also on the scene,
and has a discussion with Ratiotheie, and sings a song, le Galop
(le la Conibte, to the air Les Defenseurs cle la Religion.
Nations, I come to toll the final hour
Upon the bells of this vast universe !
Already death has hewn out a huge coffin
And made all ready for the mighty convoy :
Tremble, 0 nations! no longer have ye shelter,
And utter swiftly your most sad adieu!
Tremble, 0 nations, before my flaming tail!
0 nations, wallow in the fierce chaos of fire.
In the third canto La Soeialiforce has a long discussion with
his partisans, which terminates thus :?
I found for aye the golden age of the belly,
Whose pleasant sway our time has much enlarged:
The belly is the fount of revolutions,
And eke creations and destructions.
The Empty-bellies through the long night thunder;
The Well-filled bellies glow with radiant light;
The Hollow-bellies are not worth a jot.
But I will fill them, for they loudly praise me.
Come then, dear friends, and let us hasten swiftly
To trick out feasts that shall astound the world.
The scene of the fifth canto is placed " wheresoever you wish
it," and the text is filled with indecent matter. The scene of the
thirty-eighth act of the eighth canto is a vast potato-field, and
Potato-culture opens the scene in a discourse containing seventy-
two lines, of which the following is an example :?
Nations and kings, I am Potato-culture,
Daughter of nature and this frying-age ;
% % ^ ^ # #
For aye I have adored this dainty fruit,
Once as an extra eaten by the gods.
This tirade ends with:?
Iii the potato lies the health of all!
In the same scene, Carotti-culture also addresses the kings
LITERARY FOOLS. 18J
and nations, and sings a parody of the Marseillaise, entitled The
Universal Carrot (la Carotte universelle), commencing?
" Allons, Enfans, de la Carotte
Le jour de gloire est arrive.
Chorus:?
Aux armes, Carottiers, formez vos bataillons,
Marchons, que la Carotte inonde nos sillons.
M. Gagne tells us in his preface, that " the vast subject of
his humanizing and Christian poem should form the universal
poesy of humanity, and the school of trutli.'' Madame Elise
Gagne, the wife of the author, adds an epilogue, in which she
tells us that after the reforms indicated in the poem are carried
into effect, abundance and happiness will prevail upon the earth.
The poem, indeed, is no pleasantry on the part of its author.
" The whole proves," writes M. Delepierre, " that he employed
all the resources of his intellect in writing this chef cl'ceuvre."
We must add that the poem is written in rhyme. Other poems
written by M. Gagne, are Le Suicide, La Monopanglotte ou
Langue Universelle, Le Delire, L'Ocean des Catastrophes.
In the section of M. Delepierre's Essay devoted to Philoso-
phical and Scientific Fools, Kant is mentioned, who became
insane towards the close of his life, and who has a place among
literary fools, inasmuch as recently a work has been discovered
in Germany, written by the great metaphysician during his in-
sanity. The next illustration is derived from the fifteenth century,
towards the close of which lived, at Pisa, one Gragani, a phy-
sician, who became mad, and during his confinement in a mad-
house he wrote a work entitled, De Philosophid Aristotelis,
which was published, to pacify the writer, at Pisa, in 1496. In
this curious book, of which one copy alone, in the library of the
Vatican, is known to exist, Gragani attempts to prove that the
name of Aristotle was a myth, and that that philosopher never
had being.
In 1529, a work was published in Florence entitled, The
Anatomy of Language. It was written by a physician named
Joseph Bcrnardi during his confinement in an asylum. Among
other curious opinions, he maintained that the whole race of
monkeys had the faculty of speech, but that they carefully kept
the gift secret. He drew upon the walls of his cell an anatomical
diagram of a monkey's throat, and sought to prove that the con-
struction clearly showed the faculty of speech and even of song.
Bernardi asserted that in the first editions of the voyages of Marco
Polo, it had been well established that monkeys could sing.
What added to the curiosity of all this was, that a Jesuit, Father
182 LITERARY FOOLS.
Cremoni, wrote a refutation of Bernardi's treatise, and maintained
that, although tlie work of his adversary was well written, the
thesis was contrary to the testimony of Holy Writ, and conse-
quently could not be true. Plow aptly does the biting remark of
Jaques apply here?
" The wise man's folly is anatomised,
Even by the squandering glances of a fool."
Bernardi lived ten years after the publication of his work, but
he never fully recovered his reason.
In 1022, there appeared at Salamanca, under the title of De
Pliilosophia, a work written by Miguel de Flores, formerly a
professor in the university of that city. He had become insane
in consequence of concussion of the brain, occasioned by a fall
from a carriage. The insanity continued many years, but as he
was peaceable, he was suffered to be at liberty. His mania was
characterized by an incessant desire to write; and he would
carry his manuscripts along with him, stopping the passengers in
the streets to read to them his lucubrations. Four years before
his death, his friends published one of his essays, and " it is
remarkable," writes M. Delepierre, " since that in it is contained
the germ of the system developed in our days, under the name of
the atomic theory, by Father Boscovitcli, Dr Priestley, and
others. De Flores represents the Deity as occupying the centre
of creation, and all things created as concentric circles, more or
less removed the one from the other. Eccentric engravings give
an idea of the theory of the author. They depict the Divinity
setting in motion all things by the mechanical action of the arms
and legs."
jRobert Hall finds a place in this section, and also Thomas
Wirgman, who was the author of many works, and who dissi-
pated a great fortune in printing them.
Wirgman lived not long ago, and among other freaks, he
addressed a letter to George IV., in which he declared that if the
principles set forth in his book, the Devarication of the New
Testament, were not adopted, neither the king nor his subjects
would be saved in the other world. The title of the work named
runs thus:?" The development of celestial power, the aggrega te of
spiritual existence, the sublimity of creative energy, the positive
realization of voluntary action, and the blended harmony of
supreme icisclom, truth, and goodness.
Wirgman's mental failing was not manifested in his writings
only, but also in the mode in which his books were fabricated.
He had paper made in such a fashion that each leaf of his books
was of divers colours; and if the colours did not happen to
please him, he would have other paper prepared. He would also
frequently change the arrangement of a book in passing through
LITERARY FOOLS. 183
the press. Thus it happened that the hook just named, although
possessing only 400 pages, cost him ?227G sterling.
Another ofWirgman's works was entitled, The Grammar of
the Five Senses, and purposed to be a course of metaphysics for
infants. The work is illustrated by nineteen coloured diagrams, and
of it the author states: " When this (grammar) is adopted, virtue
will supersede crime, and establish peace and harmony on earth/'
Wirgman was a goldsmith by trade, and he had retired from
business with a fortune of ?50,000. This was altogether wasted
in printing his books, and he died destitute. (Essay on Bluet
d'Arberes, by M. Delepierre, p. 11.)
Last in the list of philosophical fools is William Martin, a
brother of Jonathan Martin, who set fire to York Cathedral.
His first work was entitled, A New System of Natural Philosophy
on the principle of Perpetual Motion?Newcastle, Preston, 1821.
In the title-page he designates himself Natural Philosopher; and
in the preface he tells us, that having in vain attempted to solve
the problem of perpetual motion mechanically, he renounced the
subject as impracticable. But the very evening of the day on
which he had come to this decision, he had a dream, partly
strange and terrible, partly very agreeable; and from this dream
he awoke perfectly convinced that God had chosen him to
discover the great secondary cause of all things, and the true
perpetual motion. Martin wrote several books.
From M. Delepierre's section on Political Fools, we shall quote
only three examples.
One Demons in the sixteenth century distinguished himself by
two works, the title of one of which is as follows: " The clisputative
and potential Sextessenee obtained by a neiu method of distilla-
tion, according to the precepts of white magic and invocation of
Demons, counsellor of the presidial [an inferior court of judi-
cature] of Amiens, as well to cure the hemorrhage, wounds,
and venereal ulcers of France, as to change and convert things
noxious and abominable into things good and useful." (Paris,
1595, 8vo.).
Francois Davenne, who believed among other things that he
ought to supplant Louis XIV., and who wrote several very curious
tracts, proposed two modes in which to demonstrate his sovereign
puissance and royal authority. " Take," said he, " the Cardinal,
the Regent, the Duke of Orleans, the Princes, the coadjutor, and
those whom "the world esteems most holy ; light a furnace, throw
all into it, and let the individual who comes out without injury
from the flame, like a phoenix renewed, be considered the protege
of God, and be ordained prince of the people.
The second proposition, made lest the farmer-one should not
be accepted, runs thus :?<c Let the Parliament decree my death for
184 LITERARY FOOLS.
having dared to tell the princes truth. Let them execute me,
and if God saves me not from their hands in a supernatural
manner, let my memory he blotted out. If God does not deliver
me from the hands of the executioners, there will be an end of the
matter; but if the supernatural arm snatches me from their claws,
let them be sacrificed in my stead."
In his Pleaof the Eternal Wisdom, he has the following quaintly
expressed thought: "My soul, I immolate thee upon the scaffold
of my ideas, with the hand of my desires, by the sword of my
resignation."
In 1848, one Herpain of Genappe, whose mind had been
deranged by ideas of social progress, under the pseudonym of
Usaner, published a little work in 18mo., developing a theory of
language which slie termed Langage pliysiologique. He sent
copies of the work to all the legislative assemblies of Europe.
That destined for the English Parliament, was addressed To the
Legislators of the great English Nation by their servant Herpain,
author." In a note at the end of the introduction he suggests
the use of certain ciphers in place of the letters ordinarily made
use of; for example, " Statong facto opro lit2al ni, ni foASal ovo
otano," &c. Fortunately he adds a translation, which is not a
bad example of his style of writing:?"Immediately that your
majestic presence had lit up the nothing (ncant), the nothing
became the medium of existence. Then you willed to sway
favourably the essences, and the principles of beings were pro-
duced by your generous fecundity," &c.
Thus far we have dealt with the literature prompted by in-
sanity, and which is a manifestation of the loss of mental equili-
brium. But there is another class of literature of the insane. In
several of the lunatic asylums in this kingdom literary composi-
tion is encouraged as a curative occupation for the inmates. The
Crichton Royal Asylum, in Scotland, has its journal, The New
Moon, edited, conducted, written, and printed by the lunatics in
the establishment. This journal is issued monthly, and has been in
existence many years. Some years ago a series of Memoirs of
Mad Poets, Mad Philosophers, Mad Kings, Mad Churls, by the
inmates of the Crichton Institution, were published, and more
recently a small volume of poems by the lady patients was printed.
The Royal Edinburgh Asylum for the Insane has also its
monthly journal, The Morningside Mirror, which has been
regularly published about twelve years. This journal is also
entirely written and printed by the patients, in the Hanwell
Asylum literary composition is also encouraged.
Two poetical extracts from The New Moon, illustrative of
LITERARY FOOLS. 1S5
that happiness of expression which often madness hits on, may
fittingly close our illustrations of the literature of madness :?
On the Death of my JBulJinch.
Oh, couldst thou know, my little pet,
How much thine absence I regret!
Ah ! 'twas a day like this
When thou into my little room
To cheer me with thy voice didst come,
Which now I hourly miss ;
And 'neath this shade of woe, alone,
Lament my little Goldie gone.
Whene'er thou saw'st me shut within
My room, thou cheerily wouldst sing,
And all thy art employ ;
At thy lov'd voice, so sweet and clear,
All care would quickly disappear?
My sadness turn to joy ;
And all the trouble of my lot
Be dissipated and forgot.
Wise people do, I know, believe
That birds, when they have ceased to breathe,
W ill never more revive;
But?though I cannot tell you why?
I hope, though Goldie chanced to die,
To see him yet alive !
May there not be?if Heaven please?
In Paradise, both birds and trees P
I've had such dreams?they may be true:
Meantime, my little pet, Adieu!
ii.
Go! sleep my heart in peace !
Bid fear and sorrow cease:
He who of worlds takes care,
Our heart in mind doth bear.
Go! sleep my heart in peace!
If death should thee release,
And this night hence thee take,
Thou yonder wilt awake.
This last poem might have been written by Herrick.
It may be due to M. Delepierre to express our high apprecia-
tion of his admirably written and daintily printed essay, but it is
hardly just to our readers, seeing that the great majority of them
NO. XIV.?NEW SERIES. 0
186 ON THE ARTIFICIAL PRODUCTION OF
can only know it through the means of our imperfect abstract,
and consequently we might unhappily excite a desire which could
not he gratified. The essay is printed for private circulation, and
the last line on the last page runs thus:?" Nota.?Cet Essai n'a
ete tire a part qua 50 exemplaires."
