On the State and Condition of Lunacy In Ireland 
================================================

Akt. VII.-
In 1850 a Royal Commission was appointed to inquire into the
state of Lunatic Asylums and other Institutions for the custody
and treatment of the Insane in Ireland, and into the present
state of the Law respecting Lunatics and Lunatic Asylums in
that part of the United Kingdom. The Report of the Commis-
sioners has now been made public, and it is unfavourable, not
only as regards the condition and management of both public
and private institutions for the insane in Ireland, but also as
regards the existing state of the Irish Law of lunacy. From
several omissions, however, and also from not a few misappre-
hensions of the Commissioners, it appears to us that the
unfavourable aspect of their Report has been unnecessarily,
although, without doubt, unintentionally, heightened, and that,
* Report of the Commissioners of Inquiry into the State of the Lunatic
Asylums, and other Institutions for the Custody and Treatment of the Insane in
Ireland.?(Blue Book.) 1858.
Observations on the Report of the Commissioners oi Inquiry into Lunatic
Asylums, &c. (Ireland), in a Letter to the Right Honourable Lord Viscount
Naas, M.P., Chief Secretary. By J. Nugent, M.D., Inspector of Lunatic
Asylums. (Her Majesty's Stationery Office.) 1858.
ON THE STATE AND CONDITION OF LUNACY IN IRELAND. 107
in consequence, the Report does not present a correct notion of
the actual state and condition of Lunacy Legislation and Manage*
ment in Ireland.
The returns laid before the Commission show that, on the J st
of January, 1857, the number of insane poor in Ireland amounted
to 928G, of whom 5934 were maintained at the public charge,
and 3352 were at large. The returns made to the Commissioners
do not correspond with the returns of the Inspectors of Lunacy
for the same period. These returns give the total number of
insane in Ireland, exclusive of epileptics at large and in work-
houses, as being 11,452, of whom 5441 were at large. The
inspectors estimate that, of the total number of insane at large,
as recorded in their returns, 600 lunatics and idiots were not
paupers. Thus, according to this calculation, the insane poor
would amount to 4841. The returns upon which the Commis-
sioners' enumeration is founded distinctly specified that the
"poor" alone should be included; the inspectors' estimates
were founded on returns obtained irrespective of social condition.
The Census returns show that the total number of insane in
.Ireland on the 31st of March, 1851, was 9980. A comparison
of the Census and of the Lunacy Inspectors' returns, " made at
an interval of between five and six years, and obtained through
the same sources of information, shows a considerable increase in
the amount of insanity in Ireland."?(p. 2.)
It is to be regretted that the Commissioners have not given an
estimate of the proportion of insane to population in each of the
two periods referred to, and also of the probable rate of increase
in the amount of insanity.
The insane poor, who are maintained at the public charge, are
distributed in the District Asylums (sixteen in number), the
workhouses, the gaols, and the Central Criminal Asylum.
Concerning the District Asylums, the Commissioners report
that the rules which exist (themselves imperfectly conceived) for
the government of those institutions are frequently imperfectly
carried out, disregarded, or altogether violated ; that the books
which are required to be kept for recording, at regular periods,
the condition of the inmates, are either not kept, or if kept,
there is a want of uniformity in the mode in which the entries
are made; that the Governing Boards of the institutions do
not, as a rule, meet sufficiently often; that there is great
diversity in the rules of admission; that the hygienic arrange-
ments of both the old and the new asylums are not satisfactory,
particularly the ventilation and warming; that in several asylums
there is an inattention to cleanliness; that the provision for the
recreation of the inmates is deficient, if not altogether wanting;
that the wards have commonly a bare and uncomfortable aspect;
108 ON THE STATE AND CONDITION OF LUNACY IN IRELAND.
tliat, though the dietary usually appeared equal, if not superior,
to that which the inmates had been previously accustomed to,
there were great variations in different asylums, and the returns
of consumption showed inexplicable inconsistencies with the
tables of allowances; and the Commissioners remark, " If the
returns of consumption are correct, the patients cannot receive
the amount of food professed to be allowed to them."?(p. 14.)
Further, the Commissioners object to the use of skimmed-milk
and butter-milk in asylums. The Commissioners report, also,
that the bedding is ample in quantity, but not sufficiently good
in quality ; that the bedsteads are often of bad construction ;
that the clothing is in general sufficient, and of fair quality, but
that it requires improvement; and that the distribution of out-
door exercise, or labour, among the inmates, is not satisfactory
on the whole. The Commissioners also object to the treatment
of the sick in cells, as is practised in several asylums, even
where a proper infirmary exists?which, however, in a few in-
stances, was found to have been converted to another use.
Moreover, the Commissioners report that the prescription, wine,
and dietary books are negligently kept, and that there is a
"culpable disregard" of the rule which regulates the use of re-
straint. This rule requires that " the Manager is to take
charge of the instruments of restraint, and is not, under any
pretence, to allow the unauthorized use of them to any person
within the establishment; all cases placed under restraint, seclu-
sion, or other deviation from the ordinary treatment, are to be
carefully recorded by him in the daily report, with the particular
nature of the restraint or deviation resorted to ; but in no case
shall the shower-bath be resorted to without the authority of the
physician."?(p. 16.) In some instances the Commissioners
found that the managers were not even aware of this rule; in
others, it was found that the instruments of restraint were left in
charge of the attendants; and several instances are mentioned
in the Report in which restraint had been had recourse to with-
out the knowledge either of the manager or visiting physician
of the asylum. In two of these instances the restraint was unjusti-
fiably harsh and protracted.
It is a somewhat singular fact that, while the Commissioners
have, throughout their Report, kept constantly in view the great
proposition that an asylum should be an institution for the treat-
ment as well as for the detention of the insane, they should have
altogether passed over, without observation, the data submitted
to them, and printed by them in the Appendix to the Report,
which indicate the character of the asylums of Ireland as curative
institutions for the insane. When these data, so important to a
ON THE STATE AND CONDITION OF LUNACY IN IRELAND. 109
right knowledge of tlie subject of investigation, are examined,
a suspicion is excited that the generally unfavourable opinion of
tlie^ Commissioners upon the District Asylums arises in no small
degree from their having raised a false standard of comparison.
We do not desire for a moment to convey an impression that we
in any way approve, or would wish the continuance of those
irregularities and defects in management that the Commissioners
report; but the omission upon their part of any allusion to
the most creditable, as well as most important feature of the
asylum returns, is a circumstance much to be regretted.
From the Tables of Admissions and Discharges of the different
District Asylums, it would appear that the proportion of reco-
veries, calculated on the admissions, for the whole of the District
Asylums, on an average of five years (1852-50), was 39*2 per
cent.; and that the mortality of the same asylums, calculated
upon the whole number of insane within them during the same
period, was 10"5 per cent. These proportions, both of recoveries
and deaths, compare very favourably with those occurring in
English County Asylums, the mortality being below, and the
recoveries almost equal to the proportions found in those institu-
tions. Drs. Buclcnell and Tuke give the following averages (for
periods not stated) of the recoveries and mortality of fifteen
English County Asylums :?
Proportion of Re- Mean Annual Mor-
coveries per cent. tality per cent,
of admissions. Resident.
Average of six English County ^
Asylums receiving private V 46*87 ? 1046
and pauper patients . , . )
Average of nine English County }
Asj-lums receiving paupers > 36 95 ? 13*88
only J
Average of the fifteen Asylums 41-91 ?* 12'17
The general condemnation of the Commissioners is, so far as
we can gather from the medical returns with which they furnish
us, and from which the foregoing statistics of recoveries and
mortality in the District Asylums are taken, in a great measure
inconsistent with the medical results obtained in those institu-
tions. Faults there undoubtedly are, both in the hygienic
condition and general management of the District Asylums;
but we must not, on that account, ignore their merits.
Moreover, Dr. Nugent, one of the Inspectors of Lunacy in
Ireland, in a letter to the Eight Honourable Viscount Naas,
M.P., Chief Secretary, points out that the opinions of the Com-
missioners respecting the dietary of lunatics, the disuse of the
infirmaries in several asylums, and the negligent use of the pre-
110 ON THE STATE AND CONDITION OF LUNACY IN IRELAND.
scription and wine books, are founded on misapprehensions. The
inconsistencies in the consumption and the diet-tables, to which the
Commissioners refer, may be explained by the variations ordered
from the ordinary diet by the physicians. The disuse of the in-
firmaries in several asylums can be, and is, satisfactorily accounted
for; and it appears that a bye-law exists (however ill-advised it
may be) giving the physician the option in using the books
referred to.
Dr. Nugent seeks also to explain in some degree the instances
of cruel restraint mentioned by the Commissioners. When, how-
ever, as would appear to be the case in the District Asylums, the
number of attendants is not sufficient for the effective carrying out
of a system of non-restraint, and the wages paid to the attendants
are not liberal enough to secure persons of a degree of intelligence
that would enable them to comprehend and carry out fully the
requirements of a non-restraint system, it becomes almost neces-
sary to use more or less restraint in the treatment of the insane;
but the liability to abuse becomes also great, and the necessity
for stringent rules regulating the use of the means of restraint,
and for the strict observance of those rules, cannot be too care-
fully enforced.
Concerning the lunatic wards in workhouses, the Commis-
sioners report that they are most unsuitable for the detention of
the insane ; and upon the condition of the insane in them at the
present time the Commissioners write :?
" The unfortunate creatures have commonly no one to attend to
them but some of the other pauper inmates, who are but little capable,
or little inclined to concern themselves with looking to their wants or
necessities. The result is, that the condition of these wards, and the
lunatics detained therein, is usually most unsatisfactory. In many
cases the bedding is ill attended to, the persons of the lunatics were
often most filthy, their clothing bad, and no effort at cleanliness was
observable, in this apparently condemned division of the workhouse.
In some workhouses, however, the bodily condition of these afflicted
beings was as carefully attended to as in an asylum, though we cannot
say that in any their moral treatment was much studied. The cases,
are, however, generally chronic or idiotic."?(p. 18.)
Dr. Nugent directs attention to a fact, upon which the defective
care of lunatics in workhouses mainly depends, and which seems
to have escaped the attention of the Commissioners, namely, that
the strict law of Union discipline does not recognise paid servants
in workhouses, and forbids their employment, " consequently the
demented and idiotic classes are dependent on the charitable
offices of the pauper inmates of these institutions."?(Letter,
p. 11.)
Concerning the gaols as places of reception for lunatics, the
ON THE STATE AND CONDITION OF LUNACY IN IRELAND. Ill
Commissioners report that tli^y are most unfitted for such a pur-
pose, from the absence of all arrangements in these buildings for
the treatment of the insane; and concerning the Central Criminal
Asylum, which was opened for the reception of criminal lunatics
in 1850, the Commissioners report that, although it is provided,
with all modern improvements, and well conducted, the arrange-
ments for ventilation and heating seem to be defective, and there is
a general absence of any means of amusement for the inmates,
and of any pictures or decorations to relieve the monotony of
the whitened walls of the day-rooms and galleries.
Of the condition of other establishments for the insane, accord-
ing to the Report, the following is a summary:?
Previous to 1857, an establishment, connected with the House
of Industry of the city of Dublin, and known as the Hardwicke
Cells, existed in that city, and afforded accommodation for 108
lunatics. This institution was very inefficiently managed, and
in 1857 the inmates were removed to a new establishment at
Lucan. Of the character and management of this establishment,
which is maintained by a Parliamentary grant, the Commission-
ers speak in favourable terms.
Concerning the Private Asylums, the Commissioners report that
they, " generally, are not well adapted for their purpose. They
are usually old mansions, or private houses, which have been
converted to their present use, and their arrangements are not
convenient for the purpose of an asylum" (p. 32) ; and concerning
the benevolent institutions for the insane, two in number?St.
Patrick's Hospital, Dublin, and the Bloomfield Retreat?the Com-
missioners report that the objects of the former institution have
not been satisfactorily carried out, the reception of paying patients
having become the most marked characteristic of what was in-
tended to be a charitable institution; but of the Bloomfield Re-
treat, a small asylum belonging to the Society of Friends, the
Commissioners express approbation.
Of the condition of the insane poor who are at large in Ireland,
the Commissioners give the following classified summary
Insane.
691
Idiotic.
2661
3352
Well
treated.
Ne-
glected.
1767 1585
3352
Danger-
ous.
Trouble-
some.
261
Harm-
less.
3029
3352
Resident Resident
with
Rela-
tives.
persons.
2371
with Living
other alone.
336 80
Vagrant,
565
3352
The asylum accommodation, notwithstanding that this has
112 ON THE STATE AND CONDITION OF LUNACY IN IRELAND.
"been considerably extended within a few years, is still inadequate.
The insane poor at large, according to the Commissioners' re-
turns, amount, as previously stated, to 3352, and Dr. Nugent
considers that additional accommodation ought to be provided
for 2100, that being about the number of insane poor at large,
who, according to his calculations, require to be placed under
proper control. In several districts the want of additional accom-
modation is severely felt; and if several of the recommendations
of the Commissioners are carried out, the necessity for further
accommodation will be still more felt.
A defective state of the law respecting lunatics and lunatic
asylums is to be regarded, according to the Commissioners, as the
main source of the imperfections which they report in the condi-
tion and management of lunatic asylums generally in Ireland.
Moreover the Commissioners imply that no sufficient means exist
by which the perfect action of the law, even as it at present
stands, could be effectively secured. The Inspectors of Lunacy,
with whom rest the superintendence and direction of asylums,
have so great an amount of duty to perform, that it is impracti-
cable for them to give that narrow attention to the internal regu-
lation of asylums which might be desired, or is necessary; and
the committal of all that relates to the building, fitting up, and
extension of asylums, to the present Board of Control, as wrell as
the mode in which the power is evoked, that rests with the Lord
Lieutenant in Council, to erect new asylums, are not the means
"best fitted to obtain good results.
An entire reconstruction of the lunacy laws is proposed by the
Commissioners, and they suggest that a Central Board should
be created which should have the full direction and superinten-
dence of all asylums, public and private, as well as the control of
single lunatics. This Board, it is further suggested, should con-
sist of three salaried members, two of whom should be members
of the medical and one of the legal profession. The Commis-
sioners do not propose to associate any unpaid Commissioner
(as in the case of England and Scotland) with the salaried Com-
missioners, for the following reasons :?" First, because we do not
think that any unpaid members, whose services could be made
available for the purpose, would give additional weight to the
authority of the Board; secondly, because it is not likely a
regular attendance would really be ensured on the part of the
persons so appointed, and whose position and ability might point
them out as qualified for the discharge of the duties belonging to
the Board ; lastly, because we think it of great importance that
the Commissioners should not merely sit at the Central Office, to
order and direct the management of the asylums, but that they
should be themselves kept constantly informed of the actual con-
ON THE STATE AND CONDITION OF LUNACY IN IRELAND. 113
dition of the asylums, and tlie lunatics under their control, by
discharging the duties of inspection" (p. 2G). The Commis-
sioners should perform the duties of inspectors, and should
have full power of examination into all that relates to the manage-
ment and condition of asylums, with the right of entrance into
them at any hour, night or day; they should, also, have the
right to sit at the meetings of Boards of Governors, hut not to
vote. In all that relates to the increase of asylum accommoda-
tion and the erection of new asylums, the Central Board would
advise the Government, and superintend the carrying out of such
measures as might he determined upon; the Board would, also,
have supreme control over the licensing and government of
private asylums, and it would become the medium of simplifying
and making more satisfactory, the proceedings respecting Chan-
cery lunatics.
At present rate-payers or their representatives, Grand Juries
and Town Councils, have no voice whatever in determining the
management of asylums, the increase of asylum accommodation,
and the erection of new asylums. The two latter measures rest
altogether with the Executive Government, which also provides the
funds necessary for the construction, alteration, and expenditure
of asylums, recovering the sums advanced by rates laid upon the
district for which the asylum is erected. The Commissioners pro-
pose that the rate-payers, or their representatives, should in future
have a voice in a matter which so nearly concerns their interest
as the provision of additional asylum accommodation, or the erec-
tion of new asylums; and that Grand Juries and Town Councils
should have the privilege of electing a portion of the governors
of asylums, now nominated entirely by the Government.
The Commissioners also suggest that a new code of regulations
should be drawn up for the internal management of public
asylums.
We concur in the suggestion of the Commissioners in regard
to the formation of a Central Board having the superintendence
and direction of the general and internal management of lunatic
asylums and the control of single lunatics, but we doubt whether
the constitution of the Board, as proposed by the Commissioners
is that best calculated to secure its objects ; and whether, if the
suggestions were carried out concerning the relations which should
exist between the Central Board, Boards of Governors and Grand
Juries, unless the opinions of the two latter bodies are to have
more weight than seems to be contemplated by the Commis-
sioners, the relations proposed would not lead to frequent and per-
plexing embroilments.
Dr. Nugent makes a suggestion respecting the constitution of
the proposed Central Board, which merits attention, and with
NO. XIII.?NEW SERIES. I
114 ON THE STATE AND CONDITION OF LUNACY IN IRELAND.
which, if it he feasible, we are disposed to coincide. He
writes?
" Though I may be opposed to the constitution of a Board of three
?two physicians and a lawyer?one on a larger and more influential
basis may be worthy of much consideration by your lordship. I
allude to a Central Board, of which the Lord Chancellor would be
Chairman, with four unpaid Commissioners, one of whom might be a
Judge of the Court of Queen's Bench (for criminal lunacy), and two
others members of the Privy Council, with three paid Commissioners,
two of them to be physicians, the third a barrister. A Board so con-
stituted must, per se, command full control, and an unquestionable
authority throughout the kingdom."?(Letter, p. 18.)
We may not dwell upon the numerous suggestions which are
made by the Commissioners respecting the particular management
of asylums and alterations of the law, except in one instance
relating to medical arrangements. The Commissioners agreed in
suggesting that a Eesident and Visiting Physician should be
attached to each public asylum, and four of their number con-
sidered " that the resident physician should be solely responsible
for the treatment of the patients, both as regards their bodily
health and their mental disease; hut that he should be assisted,
when necessary, by a visiting physician, whose duties, however,
should be confined to cases where his attendance may be required
in consultation with the resident physician."?p. 9. One of the
Commissioners (Dr. Corrigan) considers, however, that the at-
tendance of the visiting physician?
" Should not be dependent on the discretion either of the Resident
Physician or Local Board, but that he should visit the institution daily,
that while the Resident Physician and Manager should have general
charge of the institution, and be responsible for the treatment of the
insane, as such, the duty of the Visiting Medical Officer in this regard
should extend onty to cases where his attendance may be required in
consultation by the Resident Physician, but that the Visiting Physician
should daily visit all cases whatever confined to bed, in seclusion, or
under restraint; that he should see, with as little delay as possible all
cases of injury, accident, and child-birth, and record such observations
on them as may appear requisite; that he should be directly respon-
sible for the treatment of the sick as distinguished from the mere
insane ; that, in all cases of discharged patients, the certificate of dis-
charge should be signed by both Resident and Visiting Physicians ; and
that, in all cases of death, the record of the illness and cause of death
should be signed by both the Resident andVisitingPhysicians."? (p. 9.)
It is not apparent from the Report upon what grounds Dr.
Corrigan forms his opinion that the medical functions of the
resident and visiting physicians should differ, or why indisposition
occurring in an insane person apart from and in addition to his
insanity, should constitute a sufficient reason for his being trans-
ON THE STATE AND CONDITION OF LUNACY IN IRELAND. 115
ferrecl to the charge of another medical man, who is not respon-
sible for the treatment of the'mental affection. That a patient
should be seen daily by two medical men, the one of whom is to
confine his attention and to be solely responsible for his mental
state, the other for his bodily state, seems to us a speciality of
practice which, to say the least, is somewhat paradoxical; and
we cannot conceive what advantage either the patient or the
institution can derive from it. Moreover, that the visiting phy-
sician, who is to be solely responsible for the bodily ailments of
the lunatics, should also act as consulting physician to their
mental ailments, makes the paradox, if we may so write, still
more paradoxical.
Dr. Nugent, although appearing to coincide with Dr. Corri-
gan's opinion concerning the duties of the visiting and resident
physicians, differs from the opinion of the Commissioners, that
the resident physicians should not perform civil duties; for he
writes?" I really do not see (if aided by a Visiting or Consulting
Physician) what employment the Resident can have to occupy
his whole time as a public salaried officer [particularly if the
patients do not exceed 200 or 250], unless he superintends the
general domestic economy of the establishment."?(p. 5.)
The Commissioners direct attention to the insufficiency of the
wages of the domestics in the public asylums, and the inadvisa-
bility of low wages under these circumstances. We may add
that the salaries of the officials appear to be on a scale which is
not commensurate with the importance of the duties performed.
In particular, the salaries of the inspectors of lunacy are charac-
terized by a parsimony which contrasts very strongly and unsa-
tisfactorily with the salaries attached to some of the legal
appointments of secondary importance in connexion with the
Irish government.
We have only entered so far into the details of the Commis-
sioners Report as would enable us to present to our readers an
idea of its general tendency and character. Dr. Nugent, in the
letter to which we have several times referred, has officially and
mostjustly protested against the almost unbroken series of condem-
natory conclusions of the Commissionei's respecting the manage-
ment and condition of the lunatic asylums in Ireland. From his
long and intimate acquaintance with everything that relates to
these institutions, Dr. Nugent's opinions merit very high con-
sideration; and with regard to the important questions of in-
creased asylum accommodation, district requirements, expendi-
ture, and monetary arrangements, the value of his views and sug-
gestions cannot be over estimated.
In addition to the very creditable character of the asylums in
Ireland, as curative establishments (to which we have alreadv
i 2
116 DON QUIXOTE: A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. ?
referred), Dr. Nugent states that they have been remarkably free
from abuse, and that accidents are of rare occurrence in them,
which he attributes to the carefulness of the attendants. " Only
four cases of suicide, and not one of a homicidal nature, are
recorded as having taken place within five years, notwithstanding
that in that period 110 less than 2000 lunatics, committed to
gaols on sworn depositions as ' dangerous' to themselves or others,
had been transferred thither; and that at the date of their (the
Commissioners') statistical returns, there were 551 of the class
still remaining."?(Letter, p. 2.)
