Transitory Homicidal Mania: Where Does Keason End of Mania Begin?
===================================================================

Aet. IV.?

By M. le Dr A. Deyergie.
(Read before the Imperial Academy of Medicine, Paris.)
On the 1 Otli of November, 1854, a young man aged nineteen
years, the son of one of the principal merchants of Bordeaux,
dined with his father, to whom lie was much attached, and his
stepmother, whom he had regarded from his ninth year first with
dislike, and subsequently with gradually increasing aversion.
The dinner, at which several friends should have been present,
passed without any unusual incidents. At dessert, young Julius
quitted the table, and went to the drawing-room in order to
warm himself, but a fire had not been lit there. He then as-
cended to his chamber and took his fowling-piece and straw-hat,
for the purpose of having a stroll in the country, as was his wont,
when an idea of suicide, which had tormented him for a month,
suddenly occupied his mind, and as suddenly was changed into
the thought of killing his stejwiother.
He threw aside his fowling-piece, went to his brother's room to
seek two pistols which had been charged three weeks, although
he was ignorant in what manner they were loaded, and at the
same time he had pistols of his own that he had charged the day
before.
He descended into the dining-room, approached his step-
mother, still at table with her husband, and discharged one of
the pistols at her temple.
NO. XVI.?NEW SERIES. N N
I
534 TRANSITORY HOMICIDAL MANIA:
Madame X sank down, and the young man recoiling,
rested motionless against the wall. His father rose to seize him,
hut a feeling of self-preservation being aroused in Julius, he fled
across the kitchen, through the midst of the terrified domestics,
who iiad run at the sound of fire-arms, and he cried, "I am a
madman?an insensate ! I have killed my stepmother !"
He left the house, surrendered himself to the commissary of
police, and related to him the circumstances of the deed.
Before and until this murder the life of this young man had
been regular, indeed exemplary; he avoided youths of his own
age, or associated hut little with them, notwithstanding his great
fortune. He fulfilled all the duties of a son and the affection of
a brother, and his occupation was regular in a banking-house.
If the deed which the young Julius committed was an act of'
madness, there must have been a brusque, rapid, and instanta-
neous passage from reason to insanity, and an instantaneous
return from insanity to reason. This, then, would be a very clear
example of the species of insanity which has been termed tran-
sitory.
Where, then, was the limit in this case between reason and
madness ? Through what grades of change did the intellectual
faculties pass to bring about such a transition, and to attain ex-
tremes so opposed ? This is what we have to ascertain. In the
meantime it may be said that the jury of the imperial court at
Pan, before which the case was tried, adopted the opinion which
MM. Gintrac, Delafosse (of Bordeaux), Calmeil, Tardieu, and
myself entertained, and considered the yonng Julius as not pos-
sessing his free-will at the moment of committing the deed, since
the court has pronounced a verdict of acquittal, pure and simple.
This judgment is very different from an opinion which was
expressed at a period not very far distant, by M. Dupin, at that
time advocate, who wrote in these terms to the then prefect of
police:?
" Monomania is a new resource of medicine, but it will prove too
convenient, at one time to tear the culpable from the just severity of
the law; at another, to deprive arbitrarily a citizen of his liberty.
When they might not be able to say ' lie is guilty,' they will say, 1 he
is mad,' and Charenton will replace the Bastille."
This was written in the month of March, 1820, in connexion
with the case of an individual supposed to be detained unjustly
at Charenton. Now, this person had had, from 1804 even to the
time of which we speak, a fixed idea that he was loved by all the
French princesses. He sent to them, or threw into their carriage,
letters, in which he recounted his amorous remembrances. He
had been five times under arrest; yet he possessed fully his intel-
WHERE DOES REASON END OR MANIA BEGIN ? 535
lectual faculties upon any other subject, and he was a man of
learning; and thus it happened that M. Dupin was led into
error.
The afore-mentioned judgment differs, also, very considerably
from an opinion given at that time by oue of the most eminent
magistrates, who said to Marc, in reference to a case similar to
that tried before the Imperial Court at Pau :?" These men are
?madmen; but it is necessary to cure their mad acts in the
Place de Greve."
The science of mental alienation has, then, made very great
progress, since its doctrines have penetrated even the minds of
persons the least acquainted with medicine, and have at once
become understood and comprehended by them.
What data has it furnished ?
What precepts has it laid down ?
These data and these precepts, can they guide the physician in
the appreciation of facts, so as to make now evident that which
formerly was denied absolutely, since these ideas were at one time
rejected entirely by public opinion ? It is this that we propose
to inquire into ; and in order to show how greatly we differ from
the past, we shall make an appeal to it.
At the commencement of the present century, Pinel had cast
upon the science of mental alienation a light most fruitful for the
- future. His pupils, Esquirol, Ferrus, and Falret, and the pupils,
also, of the last-named men, Georget and Leuret, studied and
observed those varieties of insanity which until then had escaped
the physicians of that epoch. Marc, following closely upon these
so-weighty studies, collected from the annals of justice all the
facts which could be grouped around these new ideas.*
Then appeared, in 1825, those remarkable articles of Georget,
upon many criminal processes, in the Archives Generates de Me-
clecine,-f where he assigned and specified the part of each of the
intellectual faculties, seeking thus to define them clearly and to
establish their respective attributes.
Haste we to say, that Es qui vol on the one part, and M. Ferrus
on the other, have added lustre to the clear and lucid inquiry of
Georget by their learned lectures, their works, and their pro-
foundly elaborated articles in the Dictionnaire des Sciences
MedicalesX
Then, also, arose those animated discussions between phy-
sicians, magistrates, and advocates, upon monomanias; but the
acts of transitory madness were but slightly glanced at.
* Marc: De la Folie, consideree dans ses Rapports avec les Questions Medico-
judiciaires. Paris. 1840. t. i.
+ Tomes viii., x., xi., xii., xiii., and xiv.
J SeeEsquirol: Des Maladies Mcntales consideree sous les Rapports Medical,
Hygieniqxie, et Medico-legal. Paris. 1838. 2 vols, in 8vo.
NN 2
536 TRANSITORY HOMICIDAL MANIA:
By ft coincidence entirely fortuitous, there had occurred, within
a very short space of time, the processes of Leger, Eeldtmann,
Lecouffe, Jean Poire, Papavoine, and Henriette Cornier, which
had opened a wide gate to psychological discussions?discus-
sions which contributed not a little to ensure the prevalence of
the principles which had been laid down by the masters of the
science.
Thus, in the short period of thirty years or more, we have
passed from incredulity, nay more, from the most profound igno-
rance respecting the varieties of insanity, to an advancement so
immense, that at this day magistrates and juries have accepted as
clearly established, not only the doctrine of delirious ideas upon a
solitary point (monomania), but also of transient aberrations of the
reason, which, in the eyes of the world, transformed, in times past,
the upright man into a criminal, so much the greater that he had
carried his perversion of heart even to the extent of hiding during
many years, under conduct the most irreproachable, the villany
of his disposition.
It is no longer advocates who appeal to science to aid their
clients, but magistrates, struck by the enormity of the crime and
the feeble interest which has guided the perpetrator of it, address
themselves to skilled men, and interrogate them upon the crimi- 1,
nality or non-criminality of the deed.
Nevertheless, if monomania, or delirious madness upon a
solitary point, with its diversities, its varieties of haughty, homi-
cidal, suicidal, incendiary, and contagions or imitative mo-
nomania, are -generally accepted by magistrates and juries as
implying a fixed delirious, irresistible idea, which fetters the
moral liberty, and dominates it entirely, it is necessary to say that
it is especially in those cases in which the monomania is accom-
panied with hallucinations, and of which a fact quoted by Esquirol,
among many, affords us a striking example.
A young girl in the Salpetriere never saw Esquirol approach
her without seeking to kill him. Being attacked with sickness,
she was placed in the infirmary. One day, preserving the greatest
quietude, she suffered Esquirol to approach her, when raising
herself hastily upon her bed, she seized- him by the cravat in
order to strangle him. She was afflicted with homicidal mono-
mania, accompanied with hallucination, because she believed that
in Esquirol she saw the lover who had deceived her.
Putting aside cases of homicidal monomania, complicated with
hallucinations, doubt is still unquestionably entertained by cer-
tain magistrates and men of the world, especially when trusting
to their own judgment, whatever in other respects may be their
capacity and learning. The following fact related by Dr Rennes,
(of Bergerac), will show the grave errors into which magistrates
1
WHERE DOES REASON END OR MANIA BEGIN ? 537
may be led when they do not think it necessary to consult
physicians.
B , a ligoiously upright man, loving his mother, and en-
compassing her with affectionate attentions, married a cousin; but
y he declared shortly after his marriage, that if he had any children
he would desert them. Judge then of the reception which Dr.
Rennes received when, at a later date, being called upon to attend
the young wife in childbed, he went cheerfully to announce to
B. the happy deliverance of the mother ! Some time after she
was sent back to her family, as well as the infant, which he
quickly sought to disinherit.
The mother of B. died. Being ready of hand, and besides very
ingenious, this man fabricated a coffin of wood, and one also of
lead, and he enclosed in them the corpse of his mother, and shut
up the remains in a dark room in his own house. Soon after he
believed himself to be surrounded by spies and enemies; and he
never went out unless armed to the teeth, when he spread terror
around him. Subsequently he thought that it was attempted to
poisgn him; then he bought his provisions himself, prepared his
own food, and waited upon himself, and he would not permit any
domestic to enter into his house. He collected there powder,
I lead, guns, and combustibles, ready to defend himself against
invasion, and to burn his house, intending to blow out his brains
in the roidst of the flames.
He sold an estate that was left to him, and the 40,000 francs
which he received for it he carried constantly about with him
in the crown of his hat, so that nothing might revert to his
daughter.
A year passed on, this disordered state of the intellect
continuing. All-Saints' day arrived. B. had been over-excited.
He met a servant who a year before had been obliged to hide
himself, in order to evade the consequences of B.'s vengeance.
He fired upon him twice with a fowling-piece, two balls traversing
one of the domestic's arms. Another servant who ran to help
the wounded one was attacked by B., who cast him down and
shattered a leg.
Then the madman entered his house, seized a torch, hastened
to the barn of his nearest neighbour, and set fire to it, and after-
wards ignited his own house.
Every one hastened to give help, but B. fired eight times suc-
cessively upon those who approached both the burning buildings.
He uttered at each report of his gun strident cries, which resem-
bled the outbursts of an infernal laugh.
Ere long the burning of his own house made progress; an
exjolosion occurred, the accumulation of powder having ignited ?
y and lastly, this furious maniac disappeared in the flames, &
1 - _
538 TRANSITORY HOMICIDAL MANIA:
And in the midst of the rubbish what remained intact?
Solely the coffin of his mother !
This was a man in whom the leader of the bar had not been
able two months before to recognise the signs of insanity. Indeed,
in his calm moments, and beyond the circle of his fixed ideas,
13.'s conversation was most consistent. Even his speech pos-
sessed a certain charm, and he discussed indifferent subjects
wonderfully well. Truly intelligence and sagacity are not suffi-
cient to enable one to judge if a brain be healthy or diseased; it
is necessary, in addition, to have studied individuals suffering from
every variety and form of insanity.
An immense progress has then been realized by the habitual
adoption of medico-legal examinations, in reference to the ques-
tion of mental alienation, always assumed in doubtful cases.
And if we go back to the species of alienation which forms the
subject of this article, transitory insanity, may we not consider
that it is a true triumph for science to have been able to obtain
the acquittal of the young man of Bordeaux, whose apparently
criminal act we have already recorded ?
Those physicians who have devoted themselves to the treat-
ment of insanity admit that, besides dementia, mania, and mono-
mania, there exists an instantaneous, transient insanity, which
they call transitory, and as the result of which an individual,
until then, in appearance, at least, of sound mind, commits sud-
denly an homicidal act, and returns as suddenly to a state of
reason.
Seek we, then, to define what ought to be understood by tran-
sitory insanity. It is not that species of insanity to which Marc
and some other physicians have given the name?that is to say,
the insanity which shows itself occasionally among epileptic indi-
viduals, or among those given to drunkenness ; at least we do not
understand the term thus. When the delirious act is manifested
as a sequel of epilepsy or of drunkenness, insane actions precede
the criminal deed, and, after its accomplishment, traces of de-
lirium persist for a certain time.
Is that transitory insanity which supervenes as a sequel of per-
sistent emotions, since persistent emotions lead to monomania ?
The name does not apply here. Murder, committed, under the
influence of fanaticism, pride, hate, jealousy, choler, or love has
a known permanent cause, which acts incessantly upon the moral _
freedom, and which, in the end, dominates and vanquishes it,
bringing about a criminal act.
Violent passions stupify the judgment, but they do not de-
stroy it; they lead the mind to extreme resolves, but they do
not deceive it< In a word, the man then acts under the infiu- 1
ence of propensities which end by governing, more or less, his (
WHERE DOES REASON ENt) OR MANIA BEGIN ? 539
actions. But, his conscience deceives him not. He knows
rightly that which he does; he understands the hearing and the
consequences. Solely led astray by the passions which have dic-
tated his acts, he trips up his conscience.
Bellart lias said that, by assimilating the passions to mental'
alienation immorality is justified: it is placed upon the same
evei as calamity. The man who acts under the empire of p?ssion
has commenced by suflenng his will to become depraved The
man who acts under the influence of calamity obeys, as a ma-
chine, a force, the power of which he cannot contend with.
Finally, it is not well to apply the term transitory homicidal
insanity to that condition of mind which is developed under the
influence of a nature originally depraved, and for which neither
education, nor precept, nor example, nor association, nor even a
rigid social position has done anything, but which has been en-
JfrmW ! ,'?diTidaal th?8 unhappily born, as he
falls little by little into infamy.
If, in some of these cases, the motive to action does not justify
the action itself, doubt may arise in the mind of the physician' ?
but the criminal act should not then be designated transitory in-
sanity, because it has been gradually induced by social circum-
stances of an essentially vicious nature. All the causes that we
have enumerated, taken singly or in their totality, explain per-
fectly, in a medical point of view, the delirious idea. Morally
and legally speaking, they explain also, up to a certain point, the
sudden eruption of an act of delirium ; and they would warrant
in certain cases, the admission of attenuating circumstances!
But, in addition to insanity developed under the influence of the
causes named, it is possible to show another form of alienation
to which the term transitory insanity ought to be applied that
is to say, a form to the ordinary observer without apparent pre-
monitions, and without appreciable, proximate, or remote cause
manifested as suddenly as the explosion of powder, and ceasing-
completely with the criminal act. Is this not the history of the
young man who has formed the subject of this article, and does
not the brief relation which we have made of his reputed criminal
act depict sufficiently the species of delirium to which we wish to
see attached the denomination transitory insanity ?
No incentive to the deed, either in passions not sufficiently
repressed, or in an acquired fixed idea ; antecedents and manners
irreproachable; absence of hallucinations; outbreak of insanity
manifested by a criminal act, and instantaneous return to reason
as soon as the deed was accomplished?these are, according to us
the characters of transitory insanity. Nevertheless, the word
transitory, perfectly just for the world in general, in the sense
that the madness is but transient, though the deed done be of the
I
540 TRANSITORY HOMICIDAL MANIA :
most criminal description, does not appear to me sufficiently exact
for the physician. Individuals of the character described ought
not to be considered of sound mind when an idea of crime has
suddenly risen within them, when this idea has constituted with
them a dominant and irresistible thought, stronger than the Me,
stronger than the will.
Antecedents of family, divers acts of social life, propensities,
tastes more or less perverted, tendencies to taciturnity, ideas of
suicide, are often manifested for many years before the explosion
of the irresistible criminal idea. So that, to say that the passage
from reason to insanity can be hasty or instantaneous in the opi-
nion of the physician is to commit an error. This state has
prodromata, as every malady has; and, according to us, if these
prodromata do not exist, it would be impossible to see in the
reported criminal act an act of insanity.
Moreover, M. Lelut (Recherches des Analogies de la Folie et de
la liaison, a la suite de son ouvrage Le Demon de Socrate,
p. 318) has said, with much truth, in regard to this species of
insanity, that at its commencement, and in the mental tendencies
which are the predisposing or constitutional cause of it, that in-
sanity is still reason, as reason is already insanity (la folie est
encore de la raison, comme la raison est deja de la folie). This
constitutes, for the physician, one of the first elements towards
the solution of the question.
A second datum of great interest, in a medical and moral point
of view, is the disproportion which exists between the enormity
of the offence and the motive or interest which has led to its
committal. '
If we examine all the criminal processes which have been in-
stituted on the occasion of similar offences, and which have,
moreover, been diversely adjudicated upon, but which, for the
physician, have been acts of madness, it will be seen that the
motive which led to the committal of the deed was not, so far as
its consequences were concerned, in relation with the action itself.
In other words, the accused, in committing the crime, had in
prospect the scaffold ; and, even in the case of impunity from it,
he derived frequently no advantage, material or moral, from the
act which he had committed.
Now, every important act of a man of sound mind has one end.
That end is the attainment of an advantage proportionate to the
consequences of the act. When an individual stakes his life upon
it, he hopes to obtain in exchange material or moral advantages,
more or less considerable, and by which he expects to profit
largely.
If it be asked what are the conditions under which the reputed
criminal act is performed, we are at once struck with the want of
WHERE DOES REASON END OR MANIA BEGIN ?
541
foresight which has preceded and accompanied its fulfilment.
Neither the moment of the deed nor the means by which it has
heen effected have been the object ot any premeditation. More-
over, the deed has probably been committed at the most un-
favourable moment, although the accused had had a thousand
opportunities of effecting it in secret.
Far from avoiding justice, the insane individual, in other re-
spects an upright man, comprehending quickly the enormity of
the crime that he has involuntarily committed, occasionally?nay,
most commonly?gives himself up to justice. In effect, the domi-
nant notion has hastily ceased to exist; moral freedom has re-
sumed its empire, arid the so-called criminal has ceased to
be mad.
If investigation is extended to the mental state of the paternal
or maternal ancestors of the accused, it is common to find that
one or more members of the family have committed suicide, or
have had a more or less prolonged attack of insanity. Seneca
has said:?"Nullum magnum ingenium sine mixtura de-
mentice." Seneca has exaggerated; but Napoleon said truly that
" Between a man of genius and a madman there is scarcely the
thickness of a six-liards piece." Antiquity presents us in Socrates,
Pythagoras, and Democritus, proofs of the exactitude of this
assertion, and among men of modern times, Tasso, Pascal, Rous-
seau still more justify it.
" If I did not fear," says M. Lelut (Le Demon de Socrate,
Paris, 1850, p. 96) "to renew contemporary griefs, I could show
that there are very numerous representatives of art, literature,
and science in lunatic asylums. In truth, genius, after having
abandoned itself to its highest inspirations, has but one step
more to make to break the limit which separates thought from
morbid exaltation ; the cord too tensely drawn may give way, and
then the artist, the poet, the man of science, the philosopher,
becomes changed into a poor lunatic : but a moment ago they
were the glory of the world, now they are objects of pity." But
if we observe those persons who have been attacked with transitory
madness, we find generally conditions entirely opposed to these
?slight education, little ability, contracted intelligence, and
taciturnity, in a word, a monotonous ensemble, both physical
and moral.
Lastly (and this is a criterion of great value), if we investigate
the offence from two different points of view, the hypothesis of a
criminal act, and the hypothesis of an act of folly, in order that
either view should be established, it is necessary that it should
explain all the facts without effort, while the opposite view should
present a series of improbabilities which at once strike the judg-
ment and are inconsistent with experience. This last method
iSAv
542 TRANSITORY HOMICIDAL MANIA :
leads tlie physician with the greatest certainty to a right appre-
ciation of the facts; by it doubt is dissipated, conviction arrived
at, and the conscience relieved. This method enables us to carry
conviction to the minds of magistrates and juries; this, it is
necessary to say, brought about the acquittal of young Julius of
Bordeaux, and in the manner following. In place of delivering a
scientific dissertation upon the question when I was before the
court, I avowed that when I had first examined the case I had
conceived an unfavourable impression of it; but after I had in-
vestigated the offence, as well from the hypothesis of a crime as
from the hypothesis of mental alienation, all doubt was dissipated
from my mind; and then proceeding in my deposition as I
had done in my study, by giving prominence to the past and
present state of the accused in their double bearing upon the
question of insanity or crime, I was led to the formal con-
clusion that there had been one of those rapid transitions from
the appearances of reason to an act of insanity, which constitutes
a species of paroxysm of mental alienation, with its prodromata
going back to a remote period and increasing little by little, until
the violent outbreak in the reputed criminal act.
When I quitted the witness-box, the Honourable M. Gintrac
said to me, "You have saved the accused ; from this moment he
is acquitted." And, indeed, the next morning the verdict of the
jury confirmed the prevision of M. Gintrac. But what did I do
more than my four confreres : we all concurred in and expressed
the same opinion ? Nothing, unless it were to reason with the
jury as I had reasoned with myself. Yet a few minutes before our
examination the Advocate-General had said to me, " Your con-
freres were heard yesterday, and I may tell you that public opinion
as well as the opinion of the jury remains unaltered, that is to say,
unfavourable to the accused." I do not cite this fact from vanity,
but in order that physicians may understand that in doubtful
cases, the interpretation of the facts under the double relation I
have intimated is one of the elements most fitted to give a solution
of the question.
In the case quoted, the young Julius had had among his an-
cestors a great uncle (maternal) who had a propensity to suicide
and who had died insane; an aunt (paternal) who had committed
suicide; a third relative (maternal side) who had all his life
manifested bizarre and exaggerated ideas, so that it was necessary
for him to live a retired life.
On inquiring into the conduct of the young man towards those
around him, every one described him as being subject to motiveless
outbursts of passion. One day he struck with his hand-whip a
servant who was not sufficiently active in attending to his wants ;
another day he became furiously angry because he could not have
WHERE DOES REASON END OR MANIA BEGIN? 54:3
immediate access to a room where liis stepmother was having a
hath. "When he became angry," a witness deposed, " he always
seized upon something or some one."
A month before the oflence, he had made knx>wn to Dr Brunet
his ideas of suicide. He said to the Juge d' Instruction, " When
I ascended to my room on the day of the offence, I was not
thinking of anything. I should not have gone above stairs if I
had found a fire in the drawing-room. When I got into my room,
having no evil intention, the notion of suicide possessed me; then
my thoughts taking another direction, I threw aside my fowling-
piece, ran to my brother's chamber, armed myself with two
pistols, and re-descended to the drawing-room, pushed by I know
not ivliat force which dragged me in spite of myself." I would
add, also, that in the midst of opulence he enjoyed it not; that
he avoided young men of his own age; that he was taciturn,
and that he constantly isolated himself.
Finally, he had arrived at that degree of development of the
feelings which is neither a healthy nor a morbid state, an organic
disposition in virtue of which the well-born man, ambitious of
elevated social positions, is led to actions the most sublime ; the
miserably-born to deeds the most criminal.
If we seek the cause of the offence committed, the motive for
the deed, the benefits which the young Julius would derive from it,
the preparations for its completion, and the place and moment of
its accomplishment, we see nothing but improbabilities, if it be
regarded as a criminal act.
So far as premeditation and the choice of arms are concerned,
the accused took his brother s pistols, not knowing in what manner
they were charged, although he had loaded his own with ball the
day preceding the deed. In respect to the day on ivhich the crime
was accomplished, it was one on which several friends were ex-
pected to dine at the house.
As to the moment of execution, it was in the presence of his
father, to whom he was much attached, that he killed his step-
mother, and such was his veneration for his father that he feared
to give him the least pain in the ordinary acts of life. Moreover,
he said, during his examination, "If my father had addressed one
word to me when I entered the drawing-room, a single word, what-
ever it might have been, I should not have killed my stepmother."
Lastly; it was full day, in the house, in the middle of the
domestics, that the deed was committed; and so far from any
benefits arising to the homicide by its fulfilment, he had both
step-brothers and step-sisters.
Are not all these circumstances unnatural on the hypothesis of
a crime, unnatural for the sane man, natural for the madman ?
But it is said he had conceived a dislike?an aversion even, to
544 TRANSITORY HOMICIDAL MANIA:
his stepmother ! This is true; hut lie had known her since he was
nine years of age. He had been surrounded by her cares; those,
it is testified, of a fond mother. Did she govern him harshly, or
did she control his acts in managing his father's house ? Not in
the least. Julius, loved by his father, was almost master of the
house; not only did he govern his stepmother, notwithstanding
his age, but he at times insulted her in presence of the servants.
The influence that he exercised was such that he would not suffer
his step-brothers and step-sisters to be at his father's table, under
the pretext that they made too much noise.
I have entered into these details because I have to justify the
principal incident I have cited as an example of transitory homi-
cidal mania. In these cases the part of the physician is every
way exceptional. He is not solely consulted upon a legal point,
the solution of which would form but a cipher in the balance of
justice; it is upon the entire question ? the whole process.
Magistrates and jury are effaced, so to speak, before the decision
which he is called upon to make ; the physician pronounces upon
the culpability or non-culpability of the accused; by his decision,
or with his decision, the crime ceases to be, or the cause pro-
ceeds. In face of such a responsibility is it not of weighty im-
port that science should clearly specify the morbid phases which
it recognises, and lay down criteria capable of establishing their
dominant characters ?
This consideration has induced me to define what in my opi-
nion constitutes the characteristics of transitory insanity (folic
transitoire), a vague and elastic expression which ought to be
limited to cases analogous to that which I have quoted. And
if it be necessary to justify my efforts, we may say that under the
term transitory insanity there have been related examples of
dementia, mania, and monomania, more or less protracted.
Such was the case of the shoemaker, related by Lcevanthal, in
Hufeland's Journal cle Meclecine, who, one hour after rising, was
seized with incoherence of ideas, and presently, armed with a
leather-cutting knife, attacked his wife, who had barely time to
escape with her infant. The patient was bled, he became calm,
and refreshing sleep followed. Now we may assume that if this
man had not been immediately bled he would have become for a
longer or shorter time a furious maniac ; but this was not a case
of transitory insanity.
Was the following instance one of transitory insanity ? A
day-labourer absented himself from home, begging during two
days. On his return he asked for his child. " It is asleep,"
answered the wife, pointing to a neighbouring closet. The man
entered and found there the corpse of his child, which the mother
had horribly mutilated, for it wanted a limb, which she had con-
i' WHERE DOES REASON END OR MANIA BEGIN? 543
vertecl into food! When, shortly after, the unhappy lunatic was
interrogated by the mayor, she declared that want had constrained
her to kill the child, hut she had taken care to reserve the other
limbs for her husband. Was there not unsoundness of mind after
as well as before the act of insanity which was termed transitory ?
\ And how could that insanity be termed transitory, of which
neither the commencement nor the termination was known ?
Henrietta C  was attacked with insanity, not transitory
insanity, but infanticidal monomania. She had shown a dis-
position towards the insane act long before its execution, and
> mental unsoundness remained after its accomplishment; and M.
B. de Boismont tells me, that since her trial it has been ascer-
tained that a year before she had been sent to a lunatic asylum
for having wished to shorten the days of another infant.
Many other examples related by Marc, Cazauvieth, Heim, and
Castelnau, are equally erroneous.
But the farmer whose case is cited by Dr Edwards (American \
Journal of Insanity ? Ann. Medico-Psychologiques, t. IV.,
,v 2e. serie), was really attacked with transitory insanity. When
Dr Daniel interrogated him upon the cause of his sadness, he
answered, "I have undergone a trial which fills me with horror
when I think of it. I was laid upon a sofa, and my wife and
* infants were near the fire. I spoke to them friendlily, when sud-
denly my eye rested upon the poker. At the same instant I was
seized with an idea of shedding their blood. I could not think
of anything else. I became wretched; until at last unable to
resist anv longer, I ordered them, in a \ oice of thunder, to leave
the room. Great God ! added he, how greatly I thank thee
that I am not stained with crime!
This was transitory insanity, since eight years passed and Dr.
Daniel's aid was not again required by the farmer; but it is
necessary to add, that this man had passed from an active to an
'w idle life?from poverty to riches; that he had during three years
been melancholy and irascible, his aspect being unhealthy ; but
he had notwithstanding maintained agreeable relations with his
neighbours.
There does not exist, then, transitory insanity in the pure accep-
tation of the term. Transitory insanity, like all other forms of
insanity, has its prodromata, its remote and proximate symptoms,
which the world apprehends not, and to which it does not attach
sufficient importance; and which, sooner or later, explain them-
selves by the delirious act, the act recognised by every one, often
prejudicial, and at times of a criminal character.
I And if, with regard to transitory insanity, we ask where reason
, ends and mental unsoundness commences, although the question
, x. cannot be answered, we say that it is necessary first to establish
546
TRANSITORY HOMICIDAL MANIA :
ft distinction between the delirium of insanity and insanity itself.
The explosion of delirium occurs long after the invasion of in-
sanity, and it shows itself in a hasty and sudden manner. As to
the insanity itself, it is impossible to lay down the limit which
separates it from reason; it is manifested by successive reason-
ings and acts, which for the world are acts more or less reason-
able or unreasonable, but which, for the physician, are acts more or
less imminent of insanity. Still these reasonings and acts fire at
the commencement so feebly marked that all the sagacity of the
physician is necessary in order to appreciate their importance and
gravity. In reference to this form of alienation we may reiterate
M. Lelut's remark, that insanity is still reason, as reason is
already insanity.
The individual who has perpetrated a reputed criminal act
under the influence of transitory insanity, ought to be regarded
as insane after as well as before the deed, notwithstanding the
return to reason, because a similar tendency may sooner or later
again originate in his diseased mind, and lead to a like result.
Hence arises clearly this precept, that the physician of a family /
cannot too strongly direct the attention of parents to those eccen-
tricities of character and conduct that are too frequently attri-
buted to originality, but which are the beginning of mental de-
rangement. How many outbreaks of insanity would be pre-
vented by a special moral and physical education adapted to each
of these cases!
Would not the preventive hygiene of insanity be a grand sub-
ject of study ? Certainly, insanity that is not hereditary has its
starting points in the primitive organization, education, and
social life; but how great is the number of descendants from
idiotic and insane parents, who might be saved from outbursts of
insanity by directing their studies, their existence, their social
relations and outer life, in such a manner as to fortify the intel-
lectual faculties against all the struggles and contentions of 1
society.
And now, if you please, recall to mind that in 1826, M. Dupin r
said, that monomania was a new resource of medicine. Eemember,
also, that in 1833, in this hall, on the occasion of a solemn
sitting of the Academy, Marc accumulated fact upon fact, argu-
ment upon argument, in order to demonstrate not only that
monomania existed, but that it also manifested itself in a reason-
ing form?ratiocinative monomania (monomanie raisonnante). If
in connexion with these facts we place the recognition even of
transitory insanity, not only by physicians, but also by magis-
trates and juries, ought we not to felicitate ourselves upon the
immense progress which the science of mental alienation has
made in its medico-legal relations ? This progress is due to th? <
WHERE DOES REASON END OR MANIA BEGIN ?
547
persevering efforts of the present generation, of which I should
tear to wound the susceptibility if I were to cite names which one
day will belong to the history of science. By these persevering
efforts many of those social punishments have been put aside,
and will still be set aside, which stamp the seal of infamy not
only upon the head of an innocent, but also upon his entire
family, a diseased brain having been alone in fault.
This result is owing to those physicians of our epoch who have
devoted their cares to the insane ; to those men whose life has
passed in the cold observation of the most cruel of human infir-
mities, most commonly without the hope of receiving one day
from their patients those tokens of gratitude which often reflect
greater honour upon the physician than the more ostentatious
recompense of fortune.
Towards the end of February I received a letter from the
brother of young Julius's victim. Having heard indirectly of the
lecture I had delivered before the Academy, he thought it to be
his duty to announce to me the death of Julius, and to in-
form me of the circumstances under which it had taken place.
Since 1855, this young man had resided in Brussels. He lived
there solitarily. On the 29th of January, he hastily quitted his
residence, abandoning his furniture and all that he possessed, and
having with liim solely his ordinary attire. He went to Bor-
deauxt and alighted at an hotel, where he passed the night, not
visiting either his father or brother. In the morning he pur-
chased a brace of pistols, hired a cab, and was driven to the
cemetery, and there at his request lie was led to his stepmother's
tomb. After sending away his guide, he knelt upon the tomb,
wrote several sentences in his debt-book, which he deposited upon
the monument, and then blew out his brains. Among the sen-
tences traced in his debt-book there was found the following:?
" I wish to die upon the tomb of her whom I have so much loved
and regretted !"
How shall we reconcile this assertion, made at the moment of
committing suicide, with the opinion entertained by some per-
sons that the cause of the murder was the deep aversion that the
young man had nourished towards his stepmother during ten years ? .}?>
Evidently the language as well as the termination of life by
suicide are the work of a lunatic. Not the slightest doubt can r : "
now be entertained even by the most prejudiced, concerning the
correctness of the judgment of the Assize Court at Pan, and the
scientific foresight which led to that judgment.
The foregoing information completes an example of transitory
insanity which is unique in science, inasmuch as the patholo-
gical view of the case has been confirmed by the verdict of a jury.
