On Convulsion
==============

Aet. VI.

In ancient times,the prevalent idea was that a convulsed person was
possessed and supernaturally excited by some good or bad spirit.
It seemed as if the convulsion was not to be accounted for by any
kind of natural power. And this idea, most assuredly, is one which
derives not a little support from the text of the New Testament,
where instances are mentioned in which convulsions of one kind or
another were cured by the direct casting out of an evil spirit. In
modern times a different explanation is offered, and " nervous in-
fluence," among other influences, is called upon to do the work of the
wayward or malignant spirit of times past. The idea appears to be
this:?Muscle is a living thing, and contraction is the out-
burst of this life. In other words, it is supposed that muscle
is endowed with a vital property of contractility, and that mus-
cular contraction is brought about when this property is put in
action by certain agents, such as nervous influence and electricity.
It is supposed, indeed, that this property of contractility is roused
or excited or stimulated into a state of action when the muscle
contracts under ordinary circumstances, and that this property is
roused or excited or stimulated beyond measure in convulsion.
In this, at least, the modern hypothesis agrees with the ancient
opinion, that in each instance the convulsion is looked upon as
the manifestation of additional life in the muscles,?a life foreign
to the individual in the one case, an excess of life belonging to
the individual in the other case.
The present, however, is an age of change, and among other
( things doomed to change, may be these opinions. At any rate,
I it is now maintained, and with no small show of reason, that mus-
cular contraction is produced, not by the stimulation of any vital
property of contractility belonging to muscle, but by the simple
cessation of the action of certain agents?electricity and others?
which had previously kept the muscle in a state of relaxation or
expansion. It is maintained that convulsion in every form, and
under every circumstance, is explainable in the same manner, and
in this manner only. In a word, a physical and intelligible hypo-
thesis is offered in place of a vital and unintelligible hypothesis?
for to call a phenomenon vital, is to confess that it is unintel-
ligible.
The hypothesis to which we here refer, and which has been
90 ON CONVULSION.
advocated for several years by Dr. Radcliffe, has been brought
out recently in a much more circumstantial and satisfactory
form*?a form so satisfactory that we think it necessary to do
what we can to make it known, for it is assuredly of high moment
to all who are concerned in the study of diseases of the brain
and nervous system to have right notions on the subject of
convulsion.
Dr. Radcliffe begins his inquiry into the physiology and patho-
logy of muscular action by showing that muscular contraction is
not produced by the stimulation of any property of contractility
belonging to muscle; and first of all he attempts to show that
the action of electricity in muscular contraction is not that of a
stimulus.
The principal facts under this head are these:?Muscle, in
common with nerve and other, if not all, animal tissues, is the
seat of definite electrical actions. These actions are only mani-
fested in irritable and living muscle; they are proportionate to
the degree of irritability and vitality; they die out as the signs
of irritability and vitality disappear; and when these signs have
disappeared, and the muscles have passed into the contraction of
death, rigor mortis, they are altogether at an end. In ordinary
contraction, also, there is an unmistakeable weakening of that
electrical action which naturally belongs to muscle in the state of
relaxation or elongation. This fact is very curious, and it is
well to hear what Dr. Radcliffe has to say about it:?
" It would also seem as if the muscular current were iueci7cene\l
during ordinary contraction ; indeed, there can be no reasonable doubt
that this is the case. In demonstrating this very important fact, Dr.
du Bois-Reymond makes use of the 'gastrocnemius of a frog with a
long portion of its nerve attached. This muscle is placed upon the
cushions of the galvanometer, and the nerve is arranged in such a
manner that a series of shocks from an induction coil can be passed
through a portion of it. As soon as the muscle is laid upon the
cushions, the needle of the galvanometer is deflected to some distance
from zero, and it continues to be deflected, though not to same
extent, so long as the muscle remains in a state of rest; as soon as the
muscle is tetanized by passing the interrupted current through a por-
tion of the nerve, the needle immediately travels back again and oscil-
lates on the other side of zero. These are the simple facts. As soon as
the muscle is tetanized, that is to say, the needle is acted upon by a
reverse current.
" Now it cannot be supposed that this current is due to the irruption
of a current from the induction apparatus by which the muscle is teta-
nized into the circuit of the galvanometer, for both galvanometer and
coil are carefully insulated. Moreover, there is the same reverse current
* "Epilepsy and other Convulsive Affections." Second Edition. Churchill,
London. 1858.
ON CONVULSION. .91
(only in a less marked degree) when the muscle is tetanized by other
means, as by subjecting the nerve to mechanical or chemical irritation,
or by acting upon it by heat. Nay, the same current is seen to be
produced b}r strychnine in a gastrocnemius which is still in living con-
nexion with the nervous centres by means of the ischiatic nerve.
" Nor is the reverse current, which is manifested during tetanus, to
be regarded as a proof that there is a muscular current during con-
traction, whose direction is contrary to that of the current which plays
during the state of rest. On the contrary, it is possible that the
muscular current, before the state of tetanus was induced, may have
given rise to a reverse current within the circuit of the galvanometer
by evolving the secondary polarity of the platinum plates, and that this
reverse current may be manifested during tetanus, in consequence of
the proper muscular current having become weakened. And that this
is the true explanation may be seen by the following modification
of the same experiment.
" The only difference between the experiment as modified and the
original experiment is this?that one of the electrodes, instead of being
connected with the galvanometer by a continuous piece of wire, is
connected by a broken wire, of which the two ends are made to dip
into a small cup of mercury. The difference, that is to say, is in a
simple contrivance for rapidly breaking or closing the circuit; for it
must be plain that the circuit is broken when an end of the wire is
raised out of the mercury, and closed when the same end is replaced in
the mercury. In performing the modified experiment, the muscle is
first laid upon the cushions, and a note made of the degree to which
the needle of the galvanometer is deflected. Then the muscle is removed
from the circuit of the galvanometer, and the instrument depolarized
by raising one end of the wire out of the mercury. In the next place,
the muscle is tetanized, and while it is in this state it is included in
the circuit of the galvanometer by replacing the end of the wire in the
mercury. In this way, then, the current of the tetanized muscle is
for an instant separated from the reverse current of secondary polarity,
which is caused by the continued action of any current upon the
instrument, and the result is that the needle travels in the same
direction as that in which it travels under the current of the unteta-
nized muscle, but not to the same distance from zero. In other words,
the muscular current of the tetanized muscle is found to be iceaJcened,
but not changed?as it would appear to be if no care be taken to
eliminate the influence of secondary polarity from the experiment.
In several instances in which I repeated this experiment upon the
ordinary frog, the primary deflection of the needle, under the current
of the elongated muscle, was from 40? to 60?, and the permanent
deflection from 5? to 7?; whereas the primary deflection of the needle,
under the current of the tetanized muscle, was from 8? to 15?, and
the permanent deflection from 1? to 2?."?(pp. 26-30).
Here, then, are two facts to begin with?two facts which are
of primary and fundamental importance. The one is, that the
contraction of death, rigor mortis, does not come on until the
92 ON CONVULSION.
electrical action of muscle?or the muscular current, as it is called
?is at an end ; the other is, that the muscular current is weakened
in ordinary muscular contraction. These are the facts; the in-
ference arising out of them, according to Dr. Kadcliffe, is, that
muscular contraction is antagonized by the muscular current.
Nor is a different inference deducible from the action of arti-
ficial electricity upon muscle. For what are the main facts? The
first fact is, that, except at the moment when the circuit is made
and broken, the muscle is kept in a state of relaxation or elonga-
tion during the whole time that a constant electrical current is
made to pass through it. The second fact is, that a contracted
or tetanized muscle is relaxed or elongated by the passage of a
constant current through it. But for the contractions which
attend upon the moment when the circuit is made and broken,
the facts, indeed, would seem to show, if they show anything, that
muscular contraction is antagonized rather than caused by the
action of the foreign electrical current upon muscle. Nay, the
contractions which attend upon the moment when the foreign
current begins and ceases to pass, may be no objection to this
view; for at the time when these contractions happen, there may
be a momentary annihilation of electrical action arising out of
certain opposing reactions between the foreign and muscular
currents, which reactions are very clearly pointed out by Dr. Rad-
cliffe, but which would take us too long to explain in this place.
In the next place, the object is to show that muscular con-
traction is not produced by " nervous influence." Here, first of
all, Dr. Radcliffe speaks of the nerve current?which current is
an unquestionable fact in physiology?and shows that it agrees
with the muscular current, in that it affords evidence of enfeeble-
ment during muscular contraction. Take a beautiful experiment
by Dr. du Bois-Reymond as an instance in point:?
" A frog is fastened upon a suitable frame, and then, after tying
its common iliac artery, the ischiatic nerve is cut low down in the
ham and dissected up to the vertebral column. After this the lower
end of the nerve is bridged over the cushions of the galvanometer, so
as to touch one cushion with its end and the other cushion with its
side, and a note is taken of the degree to which the needle of the
galvanometer is deflected by the ' nerve current.' The animal is
then poisoned with two or three drops of a solution of nitrate of
strychnia, and the effect of the tetanus upon the 'nerve current' is
attended to by watching the movements of the needle of the galva-
nometer. The experiment is simple and the result unmistakeable; for
when the tetanus occurs, the needle recedes three or four degrees nearer
to zero, and this not only during the principal attacks, but also during
those single shocks which are produced on touching the animal. It is
seen further that the needle continues at this point so long as the
tetanus continues, and that it again diverges from zero when the
ON CONVULSION. 93
spasm passes off. It is seen, indeed, that the 1 nerve current' is en-
feebled during muscular contraction. In some frogs upon which I
repeated this beautiful experiment, the primary deflection of the needle
under the nerve current before the supervention of the tetanic symp-
toms was from 15? to 20?, and the permanent deflection from 2? to 4?;
and, after the supervention of these symptoms, the primary deflection
was from 3? to 4?, and the permanent deflection scarcely perceptible."
(pp. 44, 45.)
With respect to the action of*a foreign current upon the nerve,
it is also found that the results, so far as muscular action is
concerned, are precisely analogous to those which attend the
action of this current upon muscle, in that, except at the moment
when the current begins and ceases to pass, a relaxed muscle
remains relaxed, and a contracted or tetanized muscle relaxes and
then remains relaxed, so long as a constant current is made to
pass through a living nerve. The contractions attending upon the
time when the current begins and ceases to pass, are also referred
to a momentary annihilation of electrical action, arising out of
certain opposing reactions between the nerve current and foreign
current, which reactions are clearly pointed out; and not only so,
but an apparent explanation is found, in certain intelligible differ-
ences of these reactions, of the reason why the degree of contraction
at the commencement and cessation of the current is different when
the current is said to be inverse, and when it is said to be direct,?
and also of those curious revivals of contraction on changing
the direction of the current which are known as voltaic alterna-
tives. For these matters, however, we must refer to the work itself.
In short, it would seem as if muscular elongation is coin-
cident with the action of natural or foreign electricity upon the
nerve, and that muscular contraction is connected in some way
with the diminution or annihilation of this action, and not with
the stimulating action of electricity upon a vital property of irri-
tability inherent in nerve.
After these considerations, Dr. Radcliffe adduces facts which
seem to demolish the idea that muscular contraction is produced
by any kind of stimulation derived from the nervous centres.
Thus:?
" In these experiments, weights of different sizes are suspended from
a small hook that has been previously attached to one of the hind
legs, a little above the heel. The frog is then held up by its fore
limbs, and a weight that is just sufficient to put the hind leg gently
upon the stretch is placed upon the hook. In the next place the toe
of the weighted leg is pinched, and the weight is changed for one
heavier, until the animal is no longer able to withdraw its leg from the
torture to which it is subjected. This being done, the next thino- is
to divide the spinal cord immediately behind the second pair of
nerves; and to go on testing the muscular power of the paralysed
94. ON CONVULSION.
legs. The results are very strange. Immediately after tlie operation,
the muscular power that can he put forth by the weighted leg when
the toe is pinched is sometimes nil, hut generally it is no more than a
third or fourth of what it was before the operation. Fifteen minutes
later this power is evidently rallying. In twenty or five-and-twenty
minutes it has recovered all it had lost. An hour after the operation
it is greater than it was before the operation?perhaps doubled. An
hour or two later still, it is certainly doubled, and possibly trebled;
and from this time up to the twenty-fourth hour, when the increase
generally attains its maximum, it goes on slowly augmenting. The
particulars of two experiments with very fine frogs (a and u) were as
follows, the weights raised being expressed in grammes:
Wo
*3 p
o M
eg
8 rt
<3
2 S
C3 ?
II
g 3
.5 &
? S
II
s I
cq ei
?S g
s ?
2$.
o g
2 s
f
60 Gram.
20
45
60
80
130
140
140
150
150
Gram. 10 30 40
60
100
130
140
140
" When the increase of the muscular power has attained its maximum,
it may remain nearly stationary for six, ten, fifteen, or twenty days,
and after this time it fails by slow degrees. In a month, if the animal
lives, this power will have fallen to its original value before the opera-
tion ; and at the expiration of six, seven, or eight months, it may have
fallen still lower, until it is not more than a third or a half of this
value. It is possible, however, that the increased muscular power
would not have failed in this way if care had been taken to exercise
the paralysed limbs by galvanism.
" Nor is it easy to agree with Dr. Marshall Hall in thinking that this
increase of muscular power is due to an increased stimulation of the
muscles on the part of the spinal cord (which inordinate stimulation
had come into play because the controlling influence of the brain had
been withdrawn), for there are other experiments which show plainly
enough that the muscular power is augmented, not only in a similar
but even in a higher degree, after the muscle has been cut off altogether
from the spinal cord.
" In the paper on muscular irritability, to which reference has already
been made, and which is deserving of study, as well for the facts as for
the opinions contained in it, Professor Engel, of Zurich, has shown that
muscles are more prone to enter into the state of contraction after the
complete removal of the cerebro-spinal system. In this experiment
he clips out the whole of this system, bones and all, and, after five or
ten minutes, he finds that the muscles have become so irritable as to
be thrown into a state of contraction by a blow on the table. He
finds, indeed, that the muscles are as irritable as they are in narco-
tized frogs.
ON CONVULSION. 95
" Some very conclusive evidence to the same effect is also furnished
in the following experiment by Dr. Brown-Sequard. In this experi-
ment the spinal cord of a frog is divided immediately behind the roots
of the brachial nerves, and then the nerves proceeding to one of the
hind legs, cut through at the points where they leave the cord. Tivo
hours later both the hind limbs are separated from the body, and the
contractility of their muscles is tested by the prick of a needle and by
galvanism. This is the experiment. The result is, that the ' irrita-
bility is augmented' in both these limbs, and that this augmentation is
most considerable in the limb ivhose nerves had been divided?in the
limb, that is to say, which had been cut off from the spinal cord."
(p.p. 60?63.)
Even tlie action of the will upon muscle is not allowed to be
that of a stimulus :?
" Is it not certain," says Dr. Badcliffe, " that the will acts in this
case by stimulating the muscle to contract ? It is difficult, no doubt,
to think differently. It is more than difficult to wean the mind from
so old an idea. But, on the other hand, it must not be forgotten that
the will may have acted in bringing about muscular contraction, not
by imparting anything to the muscles, but by withholding something
from the muscles; and this being the case, we may well refuse to
allow a mere opinion respecting the action of the will, however sanc-
tioned by time that opinion may be, to rank as an objection to a view
of the action of ' nervous influence' in muscular motion, which view
appears to arise necessarily out of the general history of ? nervous
influence' as concerned in muscular motion." (pp. 64, 65.)
The action of blood upon muscle is considered after the
action of nervous influence; and here the conclusion is, that
contraction is not the result of stimulation. Many experiments
are cited in favour of this view, and one of them will serve as an
example. This was performed by Dr. Brown-Sequard upon the
arm of a criminal who was guillotined on the 12th of July, 1851,
at eight a.m. :?
" This arm, which was severed from the body, was in a state of per-
fect rigor mortis at 11 p.m.?fourteen hours after decapitation?and
at this time the experiment was commenced by injecting a pound of
defibrinated dog's blood into the brachial artery. As the blood began to
penetrate into the vessels, some reddish spots appeared in different
parts of the skin of the forearm, of the arm, and more particularly of
the wrist. Then these spots became larger and larger, and the skin
acquired the appearance it has in rubeola. Soon afterwards, the whole
surface had a reddish-violet hue. A little later still, and the skin had
acquired its natural living colour, elasticity, and softness, and the
veins stood out distinct and full as during life. Then the muscles
relaxed, first the fingers and lastly the muscles of the shoulders, and
on examination they were found to have recovered their lost irrita-
bility. At 11.45 p.m. the muscles were more irritable than they had
96 ON CONVULSION.
been at 5 p.m., at which time the corpse was first examined; and this
degree of irritability was kept up, without abatement, until 4 a.m.,
when fatigue compelled Dr. Brown-Sequard for the time to abandon
the experiment. When the experiment commenced, the temperature
of the blood was 73? Fahr., and that of the room 66?Fahr. "
(pp. 67?68.)
After relating these experiments, Dr. KadclifFe proceeds to
combat Dr. Brown-Sequard's theory, that muscular contraction
is caused by the stimulus of carbonic acid in the blood, that is,
by venous blood :?
" It may, indeed, be questioned," he says, " whether the convulsions
of asphyxia are not rather due to the want of the stimulus of red
blood than to any stimulus derived from the black blood with which
the system has become charged; for it is certainly true that the
muscles are similarly convulsed when an animal is bled to death. In
other words, it is certainly true that the muscles are similarly con-
vulsed, as well when the animal is left without blood as when it is
left full of venous blood.
" Nor can it be allowed that the (apparently) more powerful con-
traction of the left ventricle during the first moments of asphyxia are
due to increased stimulation on the part of the venous blood; for the
fuller and firmer pulse, and the rise of the mercury in the hsemady-
nometer may be owing, not to increased contraction in the ventricle,
but simply (as is indeed allowed on all hands) to the fact that there is
some impediment to the free flow of blood through the capillaries of
the systemic circulation?an impediment, that is to say, by which
the systole of the ventricle is made to expend itself with greater force
upon the coats of the intermediate arteries.
" Again, it may be questioned whether the muscular contractions
which are produced in the two other experiments, when black blood is
injected into the vessels, may not also be due to the want of some
stimulus belonging to the red blood rather than to the action of any
stimulus derived from the venous blood. At any rate it is well known
that the uterus has often contracted and expelled its contents when a
pregnant animal has been bleeding to death. And there are several
facts on record in which the human uterus, even, has expelled its
burden after the mother has yielded to the utter syncope of actual ?
death.
" As it seems, however, the grand difficulty in the way of accepting
this idea?that muscle is stimulated to contract by venous blood?is
a chemical difficulty. For what is the main difference between arte-
rial blood and venous blood ? It is that the oxygen of the former has
in the latter become displaced by carbonic acid. Now, carbonic acid
has an action upon all parts of the nervous system which minister to
intelligence or sensibility?upon all parts of the frame indeed, with the
supposed exception of those which minister to motion?which action is
so obviously opposed to that of stimulation, that it is extremely diffi-
cult to suppose that carbonic acid can be a stimulus in any case. In-
deed, it is so difficult, as to make it well nigh impossible to entertain
such a supposition for a single moment."?(pp. 74?76.)
ON CONVULSION. 97
The next point in tlie argument is to show that muscular con-
traction is not produced by the stimulation of any mechanical
agent. This section of the argument is not altogether satis-
factory. The idea is, that the needle, or any other mechanical
agent which has provoked the contraction, may have served to
discharge the electricity with which the muscle is in a manner
charged, and that contraction may he the result of this discharge;
and, certainly, some difficulties in the way of this hypothesis
are disposed of with considerable cleverness. After this, it is
shown that the history of muscular contraction, as seen in the
vesiculce seminales, or bladder, or bowel, or uterus, is at va-
riance with the idea that this contraction is called into existence
by anything like mechanical stimulation. The case of the
uterus must serve as an instance of the way in which our author
treats this part of his subject:?
" And, certainly, the doctrine of stimulation is not wanted to explain
the parturient contractions of the uterus. At the time of labour this
organ returns from the state of progressive expansion in which it had
been kept during the period of pregnancy; and as owe cause of the pre-
vious state of expansion would seem to be found in the increasing vital
activity of the foetus, so now one cause of the return from this state
would seem to be found in the failure of this activity?a failure brought
about, first in the mother, and afterwards in the foetus, in consequence
of the growth of the foetus having then passed the limit beyond which
it cannot pass without trenching upon the supplies necessary for the
proper nourishment of the mother. It would seem, also, that this
return of the uterus from the expanded state, or, in other words, this
contraction of the uterine walls, must compress the vessels going to
the placenta,?that the vital activity of the foetus must suffer a cor-
responding depression from this interference with the sufficiency of the
placental respiration?and that this depression must again lead to con-
traction in the uterus?for if this organ contracted in the first instance
in consequence of a depression of this kind, there is no reason why it
should not do so again. And, further, it would seem that this second
contraction must lead to a third, and the third to a fourth; and that
thus, the uterus acting upon the foetus, and the foetus reacting upon
the uterus, contraction must follow contraction, until the completion
of birth. Nor does it follow from this hypothesis that the uterine con-
traction should be unintermitting, for it is quite possible (this among
other reasons) that the blood which is displaced from the uterus during
contraction may temporarily ' stimulate ' the system of the mother
to a degree which is inconsistent with an unintermitting continuance
of contraction in any of the muscles belonging to the involuntary
system. At any rate, it is quite impossible, upon any rational view of
parturition, to refer the contraction of the uterus to any ' stimulation'
on the part of the foetus, without ignoring the whole of the previous
history of pregnancy."?(pp. 86?88.)
That muscular contraction is not produced by the stimulation
NO. XIII.?NEW SERIES. H
98 ON CONVULSION".
of light is argued from the apparent expansion which takes
place under this influence in the cushions of the sensitive plant,
and in the iris. And, certainly, it is more easy to suppose, with
Bichat, that the iris expands, and in this way closes the pupil, than
to suppose that this closure is brought about by the action of
sphincter fibres, which have a very doubtful existence.
Nor are we allowed to say that muscular contraction is pro-
duced by the stimulation of heat or cold; for the fact is, that
the muscular current and nerve current?which currents, accord-
ing to the premises, would seem to antagonize contraction?are
annihilated or greatly weakened by that degree of heat or cold
which is sufficient to throw the muscle into a state of con-
traction.
And, lastly, it is shown that muscular contraction is not pro-
duced by the stimulation of any chemical or analogous agency.
Here a good deal of evidence is produced, and, among the rest,
some recent experiments by Dr. Harley upon the action of
strychnia and brucia, which seem to show most conclusively
that these poisons act, first of all, by rendering the blood less
apt to appropriate its stimulating element oxygen, and, in the
second place, by diminishing the irritability of the muscles.
Reviewing the whole evidence belonging to this part of the
subject, there appears to be no sufficient reason why rigor
mortis may not "be taken as the type of muscular contraction in
general:?
"For what," asks Dr. Radcliffe, "is the case with respect to this
form of muscular contraction ? The case is simply this : As long as
there is any trace of that action of which the ? muscular current' is a
sign, so long is there no rigor mortis. As long as there is any trace
of that action of which the ? nerve current' is a sign, so long is there
no rigor mortis. If this action dies out speedily, as in persons in whom
the vitality of the frame has been exhausted by long life, or by chronic
disease, such as consumption, the muscles become speedily rigid; if
this action dies out slowly, as in persons who have been cut down sud-
denly in the full glow of life, the muscles are equally slow in becoming
rigid. Once contracted, moreover, the muscles remain contracted until
they break up in the ruin of final decay?an event which happens
most speedily in the case where the muscle retains its physical in-
tegrity least perfectly. And this is precisely as it should be according'
to the pi-emises; for according to the premises all that is necessary to
the commencement of rigor mortis is the cessation of that action of
which electricity is a sign, and all that is necessary to its continuance
is the absence of this action and the physical integrity of the muscular
fibre. In a word, it is possible to explain those unexplained and seem-
ingly contradictory facts which constitute the distinctive features of
that contraction into which the muscles pass after death; and hence
rigor mortis may be accepted, not only as a type of muscular contrac-
ON CONVULSION, 99
tion in general, but as an experimentum cruris in favour of the propo-
sition?that muscular contraction is not produced by the stimulation of
any contractile power belonging to muscle."?(pp. 99, 100.)
Having attempted to show that muscular attraction is not to
he referred to the action of any stimulus upon any property of
contractility inherent in muscle, the author's object is next to
show "that muscular elongation is produced by the simple phy-
sical action of certain agents?electricity and others?and that
muscular contraction is the simple physical consequence of the
cessation of this action." In this section of the argument, a
good deal is said to show that the peculiar changes of form
in muscle, in contracting and in passing out of this state, and
the law of contraction during life and after death, are sus-
ceptible of a purely physical explanation. As to the changes of
form, it is shown, by the experiments of Mr. Joule, of Man-
chester, that a bar of iron, when it ceases to be magnetic, loses
in length and gains in breadth, without undergoing any change
of volume?precisely as a muscle does when contracting; and,
consequently, the change of form in a muscle, under these cir-
cumstances, cannot be looked upon as a vital phenomena. After
this, it is shown that certain facts, which at first sight do not
appear to be altogether consistent with the physical mode of
regarding the phenomena of muscular contraction, may be dis-
posed of. It is shown, for example, liow-the diminished degree
and diminished power of muscular contraction after death?how
the loss of power as the muscle contracts upon itself, and how
the waste of substance in proportion to the number of contrac-
tions?may be accounted for without supposing that the con-
tractile power is a vital endowment.
Dr. Radcliffe's third and last object, in the physiological part of
his work, is to show " that the special muscular movements
which are concerned in carrying on the circulation?the rhythm
of the heart, and those movements in the vessels which are in-
dependent of the heart?are susceptible of a physical explanation
when they are interpreted upon the previous view of muscular
action." Our space will not allow us to enter into this part of
the argument, and a hint or two as to its character must suffice.
Thus, when speaking of the action of the blood in producing
the cardiac rhythm, Dr. Eadcliffe says :?
" Upon any existing theory of muscular action it is more than diffi-
cult to understand why the ventricles remain distended with blood
during the full half of the rhythmic period, if the ventricular systole is
in anywise called into existence by the stimulation of the blood; but
this fact is not altogether unintelligible if, on the contrary, it be sup-
posed (as must be supposed upon the previous view of muscular action)
H 2
100 ON CONVULSION.
that the office of the "blood will rather he to antagonize the systole and
induce the diastole. Indeed upon this view the difficulty appears to
be at an end, for according to it the ventricles are thrown into the
state of diastole by the stimulation of the blood which has been injected
into the coronary system of vessels, and they remain in this state until
this blood has given up its arterial properties and so ceased to be
stimulating. And certain it is that the different action of the ventri-
cles in anaemia and plethora is calculated to strengthen this idea.
Thus : in plethoi'a the pulse (which is the direct test of the action of
the ventricles) is full and slow; in anaemia it is small and quick. In
the one case, that is to say, the ventricle fills to distension with rich
blood and the systole is deferred?in the other case, the ventricle
takes in a small quantity of poor unstimulating blood, and the systole
follows with scarcely any delay. The facts, indeed, are the very oppo-
sites of what they would be found to be if the blood stimulated the
ventricle to contract, for in that case the pulse must be small and
quick in plethora, and full and slow in anaemia. But if, on the other
hand, the blood provokes the ventricle to the diastole by causing
elongation in the muscular fibres composing this chamber, then it is
intelligible that the ventricle should dilate more fully, and the dilata-
tion continue for a longer time, when the blood is rich and warm, as
in plethora, than when it is poor and watery, as in anaemia."?
(pp. 115, 116.)
* * * * *
" On realizing the phenomena of the heart's action more distinctly,
it becomes even still more improbable that the systole of the ven-
tricle is causcd by any kind of stimulation, and of the blood more
particularly. For what are the facts? At the systole the blood
rushes through the coronary arteries into the coats of the heart, and
the diastole of the ventricles is attendant upon this rush. And after
the blood has remained in these coats until it may be supposed to
have lost some of its arterial properties, then the systole returns.
These are the simple facts; and thus if stimulation has to do with
the phenomena at all, it is with the diastole and not with the systole.
" It appears, indeed, as if the ventricular diastole were due, partly
to the force with which the blood is injected into the coronary arteries
at the ventricular systole, and partly to the elongating, electro-motive
effects of the arterial blood upon the cardiac fibres. It appears, also,
as if the diastole of the ventricles were made to continue as long as the
blood retained its arterial properties, and that the systole returned
when the oxygen was exhausted and the arterial converted into venous
blood. And thus, it appears as if the rhythm of the ventricles had a
part of its explanation ; for according to this view, so long as the proper
blood continues to be supplied, and so long as the ventricle continues
to be capable of responding to it, so long must the systole give rise to
the diastole, and the diastole be followed by the systole.
"A little further examination will also serve to show that the
systole of the auricles must be contemporaneous with the diastole
of the ventricle ; for this systole of the auricles, there is reason to
believe, is, in great measure, the mere falliny in of the auricular walls
ON CONVULSION, 101
upon the sudden withdrawal of blood from the auricles by the diastole
of the ventricles. There is reason for this opinion in the absence of
valves at the mouths of the veins opening into the auricles, and the
reason is obvious. For if the auricles had to contract primarily like
the ventricles, is it not fair to assume that there would have been
valves to prevent the reflux of the blood from the auricles into the
great veins ? And if so, then there is no difficulty in accounting for
the rhythm of the auricles; for the auricular diastole, which is virtually
coincident with the ventricular diastole, will be partly due to the same
cause as the ventricular diastole?namely, the rush of blood into the
coronary system of arteries?and partly to the onward current of blood
which is continually setting in from the veins; and the auricular
systole will be mainly due to the collapse of the auricular walls upon
the sudden passage of blood into the ventricles at the ventricular
diastole."?(pp. 117?119.)
.... "And if, under ordinary circumstances, the blood acts in this
manner, then there appears to be no great difficulty in understanding
how it is that the heart, or a portion of the heart, may go on pulsating
after removal from the bodj^. For why should oxygen dissolved in the
blood act differently from oxygen diffused in the air ; why, for instance,
should not the air, which bathes the surface and permeates every inter-
stice, provoke a diastolic state in the separate heart or a fragment of
the same, by rousing that polar condition which in the nerves and
muscles is designated under the name of the nerve and muscular cur-
rents ? Why may not the systolic state supervene upon this diastolic
state when the polar condition fails, in consequence, as it were, of the
arterial air having become converted into venous air? And why,
again, should not the diastole return after every systole, so long, that
is, as the muscle is capable of responding to the action of the oxygen,
for it may well be supposed that the commotion of the systole will
displace the venous air and bring the muscular and nervous tissues
into relation with fresh quantities of arterial air ? Assuredly there is
no evident reason to the contrary, and there is one reason why this
view should be received, and this is to be found in the fact that the
rhythm is rendered more rapid, and even revived for some time after
its actual cessation, by placing the heart in oxygen instead of atmo-
spheric air, and that it is brought to a stop by placing the heart in a
vacuum or by immersinar it in hvdrocren or nitrogen or carbonic acid."
?(pp. 123, 124.)
Passing from the domain of physiology to that of pathology,
Dr. Radcliffe proceeds to consider the conditions in which mus-
cular contraction is in excess; namely, the different forms of
tremor, the different forms of convulsion, and the different forms
of spasm. In doing this, the interparoxysmal condition, the
paroxysm, the appearances after death, the pathology, and the
results of treatment are all passed in review, and the conclusion
arising out of eachpartof the inquiry is found to be in harmony with
102 ON CONVULSION.
the previous view respecting the physiology of muscular action.
In no part is it found that tremor, or convulsion, or spasm, is
brought about by excess of stimulation, actual or relative. We
are altogether unable to follow Dr. Kadcliffe step by step in a
subject so extensive, and all we can attempt to do is to give a
hint or two as to the character of the argument, and refer to the
book itself for further information. These hints, we think, may
be best taken from the parts where the pathology of tremor, or
convulsion, or spasm, is deduced from a consideration of the phe-
nomena connected with the vascular system. We think that
these hints may be best taken from these parts; for, seeing that
the functional activity of the system is in direct relation to the
supply of arterial blood, it is to be expected that the key to the
whole problem will be found in the condition of the circulation.
Thus, the supply of nervous influence to the muscles is propor-
tionate to the activity of the circulation of arterial blood in the
nervous centres and nerves, and this supply cannot properly be
kept up when the circulation flags. What then is the condition
of the circulation in those cases where muscular contraction
is in excess ? The answer furnished by Dr. Kadcliffe is, that
this condition is always what it ought not to be if the muscles
?were over-stimulated at the time. In siviple epilepsy, for in-
stance?
" The frigid and clammy hand, the foot that will scarcely keep
warm before the fire, the pale and sallow or dark and venous complexion,
the habitual feeling of chilliness, are facts which appear to show that
the circulation is wanting in vigour ; and this inference is fully borne
out by the pulse, which in simple epilepsy is rarely otherwise than
weak and slow. Plethora, in the form so often exhibited in the
butcher, is never met with, and feverish reaction is a rare occurrence,
even as an accident. There are, indeed, cases of epileptiform disease,
in which the circulation may exhibit a greater degree of activity; but
these cases, as will be seen in the proper place, present no real objec-
tion to the conclusion that the habitual state of the circulation in
epilepsy is one of depression.
" Nor is there any evidence of a contrary character in the fit itself.
Upon the eve of the fit, if any change can be perceived, it is in all pro-
bability one in which the skin has become paler and more dusky than
usual, and the pulse more feeble. At the instant of the fall, in many,
if not in all instances, a corpse-like pallor overspreads the countenance
?a phenomenon which can only be explained on the supposition that
syncope is impending; a moment or two afterwards, a dull-red flush,
rapidly deepening into livid blueness, or even blackness, takes the
place of the paleness which had first overspread the countenance, the
face and neck become frightfully bloated, and everything shows plainly
that all respiration is at an end. This state of suffocation continues
during the whole course of the convulsion, and so perfect is it, that
ON CONVULSION. 103
little or 110 arterial blood can find its way into the arteries during tlie
convulsion.
" There is, however, one fact which may he thought to show that
there is an increased injection of arterial blood into the vessels during
the convulsion. Such injection is evidently very imperfect at the
onset of the fit?in many instances at least; for upon no other suppo-
sition can we explain the corpse-like paleness of the countenance, and
the feeble and silent pulse at the wrist. This is evident. But if the
finger be kept upon the wrist, it may be found that the pulse may rise
during the convulsion, until it has acquired a force and fulness which
it never had in the intervals between the fits; and if the hand be
placed over the heart at this time, it may be found that this organ is
beating tumultuously and with great violence. It may also be found
that these signs of vascular excitement will continue for some time
after the convulsion is over. These facts are evident and unmistake-
able, but they do not show, as they might seem to do at first sight,
that more arterial blood is injected into the arteries at this time. On
the contrary, they necessitate a totally different conclusion when they
are subjected to a strict scrutiny.
"Now it cannot be doubted, that the effect of cutting off the access
of air to the blood is to prevent the free passage of the blood through
the pulmonary capillaries, and to overload the right side of the heart
and the venous system generally, at the expense of the left side of the
heart and the arteries springing from it. In this way the right side
of the heart may become so much distended that the auriculo-ventri-
cular valves are separated, and the beatings of the ventricle are made
to tell as much in driving the blood back into "the veins, as in sending
it onwards into the lungs. But it is not right to suppose that the
arteries are empty. If, for example, the carotid of a rabbit be exposed,
and a ligature placed around the windpipe, it is found that the blood
continues to flow through the vessel, that the originally scarlet colour
becomes darker and darker, until at last it is as black as that of the
blood in the neighbouring jugulars. Two minutes to two minutes
and a half are occupied in this transformation of the scarlet into black
blood. It is found, also, that this black blood will escape from the
cut vessel in as full a stream and with as much force at the expiration
of two minutes or two minutes and a half from the commencement of
the process of suffocation, as it did before the aeration of the blood was
at all interfered with. Nay, it is even found that at this time the
black blood will escape with greater force and in a fuller stream than
it did when it was red ; for on fitting a ha>madynometer into the vessel
and testing the force of the pulse-wave before and after the tightening
of the ligature upon the windpipe, the mercury in the instrument is
seen to rise to a higher point than that to which it rose previously.
Indeed, at this time it is evident, without the aid of any instrument,
that the artery is more distended and more tense than it was before.
This phenomenon is explained by the late Professor John Reid
who has investigated the condition of the circulation in suffocation
more carefully and successfully than any other observer, as the result
104 ON CONVULSION.
of an impediment to the free passage of the black blood through the
systemic capillaries similar to that which prevents the free passage of
the same blood through the pulmonic capillaries; and it is more easy
to entertain this view, and to suppose that, in consequence of this
impediment in the systemic capillaries, a greater proportion of the
force of the left ventricle is expended in distending the arteries, than
to suppose that the ventricle is ' stimulated' to increased action under
these circumstances. And, lastl}r, as explaining the peculiarity of
the pulse in suffocation, it is to be remembered that the blood is sent
along the arteries with greater force and increased velocity during
violent attempts at expiration, and that the pulse becomes soft, feeble,
and less frequent during violent attempts at inspiration; and hence
it may be supposed that the increased fulness and force of the pulse
during the suffocation of epilepsy may be owing partly to the fact that
during the whole of this time the air is prevented from entering the
chest by the firm spasm of all the muscles concerned?a state which
may be compared to that which obtains in forced and prolonged
expiration.
" Hence, the increase in the strength and fulness of the pulse which
may take place during the convulsion of epilepsy is no proof, as it
might appear at first sight, that the brain as well as the rest of the
system is at this time supplied with an increased quantity of arterial
blood; for the black and bloated face and neck, and the absolute suspen-
sion of the respiratory movements, show most clearly that the pulse is
then filled, not with red blood, but with black.
"After the convulsion there is little to notice in the circulation.
"When the convulsions cease, the respiration is speedily restored, and
the re-admission of arterial blood into the system may be attended with
some transitory and inconsiderable febrile reaction ; but this reaction
has nothing whatever to do with the convulsion, for when it appears
the convulsion has departed, and if the convulsion returns it is not
until the reaction has first taken its departure.
" Arguing, therefore, from the corpse-like paleness and comparative
pulselessness of the onset of the paroxysm, and from the signs of
positive and unmistakeable suffocation by which this stage of paleness
and pulselessness is succeeded, the only conclusion would seem to be
that the convulsion of epilepsy is connected with the want of a due
supply of arterial blood. Indeed, the whole history of the paroxysm,
as deduced from the condition of the vascular system, would seem to
show that there is something utterly uncongenial between epilepsy
and anything like arterial excitement."?(pp. 156?161.)
Nor is the case different in epileptiform convulsion connected
with certain diseases of the brain ? chronic softening, chronic
meningitis, tumour, induration, hypertrophy, atrophy, congestion,
apoplexy, inflammation?with fevers, with certain suppressed
secretions, with irritation in the gums and elsewhere, and with
the moribund state. In each case, on examination, the condition
of the circulation is always the reverse of what it ought to be, if
ON CONVULSION. 105
the muscles were over-stimulated at the time. In inflammation
of the brain, for instance :?
" In inflammation of the brain the condition of the circulation is
not uniformly the same at all times, but this condition, as will he seen
by reflecting on what has been already said, varies little with respect
to the convulsion.
" Simple meningitis begins with paleness of the skin, a feeble
depressed pulse, cutis anserina, vomiting, rigors, perhaps convulsion.
Then follow rapidly the symptoms of high febrile reaction and cerebral
inflammation?the pulse becoming hard and frequent, the breathings
irregular and oppressed, the skin, particularly the skin of the head, hot
and burning. These symptoms of high febrile reaction and inflamma-
tion continue for two or three days, and then give place to an opposite
state of things, in which the pulse loses its force and becomes weak,
small, irregular, and the breathings are interrupted with frequent sighs
and pauses. Or if at this time the pulse retains any degree of resist-
ance, it is evident from the dusky colour of the skin and the suspi-
rious and laboured respiration, that the whole of this resistance is not
due to the injection of arterial blood into the artery. Now it is in
this stage of collapse which follows the period of inflammatory and
febrile excitement, or else in the stage of collapse which precedes the
febrile and inflammatory excitement, and never during the actual
period of excitement, that the convulsion happens. And this rule is
constant. Indeed, the history of simple meningitis shows most con-
clusively that vascular excitement is as incompatible with convulsion
as it is with rigor or subsultus.
" In tubercular meningitis the pulse is weak and variable from the
very first, now quick, now comparatively slow, rising in frequency
when the head is raised from the pillow, and falling upon lying down
again ; and from the very first, the respiration is irregular, unequal,
and interrupted with frequent sighs and pauses. For some time
there may be some little disturbance of a hectic character, particularly
in the evening; but this soon comes to an end, and the prostrate
pulse forgets to put on even this faint semblance of fever. In some
cases, there may indeed be a short stage of fever, and something like
cerebral inflammation, especially in young children ; but as a rule, the
symptoms are altogether of a passive, non-febrile, non-inflammatory
character. In any case, however, the convulsion is connected with an
extremely depressed state of the circulation, and never with a state of
febrile and inflammatory excitement, if there be such a state.
" In rheumatic meningitis, also, there is little or no febrile excitement
from the beginning, and the pulse has become feverless and utterly
weak before the convulsion happens.
" In general cerebritis, the pulse, at first slow, soon becomes variable
and readily affected by changes of posture: the respiration, also, is very
variable and suspirious. From the first, indeed, there is scarcely any
fever, and little heat of head, except the phenomena of cerebritis are
mixed up with those of simple meningitis ; but if such symptoms are
present, they soon pass off, and give place to symptoms of slow
106 ON THE STATE AND CONDITION OF LUNACY IN IRELAND.
sinking?a state in which hour by hour the breathing is more inter-
rupted with sighs ancl pauses, and the pulse more powerless, unless it
may derive some fictitious power from the difficult circulation of im-
perfectly arterialized blood, in which case the dusky countenance and
the purple lips will show very clearly that the vessel is not altogether
filled with arterial blood.
" In partial cerebritis there is even less febrile disturbance than
there is in general cerebritis, and at no stage of the malady is there
anything like increased vascular action."?(pp. 309?311.)
Such is a free sketch of the argument by which Dr. Bad-
cliffe attempts to show that convulsion in all its forms?tremor,
convulsion proper, and spasm?must be looked upon in a very
different light to that in which we have been in the habit of
regarding it. The subject is one of great importance?of special
importance in psychological medicine; for is not convulsion a most
common symptom of disorder of the brain? The subject is one
also which claims immediate, as well as serious, attention; for if
Dr. Badcliffe is right, the natural conclusion is, that the more
appropriate means of treatment will be, not those which are cal-
culated to calm excessive stimulation, butthose which will sustain
and rouse the powers of a flagging system.
