Proposed Legislation In Lunacy
================================

378
Aet. IY.-

The proceedings of the recent Select Committee on Lunatics
were brought to a summary conclusion by the dissolution of Par-
liament; and the Committee have reported that, having regard
to this event, as well as in consequence of the inquiry not being
complete, "they do not feel themselves in a position to offer
any definite opinion on the questions referred to them ; and they
have therefore agreed to report the evidence taken."

We should gladly, under these circumstances, have deferred
any consideration of the subjects submitted to the Committee
until the termination of the inquiry; hut as the most important
portion of the evidence already given is of an official character,
?we do not feel at liberty to postpone its consideration indefinitely.
We enter upon our task, however, with reluctance, since at the
very outset we are compelled to give attention to certain opinions
calculated to promote much unprofitable recrimination, and to
impede effective legislation for the better care of lunatics. These
opinions would not, indeed, have merited notice if it had not so
happened that they proceeded principally from the Chairman of
the Lunacy Commission, the Eight Hon. the Earl of Shaftesbury,
and that they influenced several of his suggestions respecting
future lunacy legislation. It is to be noted, also, that these
opinions are to be regarded as being entertained, in some measure,
by the whole of the Commissioners in Lunacy, for, in his answer
to query 5, his Lordship says?

" I would state to the Committee, as well as I can, the present
condition of things, and then point out certain amendments which
I think might be applied to the existing defects Having
done that, I should then ask the permission of the Committee to go
more widely into the subject, and to point out to them what is
the result of my long experience, and the result of the experience of
my brother Commissioners, as to the real method of the treatment
and cure of lunacy, because we are convinced that it stands at present
upon a very vicious principle; and I should wish to indicate to the
Committee, and to point out what I consider to be the true and per-
manent principle which cannot fail of conferring very great benefits
upon that enormous class of helpless beings " (p. 1).

It is fortunate, however, for the critic who does not wish to be
thrust more than is absolutely necessary beyond the bounds of
the subject-proper which he has to discuss, when the author of
objectionable and irrelevant opinions himself furnishes the most
conclusive answers to those opinions; and this is what Lord
* " Report from the Select Committee on Lunatics." Blue Book. Ordered to
be Printed, 11th April, 1859.
Shaftesbury lias done in respect to the opinions expressed by him
to which we object.

His Lordship was asked, in reference to the medical certificate
of insanity (qy. 192)?
"Do you think that there is anything now in the form of the cer-
tificate, or what is required to be inserted in it, which creates any
unnecessary obstacle in the way of placing persons under that restraint
which they clearly ought to be placed under ?"
To this he replied:?

" None beyond this, that the certificate declares that the person
ought to be taken charge of, and be placed in a lunatic asylum. That
at once fixes the taint of insanity upon a family; and we have done
all that we could to mitigate the effect. The form used to be, that
such and such a person was ' a proper person to be confinedthat was
considered painful, and this was substituted, ' to be taken charge of,
and placed under medical treatment.' One of the great difficulties
arises from this, that you must, in seeking for a certificate, apply,
generally speaking, to the medical men in the neighbourhood.
Now the knowledge of, lunacy among medical men is extremely
limited indeed ; it has never vet been made the subject of study gene- /
rally. Of course there are some who have attained to a very great
degree of science and knowledge, and there are most eminent names
in England at present; but people assume that because a man is a
medical man, he must have a knowledge of lunacy; and they there-
fore apply to him for his opinion; but the fact is, that a medical man
has no more knowledge of lunacy than any other human being;
unless he has made it his especial study; it is a specialty, and as
much requires minute study as anything else. For my own part, I
do not hesitate to say, from very long experience, putting aside all its
complications with bodily disorder, the mere judgment of the fact
whether a man is in a state of unsound mind, and incapable of
managing his owA affairs, and going about the world, requires no pro-
fessional knowledge; my firm belief is, that a sensible layman, con-
versant with the world and with mankind, can give not only as good an
opinion, but a better opinion than all the medical men put together; I
am fully convinced of it" (p. 23).

It is certainly a somewhat novel notion that the necessity of
having to obtain a medical certificate creates an " unnecessary
obstacle in the way of placing persons under that restraint, which
they clearly ought to he placed under." This is scarcely consistent
with his Lordship's answer to the 885th query: " In your Lordship's
experience, have you not observed that there is a greater tendency
amongst medical men to observe the symptoms of insanity than
amongst other people ??No cloubt of it. (p. 96.) Certainly one
of the objects most apparent in the recent attempted legislation
for lunatics was to check the supposed evils arising out of this
assumed tendency. But we notice this point only cursorily, for
it is with the latter portion of liis Lordship's answer to the 192nd
query that we are, at present, more particularly concerned.

It is not necessary for us to dilate upon the trite axiom that
our knowledge of a thing is commonly proportionate to our
acquaintance with it; neither is it needful for us to defend the
public against the charge of hasty judgment in deeming that the
person who has been specifically trained to mark deviations from
sound health, whether of body or mind, as is the medical man, is
relatively better able than he who has not been so taught to judge
of unsoundness whether of body or mind, and to profit by ex-
perience. Indeed, his Lordship himself has clearly laid down
the prime reason which induces the public to look upon the
medical man as the best judge of insanity, for in speaking of the
fitness of examiners in lunacy being medical men, he remarked,
" because the medical man is the only person in the neighbour-
hood of these asylums ivho is likely to have given any attention to
the matter." (qy. 837, p. 94.) That there may be medical men who,
notwithstanding the preliminary training mentioned, have profited
so little by it as to render their opinion, when their abilities are put
to a practical test, of no greater value than the opinion of a man who
has had no previous tuition in the method of observing disease, we
do not deny; but this is beside the question, yet we may say here,
that we fully agree with a hope expressed by his Lordship (qy. 195),
that larger opportunities for the study of mental affections will
be afforded to medical students in our public asylums, and that
these affections will become a more prominent branch of medical
study than they now are: but the throwing open of public
asylums to medical students is the first step that is requisite.
Further, we shall not quibble with the somewhat vague use of
the terms "lunacy" and "unsound mind" in the answer, but
confine ourselves to a few additional quotations from his Lord-
ship's evidence, bearing upon the opinion that, " the mere judg-
ment of the fact whether a man is in a state of unsound mind,
*iiA\co. . an(j incapabie 0f managing his own affairs, and going about the
world, requires no professional knowledge ; a sensible layman,
conversant with the world and mankind, can give not only as
good, but a better opinion than all the medical men put together -
I am fully convinced of it."

In his answer to query C38, his Lordship, referring to the
impediments which occasionally occur in removing pauper lunatics
to asylums, said?

" The parish authorities have been desirous to send a patient to
the workhouse [? asylum], but sometimes the medical man will not
certify; and in several instances they have gone before the magis-
trates, who /enow little or nothing about it, and they have said ' This
person appears to be much too tranquil to be sent to a lunatic
asylum; I will not sign an order.' And there is the evil of being
obliged to take them before persons who Jcnow nothing about the
matter " (p. 72).

Again, Mr. Tite having asked (qy. 846), "Would your Lord-
ship approve of a pauper lunatic being taken before a magistrate
that he might see the case ?" the reply was?
" The honourable member means, I suppose, private lunatics. I
think nothing could be worse than that; there would be a degree of
publicity about it that would be most painful, to go before a magis-
trate, and to have the matter determined by him, whether the patient
should or not be put under medical treatment. In 99 cases
out of 100 the magistrate knows little or nothing about the matter.
A case occurred the other day, of a poor man, who was taken before a
magistrate, and he refused to certify, because the man was not in an
infuriated state. ' A quiet person like him,5 he said, 4 ought not to
be put in an asylum; take him back.' He was in a low, desponding
state; and if he had been sent to a curative asylum he might have
been cured and restored to society" (p. 95).

If we now turn to query 838, we shall find that his Lordship
entertains as little respect for the opinion of a clergyman on a
case of lunacy as for that of a magistrate. His Lordship was
questioned concerning the propriety of having "medical ex-
aminers" to countersign and confirm the medical certificates
which authorize the reception of a patient into an asylum, and
thus afford an additional protection against unjust confinement.
As the answers to queries 830 and 837 have an immediate
bearing upon our present topic, and upon the answer to the
838tli query; and as one reason advanced for selecting a medical
man as an examiner, if such an officer should be appointed, is
curious, we shall quote the answers to the 83Gtli and 837tli
queries as well as the answer to the 838th.

" 83(J. If this duty were imposed upon the Commissioners, would it
not be performed by the medical Commissioners ??No; it might be
done by them, but there again comes in the objection which I so ,
strongly entertain, and I protest against bringing the medical profes- (
sion so forward that they only are to be the judges of insanity.
" 837. Does not that apply to the clauses of this Bill, that require that
the examiners shall be medical examiners ??Yes ; because the medical
man is the only person in the neighbourhood of these asylums who is likely
to have given any attention to the matter. You could not impose upon
the magistrates or the resident gentry such a duty, but it must be put
upon a person who is generally resident, who will take a fee for his duty,
and a medical man is almost the only person to do it.
" 838. Mr. Whitbread.] Could not you attain this object by insisting
by law upon some religious care of the patients by some chaplain who
could equally form a judgment ??I should have more distrust of the
religious gentleman than I should have of the medical man ; and I say
that with the deepest respect for the ministers of religion. The diffi-
culty of it would be incalculable if you were to throw the duty on the
parochial clergy in the neighbourhood, who are already over-burdened'r
(p. 94).

Now-, in his reply to the 194tli query, liis Lordship says, "It
is clear that the value of the certificate [of insanity] must depend
upon the experience of the people ivho sign it." (p. 23.) But
in a subsequent portion of his Lordship's examination we
read as follows :?

" 867. Clause 15 [of the Bill introduced by Mr. Walpole 'to amend
the Law concerning the Care and Treatment of Lunatics'] is, that ' cer-
tain persons are not to sign certificates for the reception of patients/
That is where they are the proprietors of any licensed house ??Yes.
"868. I believe your Lordship considers that a very important
clause ??Yes ; although I believe very great objection will be taken
to it by the medical men.

" 869. Your Lordship approves of that clause ??Yes.
"870. That clause will prevent their playing into each others*
hands??Yes;" &c. (p. 97).

Thus the only section of medical men who have, with few
exceptions, an opportunity of becoming thoroughly experienced
in insanity, and of bringing that experience to bear upon the
t public good, are at once swept aside, and the signature of
those important documents, the medical certificates of insanity,
left entirely to that portion of the profession least practically
acquainted with the subject. For it must be remembered that
the medical officers- of public asylums are debarred from private
practice entirely.

If, then, we sum up his Lordship's opinions on the first
obnoxious point that has demanded our attention, we find (1) an
assertion of the comparative worthlessness of the opinion of most
medical men on cases of lunacy; (2), an expression of "firm
belief" that the opinion of a sensible layman on such cases is of
greater value than that of a medical man; (3), an assertion that
the opinion of a magistrate is valueless from his knowing nothing
whatever about the matter; (4), another assertion that the opinion
of a clergyman is even of less value than that of a medical man ;
(5), a statement that an opinion depends for its value on the ex-
perience of the person giving it; and to crown all, (6), an
approval of a suggestion by which the bulk of the .most ex-
perienced practitioners in lunacy in the kingdom would be*
debarred from uttering an opinion at all in the form in which a
medical opinion on lunacy is of the greatest importance, to wit,
when expressed in a certificate of insanity.

We shall not attempt to reconcile these apparent contradictions,,
hut add, as a pendant, an answer which would seem to imply,
that his Lordship is disposed to look with confidence upon the
opinion of a laivyer alone in cases of lunacy.

Mr. Monckton Milnes asked?" Is there any advantage in these
medical examiners being medical men; why not lawyers ?" To
which his Lordship responded, " I would not object to that if we
could find a person in the neighbourhood who, being resident,
would take a fee for it." (p. 96). Mr. Milnes must have been in
a somewhat waggish mood, and disposed to pleasantry, when he
asked if there would be any advantage in the medical examiners,
being medical men, and then suggested laivyers ! ! .
The second obnoxious point that we have to deal with is as
follows:?

" His Lordship feels strongly that the whole system of private
asylums is utterly abominable and indefensible." (Qy. 101,
p. 14.) On this question he explains himself more fully in his
answer to query 494?

" It is the result of very long experience in these matters, that a
large proportion of the difficulties in legislation, and almost all the
complications that we have to contend with, or to obviate, arise from
the principle on which these licensed houses are founded. The licensed
houses are founded upon the principle of profit to the proprietor, and
the consequence is, that any speculator who undertakes them having
a view to profit is always eager to obtain patients, and unwilling to
discharge them; and he has moreover the largest motive to stint them
in every possible way during the time they are under his care. Now,
this must be borne in mind, I do not intend to cast any reflection upon
the medical profession. I know that when I have urged arguments of
this kind, I have been told that 1 have entertained most undue sus-
picions of that great profession. I have no suspicion of them as medical
men; but my suspicions are of the medical men only when they are
proprietors of lunatic asylums, into which lunatics are taken for profit"
(p. 54).

Again, his Lordship states further, in his answer to query
504?
" I know that there are some asylums extremely well conducted; I
know that nothing can be more attentive, more minute, or more con-
scientious than the care that some of these proprietors take, but we
have no security; they are here to-day, and they may be gone to-
morrow. True, there are some very good men; and perhaps we might
be content with what we have, and not endeavour to effect any alte-
ration ; but the licence by the death of one proprietor may pass into
the hands of another, and he might act upon totally different prin-
ciples : and you have ever to contend with that vicious principle of
profit. Now, if you read our Acts of Parliament, it will be seen that
half of the provisions are made to enable the Commissioners to fight
against the selfishness of persons who open these asylums. After per-
petual anxiety and trouble, we may manage to get an asylum into a
38-1
decent condition; and while we are in the presence of this vicious
principle, we keep it down. We direct certain things to be done in a
house, and very often there is an appearance of their being done ; but
when we turn our backs, that principle which we have curbed by our
presence recommences its active operations ; and we cannot have any
security whatever that justice will be done to the patients, because we
? ' cannot dog the thing day by day, or hour by hour, and know that
every condition is fulfilled. Where a proprietor is unprincipled, see
what advantages he has, and what power he has over his patient. It
is in vain to trust to the case-book; for, as I read in a letter from a
medical man the other day, he says that the case-books can be and
are very frequently ' cooked.' When a certain diet, for instance, is
prescribed, what security is there that that diet is given p We know
that a certain course of medicine is necessary; but what security is
there that that course of medicine is undergone by the patient ? And
it is therefore in their power to retard the cure of the patients inde-
finitely, and the temptation is inordinately great; and it is more than
human nature can ordinarily stand. There are some cases in which
the patients are paying from 400/. to 500/. and 600/. a year; and the
loss of one or two of those patients would be a dead loss?a loss of
the most serious kind?and one that would fall very heavily upon the
condition of an establishment; for the proprietor is by no means secure
that another patient, able to pay an equal amount, will come to take
the place of the one he has lost. I remember one instance, not very
long ago, where a patient was paying no less than 1200/. a year; and
I am certain that the expense of that patient in the house was not
300/. a year; so that was 900/. a year clear profit to the medical
man. You sometimes see it paraded that such and such a patient
has the benefit of a carriage. I do not much believe it. It sometimes
happens that they get a drive when the doctor has taken his drive ;
but as to the permanent use of a carriage, I am sure that very rarely
happens. But in that case, where 1200/. a year is paid, I say that
?there is the strongest temptation to retain that patient. It is not
necessary to be under such influences, that the medical man should be
a person of actually dishonest intentions ; but when there is tempta-
tion such as that, can the Committee not imagine all the self-delusions
that a man would practise, and the disaffection with which he would
look upon any returning symptom of health ? how he would consider
that the matter required further consideration, and so retard the
period of the discharge, if it ever took place ? I am certain that the
temptation is so great, that few people could resist it. I do not
believe that any person could, in fact, resist it. I am certain that I
coulcl not resist it; and therefore I feel very strongly that some
control or check must be put upon the present system'''' (p. 56).
Of course, the frank statement of his Lordship, that if lie were
similarly circumstanced to the proprietor of a private asylum,
he could not resist the temptation of making as great a profit
as possible out of liis patients, without regard to their welfare,
&t once puts a stop to serious argument upon his assertions;
but we must demur to the conclusion tliat, because he unfor-
tunately could not resist temptation, and might not be (as Sir
Erskine Perry phrased it in a subsequent question respecting
proprietors of asylums) " actuated by the ordinary motives which
actuate human conduct, viz., to succeed with his patient, and
thereby give evidence of his skill and ability," therefore it
was necessary to have additional legislative control over
the present system of private asylums. We may, however,
add, that we should have a greater confidence in his Lord-
ship's probity under temptation than he himself seems, to enter-
tain ; for even admitting that (as his Lordship would soften
the matter) a man may slide almost unintentionally into wrong,
the act is, after all, one of rank and indefensible dishonesty, and
one that could not suggest itself for a moment to a pure-minded,
honourable, and Christian man. The Earl of Shaftesbury, we /-
believe, greatly under-estimated his own moral powers of resistance
when he made this statement.

As to the positive statements made in the answer we have just
quoted, but few remarks are requisite. How does it happen that
so serious a matter as the falsification of case-books is mentioned
by the Chairman of the Commission in Lunacy upon the vague
authority of an unnamed medical man ? The Commissioners
have the power, and it is their peculiar duty, to institute inquiries
into charges of this kind. Why was no inquiry made into the
charge paraded by his Lordship, or if made, why were not the
results laid before the Committee, and not a vague and, in the
mode in which it was put, unwarrantable charge ? Again, of the
case mentioned by his Lordship as paying 1200Z. a year, he
says,?" I am certain that the expense of that patient in the
house was not 300Z. a year ; so that was 900Z. a year clear profit to
the medical man." But in his answer to query 914, his Lord-
ship states, doubtless speaking of the same case, " I have in my
mind an instance where a lady paid 1200Z. a year to the pro-
prietor of an asylum, and I am quite sure, ivlien we visited her,
the sum expended upon her did not amount to 400Z., leaving a
clear 7001, or 8001, a year profit." (p. 100.) These statements
might bo very well left to tell their own tale, but we will add that,
as the Commissioners must know, when payments of unusual
magnitude are made for the care of patients, they usually repre-
sent the magnitude of the responsibility involved in the case,
and of this responsibility and its money-value the friends of the
patient may be conceived to be the best judges. Moreover, the
Commissioners have no difficulty in obtaining the fullest infor-
mation respecting the treatment and care of private patients; and
Lord Shaftesbury might, if he had wished it, have obtained the
minutest knowledge of the cost (apart from all estimates for pro-
fessional emolument) of the case he referred to, and thus have
ascertained how ridiculously erroneous his own estimates are. It
is no explanation of the course his Lordship took, that he could
not place any confidence in returns made to him by interested
parties; for it is evident that his own statements are simply
guesses.

Now, we protest against opinions and statements such as those
we have quoted from the evidence of Lord Shaftesbury being
obtruded into the midst of a grave and important inquiry. That
they are unsupported by any evidence worthy of consideration,
and that they are calculated to impede effective legislation for the
better care and treatment of lunatics, by the substitution of
surmises, and of partial and unguarded statements of facts for
carefully ascertained data, thus leading public opinion astray, is
evident. And if mere suspicions of any class of men are to take
the place of serious argument, where shall we draw a limit to the
exercise of this double-edged and indefensible method of reason-
ing, if reasoning it may be termed ?

We have but to turn to another portion of the evidence given
before the Committee, to ascertain to what it would tend.
Mr. Bolden, the honorary solicitor to the Alleged Lunatics
Society, being asked, respecting asserted wilfully inaccurate
copies of medical certificates of Lunacy?

" Have you any copy of that kind, or can you produce any
certificate which was so inaccurately copied, that if the original
had been taken by itself it would not have justified the reception of
a patient, but if taken with the copy it was so altered as to justify
that reception ?" He replied, " 1 cannot. The only certificates that
you can ever see are the copies that are obtained from the Com-
missioners in Lunacy, and those copies the Commissioners take care
are quite sufficient to justify the detention." (Qy. 2674, p. 222.)
Again, Admiral Saumarez, the chairman of the Alleged
Lunatics Society, being asked, in reference to the power possessed
by the Commissioners of granting permission to visit patients in
private asylums,?" Do you mean that any person who wished
to visit a patient within the metropolitan district would not have
full opportunity of going to any of the Commissioners and ascer-
taining from them whether such a visit might be reasonably
allowed or not?" replied, "Yes; but they are not altogether an
independent party, and it would be almost a charge against their
surveillance to suppose that any individual is confined improperly
without their knowledge in an asylum, and therefore I would give
the public some further protection than the Commissioners in
Lunacy. I do not think the Commissioners in Lunacy are fit
and proper persons to have that power, because, as I have already
stated, they are interested parties." (Qy. 2785, p. 231.)

Let us now give attention to the more important portions of
Lord Shaftesbury's evidence, avoiding as far as practicable the
sequences of the opinions we have quoted, and premising that a
considerable part of the evidence consists of full details of the
duties of the Commissioners in Lunacy, the mode in which they
are carried out, and the enactments under which they are per-
formed.

One of the first points of general interest upon which his
Lordship was questioned was, the source of the great increase in
the number of known lunatics which had taken place between 1845
and 1858. Did this increase arise from an actual increase in the
number of lunatics in the kingdom, or was it apparent only, and
dependent upon the greater provision made for, and the greater
care given to lunatics, during the period named, in consequence
of which many previously unknown and unrecognised cases were
brought to light ? His Lordship is inclined to answer in the
affirmative; but, in addition, he expresses the opinions that, (1)
as regards the pauper classes, while he believes that there is an
actual increase of insanity among them due to increase of popu-
lation, yet that that increase is not " by any means in proportion
to the increase of population and (2) that as regards " persons
a degree above pauperism," and " the classes beginning with the
trading classes and persons keeping small huckster's shops, and
rising to the highest vocations in life," he cannot " but hazard
the opinion," to use his own expression, " although I dare say
many will differ from me, that if there is not an actual increase of
insanity, there is developed a very considerable tendency towards
it." (Qs. 49, 51, 59.)

Mr. Gaskell, one of the Medical Commissioners in Lunacy, is
inclined to attribute the increase in known lunacy to the pro-
longation of the life of lunatics in our asylums, in which "the
annual mortality was perhaps 12, 14, or 15 per cent, formerly,"
but "it is now reduced to 10 per cent." (Qs. 14, 3G.)
There can be.little doubt that the causes assigned by Lord
Shaftesbury and Mr. Gaskell have contributed greatly to the
increase of known lunacy in the kingdom, but we are still left in
the dark as to the extent to which these causes have influenced the
increase, and until this be determined we cannot, with our present
data, decide upon the increase or not of insanity, either among
the population at large, or among any section of the population.
Hence Lord Shaftesbury's speculations upon the rate of increase
of insanity among paupers, and the state of insanity among the
classes of the population above pauperism, are entirely hypothe-
tical. His Lordship is, however, thoroughly aware of the doubt-
fulness of his opinion upon the increase of lunacy in the country,
for he says?" I am almost afraid of giving an opinion, as it may
be the commencement of the most awful controversy, for there is
a great difference of opinion on that point, because all the data
preceding the year 1845 are so very indistinct, and even subse-
quently to that, they are so few, and so mixed up with all those
old chronic cases, that it is difficult to say what has been the in-
crease." (Qy. 51.) Under these circumstances we deeply regret
that his Lordship did not content himself with pointing out to
the Committee the defective state of our present statistics of in-
sanity, the impossibility of determining the important question of
the increase of insanity or not until the defects had been removed,
and what was wanting for the removal of the defects.
The approach of the Census of 1801 at once directs attention
to the only method by which an accurate knowledge of the
amount of insanity, and an accurate basis for the calculation of
its progress in the kingdom, can be obtained, and we had hoped
to have heard this urged to the Committee, and to have witnessed
his Lordship's influence, and that of the Commission iri Lunacy,
brought to bear in bringing about the sole possible mode of ob-
taining proper data for solving a much debated and exceedingly
important question?a question, indeed, of growing importance,
both scientifically and practically.

In a subsequent part of his examination, Lord Shaftesbury ex-
pressed the opinion, when speaking of the untrustworthy character
of the records we possess relative to the mortality and recoveries
?of the insane as a means of comparison concerning the character
and results of different asylums, that?

" It would be vei-y desirable if we could have proper statistics on
insanity drawn up and put upon a good footing. It would require great
trouble and expense; but I think it would be worth the trouble and
expense, if it could be put into the hands of some competent persons ;
and I have no doubt that some most remarkable results would be
brought out. In our department we have got a great deal too much
to do; the Commissioners are constantly at work, and the clerks
.too." (Qy. 263.)

This is so far well. But we do not want remarkable results ;
we want the ordinary ABC results of insanity statistics which
we do not yet possess. We do not want, morever, a huge, expen-
sive inquiry into existing statistics; that would be of little or no
value. We want a scheme of insanity statistics which might
form a portion of the ordinary returns, and govern many of the
?returns, to the Commissioners ; which would take its proper place
in the legitimate working of the Commission; and which for the
future would furnish us with trustworthy and regular information.
Such a scheme would have to emanate from a qualified worker
in statistics ; it is quite practicable, and might be put in operation
without extraordinary difficulty; and it would doubtless require
little other expense, for its regular carrying out, than would be in-
volved in an additional clerk to the Commission. Let a scheme
of this kind be developed, and let us obtain a basis of knowledge
respecting the insanity of the whole kingdom in the next Census,
and we may look forward to the probability of being able, at a com
paratively early period, to avoid the slough of vagueness into which
every one is plunged who ventures to meddle with insanity statistics.

The want of reliable data reduces also, very considerably, the
value of his Lordship's opinions on the causes of insanity. He
attributes " one-half and perhaps more" (Qy. 51) of the cases of
insanity among the poorer classes to intemperance, and quotes
several medical authorities in support of the opinion that intem-
perance is a powerful cause of insanity. He also seeks to explain
the assumed decreasing rate of insanity among the poor, by fur-
ther assuming a decrease of intemperate habits; but it will be
early enough to discuss this point when the prior assumption is
proved to be worthy of credence. It is also unnecessary to seek
with his Lordship, in the excitable state of society among the
classes above pauperism, a cause of an increased tendency to, or
actual increase of, insanity, until the one or the other is shown to
exist. As to other causes of insanity, general or special, we must
quote from the evidence.

61. Sir George Grey.]?After deducting 50 per cent, of the cases
which are attributable to drunkenness, is there any other one promi-
nent cause by which to account for the insanity of any large proportion
of the other 50 per cent. F?There is sometimes a strong hereditary pre-
disposition ) a good many come from accidents and blows upon the head.
62. You cannot indicate anyone cause to account for any large pro-
portion of the other 50 per cent. ??No.

63. I presume they would be attributable to a great variety of
causes ??Yes, but I do not remember any one cause of equal impor-
tance to that of intoxication.

64. Chairman.']?What is the predominant cause among the richer
class of lunatics ??It appears to be a disordered imagination, hereditary
predisposition, the pursuit of money, disappointed ambition, or great
losses in trade, and sometimes you will find it from over-work.
65. Mr. Tite.] And from religious excitement ??No. Am I to
understand the Honourable Member to ask whether religion is the
cause of madness ?

66. Mr. Tite.] Yes ; enthusiasm ??
67. Chairman.'] Have you any tabular statement that will show the
different causes of insanity, and the proportions of the cases arising
from those causes P?"We have papers , we have a full account of all
the patients, and a full account of the causes, so far as we can ascer-
tain, of their madness.
68. Are these accounts analysed and arranged F No; but we could
furnish them to the Committee.

69. Mr. Tite.] My question did not mean religious excitement in
the ordinary sense of the word, hut different classes appear to me more
divided upon religion than they were; has that, in your opinion, led
to insanity ??That is one of the most important questions that can he
put, and I am very glad that the Honourable Member has put that
question, because I think there are two or three observations to he
made upon it, which may tend to remove a good deal of misunderstand-
ing upon the subject. I, of course, should have very great diffidence
in speaking upon this question, if it were purely a medical question;
but it is a moral question, and therefore any non-professional person,
any layman who gives his mind and heart to this subject, has as much
right to speak upon it as all the physicians put together; and I do not
hesitate to say, as the result of my experience, that I have never seen
a case, and I have never heard of a case, in which a person has gone
mad caused by the influence of religion; and when I say by the
influence of religion, I mean the true Gospel spirit of true Christianity.
I do not mean that a person may not have been turned aside by some
strange notion, that some ignorant timid person having taken up some
obscure and mysterious point of religion, and looking at it constantly
and exclusively, may not have become disordered in his reason; but
religion, taken as the pure Gospel, I will never believe has had the
slightest effect in producing any aberration of reason whatever.

Now we are prepared to go with his Lordship hand and heart
in any raid he is desirous to make upon intemperance, but we are
not disposed to lay aside prudence in so doing. If the statistics
of insanity would aid us in scotching (we do not hope to kill) the
evil, we should gladly avail ourselves of them, but still decline to
rush so hastily with them to the front as to leave our flank and
rear entirely exposed. We are inclined to attribute a verv im-
portant place to intemperance as a determining cause of insanity,
but if we were to elevate it above hereditary influence, or to give
it the prominent position which Lord Shaftesbury does, and make
it the remote cause of the predisposition to insanity among cer-
tain classes of the population (Qy. 52) as well as the primary
exciting cause, we should fear to weaken our argument by stating
what we could not satisfactorily support, and thus lay ourselves
open to disregard when we sought for respect. But why, upon a
subject of such great interest, should we have any unnecessary
vagueness, if, as his Lordship states, the Commissioners in Lunacy
" have a full account of all the patients, and a full account of the
causes, so far as we can ascertain, of their madness ?" Why
should his Lordship have contented himself with a doubtful,
and, indeed, in great measure speculative answer, and refer to
data collected many years ago, when the question touched upon
the present time, and the materials for a tolerably positive reply
were accessible to him ? It is to he regretted that the Committee
did not ask for the return proffered by his Lordship, and we
trust when again called together they may do this, for an account
of tlie assigned causes of insanity throughout England and
Wales for a definite period would be of great interest.
Not having the clue to what Lord Shaftesbury means by "the
true Gospel spirit of true Christianity," we cannot enter with any '
benefit into the discussion which he starts respecting the in-
fluence of religion as a cause of insanity. The signification of
the term religious enthusiasm, or religious exaltation, as used by
medical men to express an occasional cause of insanity, is tolerably
well understood, and is not usually supposed to convey any dis-
respect of religion. Perhaps the best commentary upon Lord
Shaftesbury's remarks on the causes of insanity is a return made
by the French Asylums in 1853, and recently published among
other returns relative to insanity in France, by the Imperial
Government. We quote Mi Brierre de Boismont's summary of
the most important points of the return referred to, partly
for brevity's sake, and partly for the additional remarks on
the value of asylum returns on the causes, and on intemperance
iis a cause, of insanity.

" Of 2883 lunatics in 1853, hereditary predisposition is stated to
have existed in 1410 men and 1470 women. Of 1000 lunatics, the
cause of insanity was said to be physical in 572, and moral in 428. We
have already remarked upon the necessity of living in intimacy with
the insane, in order to obtain a correct knowledge on this subject;
and that the inexact information obtained in asylums, both public
and private, reduces very much the value of the figures referring to
heritage and other causes. There are also other objections in regard
to the physical causes, because it is evident that drunkenness, bereave-
ment, and misery have a double meaning. The man who, for example,
drinks to stupify his grief and becomes insane, at first acts under the
influence of a moral cause. Accidental suppression of menses (150)
and puerperal insanity (150), in a great number of cases, arise from
moral impressions.

" Among moral causes, the most frequent is grief arising from the
loss of money ; 899 eases of insanity are attributed to this cause,
which is, by comparison with the total figure of moral causes, a pro-
portion of more than 12 per cent. Afterwards come religious exal-
tation (894), love (792), violent emotions (698), pride (600), the
loss of a loved one (510), disappointed ambition (495), jealousy (442),
political events (308), excess in intellectual work (156), simple impri-
sonment (154), nostalgia (48), isolation and solitude (41), change of
life (32), association with and assiduous attention upon the insane
(16), cellular imprisonment (4).

In the official returns, out of 9764 cases assigned to physical
causes, 2594 are attributed to epilepsy and convulsions, and
1502 to drunkenness.t
* " Journal of Psychological Medicine. Ino. XIV,, N". S. p. 304.
+ " Statistique des Etablissements d'Alienes de 1842 a 1S53 inclusivement,'
1857, p. xxxix.

We liave already quoted a sufficiency of Lord Shaftesbury's
evidence on private asylums to show with what feelings of ani-
mosity he regards those institutions. It is now needful that we
should know what suggestions he makes for the diminution or
removal of the evils which he regards to be all but inseparable
from them. We may state first, however, that his Lordship is of
opinion that " the state of licensed houses, and the condition of
the poorer patients" in them, have been " inconceivably" improved
of late years (Qy. 157); and we may also remark that he also
states that the chief obstacles to their thorough reform (apart from
the "principle of profit") are constantly diminishing (Qy. 103).
Notwithstanding that Lord Shaftesbury is disposed to regard
a medical man's opinion, as a general rule, of no greater value
than that of a sensible layman, yet it is requisite to name that,
in so far as the care of the insane is concerned, he considers
that the medical man should be all-powerful. Thus his Lord-
ship being asked, " Is it not the fact, that in the case where the
medical man is under the proprietor, he is, in fact, liable to be
very much influenced by the proprietor of the asylum ?"?he
replied, " There is no doubt about it; and it is not the true
position that a medical man ought to occupy. The medical pro-
fession stands too high to be placed in that position; and they
are under influences which they cannot resist. I have reason to
speak in the highest terms of estimation of some of the medical
men in charge of asylums; and I can only deeply deplore that
they are not placed in their true position" (Qy. 94). Again, being
asked whether (Qy. 95) "The medical man ought to be a kind of
inspector and check upon the proprietor?"?he replied, "And
more than that; he ought to be lord paramount in the asylum."
Badly as Lord Shaftesbury thinks of private asylums, and
vicious as he consider the principles upon which they are worked,
he would not, however, do away with them altogether; but he
would diminish their operations as far as practicable, by the esta-
blishment of self-supporting asylums for the middle and higher
classes of society. But it is necessary to quote his Lordship's
evidence upon this point?

"507. ***** I now speak with reference to that large
class of society which begins just above pauperism, and goes on to the
highest in the land. All the difficulties in legislation arise out of that
particular class ; we have none with respect to the management of the
paupers in the county asylums ; they go on very well. There is
nothing in them but the ordinary decay, and the difficulty that arises
in all institutions out of occasional ignorance and mismanagement. If
you had establishments of that kind, asylums or public hospitals, I
should like to say chartered asylums, you would find that they would
be precisely the reverse of those I have mentioned. First of all, there

would be a tot.il absence of that motive which constitutes the vicious
principle of the present licensed houses, there would be no desire or
view to profit of any sort.

" 508. Chairman.'] Do you suggest that there should be no private
asylums oi any sort or kind, and would you absolutely prohibit them
by law F?No, certainly not. I w uld leave them, and leave it to the
public to choose which kind of as} lum they wished to go to. I have
no doubt that a certain number of those licensed houses would con-
tinue, and I dare say that persons, from peculiar notions of their own,
would resort to such asylums. I would allow them to continue, and I
would also have, as you have public asylums for paupers, houses on a
public footing for persons in a better condition of life.
"509. Would you have them in every part of the kingdom, as you
have public asylums for paupers ??Yes. These asylums would be
quite free from all those vicious motives that have been referred to in
the licensed houses. There would be no eager desire to take the
people in, and no desire whatever to stint them in any one way, and so
far from there being a desire to retain them, they would run rather
into the other extreme, for there would be rather a desire to turn them
out; because I think there would be such a pressure upon them that
their only anxiety would be to make room for others by turning some
out.

"510. Sir George Grey.] Before your Lordship fully states the
results which you anticipate, will you define how they will be main-
tained, whether at the public expense, or from local funds, and under
what control they will be placed ??I will. I was going to add that
these asylums would be free from all the objections which exist to
licensed private houses. The example which I principally should follow
would be the example of Scotland. In Scotland, the chartered asylums
have existed for a certain number of years, and they have been pro-
ductive of the very greatest benefit. We have a certain number of
institutions similar to them in England, and they are called hospitals.
Hospitals in England are founded upon private funds. The chartered
asylums in Scotland are also founded upon private funds. I do not
think that any one of them, except that at Morningside, has ever
received a grant, and I think that it received 20001, out of some of the
forfeited estates in the year 1745, and to what extent they have been
considered satisfactory to the people of Scotland I will show : of 833
private patients, placed in asylums in Scotland, G52 are in chartered
asylums, and only 230 in licensed houses. The contrast in this
respect between Scotland and England is very striking. By the last
Report of the Commissioners in Lunacy, it appears that there were
4442 private patients in asylums in England and Wales; of those,
274G are in private asylums, and 1G96 are in public hospitals; these
latter comprising GG9 patients in Bethlehem, St. Luke s, and Guy s
Hospital, and the Institution for Idiots. Then it goes on to show how
popular they are, and how beneficial they have been, in every sense of
the word, and how they have provided the very best care and treat-
ment of the patients, and that it has been done at a very low figure
compared with the cost of other establishments.

" 511. You have not stated where the funds come from ??Those are
founded upon private contributions.

" 512. Sir George Greg.~] Sustained by private endowments ??Yes,
" 517. Chairman.] What you wish for is an encouragement for the
endowment of hospitals for lunatics ??Yes; to be founded in two
ways, either, as in Scotland, and in some parts of England, by private
contributions, and we have 11 hospitals in England also so founded,
or, as in England, in respect to borough and county asylums, upon the
public rates. I think it would be sufficient only to make known the
Avant, and I have no doubt the money would flow in: but I would give
in the Bill a permissive clause to counties for the purpose of founding
these asylums entirely for the reception of the middle class patients.
" 518. Mr. Drummond.] Do you mean to be annexed to others ??
Not necessarily so.

"519. Sir George Greg."] A permissive power to found them out of
the county rate ??Yes ; it would not require that the county should
do more than give the guarantee of its rates ; it would not be necessary
that the county should expend a farthing, in fact it would incur no
hazard of its own whatever. But then it should have a power to erect
an asylum of that description ; I would leave the governing power, the
initiating power, just the same as with regard to the county asylums,
with the magistrates in quarter sessions, or it might be vested in the
visiting justices of the present county asylums, who, having considered
all matters, might, with the consent of the magistrates in quarter
sessions, if they thought it desirable to institute such an asylum,
merely take the guarantee of the rates, to raise the necessary sum of
money upon the guarantee of the rates, and raise the money at per
cent., the whole interest and principal being thus paid off in 30 years.
The thing would be self-supporting, and the moment the asylum was
opened it would be filled with patients, some of a higher class and some
of an inferior class, who would pay the whole expense; their payments
would cover not only the 6|- per cent., but the whole expense of carry-
ing on the institution, the care and maintenance of the inmates, and
all the salaries and everything else.

" 520. Might not that interfere with their being founded by volun-
tary contributions like hospitals for any other disease ??The voluntary
principle has its limits, and I think that the voluntary principle on
this head has reached its utmost limits in England. It has founded
11 hospitals that have worked well, but the voluntary principle has
not gone any further, and I do not think it is likely that any more will
be founded."

His Lordship contemplates that the cost of keeping a patient
in one of these institutions might be reduced to 15s. a-'week, the
cost in a private asylum being from 35s. to 40s. ; that with this
diminished cost all the benefits of a well-managed public asylum
might be obtained, and the disadvantages and evils of a private
one avoided; and that these advantages would be placed within
reach of persons who cannot afford to pay the costs of a private
asylum, and yet wish to avoid tlie humiliation of consigning a
lunatic relative or friend to a pauper establishment.
Dr Conolly's evidence upon chartered asylums will form a
fitting note to Lord Shaftesbury's suggestion.

" 1956. Have you considered the system that is pursued in Scotland
in the chartered asylums, basing these asylums for the middle classes
on a public foundation as they do ??Yes, I believe that some of them
are very excellent institutions, but I do not very much approve, in-
deed, I more than doubt the propriety of having patients belonging to
the higher classes and pauper patients in the same institution.
" 1957. You think it would be desirable if public institutions for
the middle classes could be established in this country ? ? Most
desirable.

" 1958. To supersede the private asylums altogether? ? Not ex-
actly that; I mean for persons who cannot afford to pay, say 100Z. or
50Z. a year. There is scarcely a week in a year in which people do
not apply to me either about a daughter, perhaps a governess, or a
young man with a small salary, and they cannot pay the necessary
expense of the cheapest asylum, and the friends are reduced to ruin
by it; it often happens in the families of the clergy, and such cases
have occurred to me over and over again.

" 1959. Chairman.] In that class of cases no asylum could pay its
own way without voluntary contributions??I believe none; there
are but few asylums where we can now send them like Northampton
and Coton Hill; but many more such institutions are very much
wanted.

" 19G0. Sir George Greg.'] The Committee have been informed that
there are eleven such now existing in England. Have you had any
personal experience in the management of those institutions ??Yes,
I have seen something of the one at Northampton, and a little offchat
at Coton Hill, near Stafford, and I have the highest opinion ofboth.'
It is simply necessary to add to this quotation that, while Dr.
Conolly points to a want which our private asylums cannot, and
our public asylums do not, provide for, but which might be ob-
viated by the establishment of asylums capable of meeting the
requirements of persons of contracted means; Lord Shaftesbury
seeks to provide, in the first instance at the public cost, asylums
which would accommodate alike those of contracted and those of
abundant means. The one scheme would probably be a feasible
plan to attain a well-defined and clearly requisite object; the
other, while including this object, would aim also at one the
necessity for which has not been shown.
The next topic which demands our attention refers more or
less to the medical certificate of insanity which is requisite before
a lunatic can be confined in a private asylum.
The Chairman of the Committee put the following question
(ay. 185)

" The medical man, if he be the proprietor of the house, has a direct
interest, if the patient be rich, not to part with him, If there is no
doubt about the facts, which is the most important part of the whole
proceeding, is it not necessary that there should be some authority who
might be put in motion by the relations independent of the medical
superintendent of the house, who might be interested in keeping a
patient in, in order to see the Commissioners were rightly informed with
reference to the case of a patient who was confined ?"
To this Lord Shaftesbury replied :?

" If you could devise such a personage as that, it would no doubt
be beneficial, but you must be careful, while you are endeavouring to
protect the patient, that you do not throw too great impediments
in the way of his being put under proper care; for, not only are the
public to be protected, but even in the interests of the patient
you must not multiply the difficulty in determining the point when
a person should be deprived of his natural liberty, and be subject to
restraint and medical treatment. If you wait until the symptoms
are so clear and so developed that there can be no doubt about it,
then you will have waited till such a time that the man is probably
become an incurable patient; but if the case be taken in time, when
the symptoms are only discernible to an experienced eye, and when
they would not be discernible to an inexperienced one, the probability
is that the man will be cured, and will return to society in the course
of a very short time. It is a cui'ious thing, but it is the result of very
long experience, and I am sure the Committee will find that all my
brother Commissioners will concur in it, that however imperfect the
certificate is, in a great variety of respects, remember in the first
?place it is the only document that you have to go on, and therefore you
must, to a very great extent, rest upon it; hut nevertheless there are
very few instances ; I do not think, in my experience of nearly thirty
years, a single case, or not more than one or two cases, in which any
person has been shut up without some plausible grounds for his or
her temporary confinement; but in every instance, with these excep-
tions, there have certain plausible grounds in facts and in logic, suffi-
cient to justify the temporary confinement of the persons ancl their
being submitted to medical treatment. I believe that very few have
been really shut up without cause, but I have no doubt that very
many indeed have been detained beyond the time when they might
have been set at liberty; I hope, however, that we are reducing the
number every day, yet I have no doubt that many are detained a
long time beyond the period when they should be set at liberty.
" 186. Mr. Tite.~\ But who were not received improperly origin-
ally??No.

" 187. Mr. Coningham.] Do you mean detained by interested par-
ties?? Yes, detained by proprietors, or detained through the non-
intervention of their friends ; but such is the melancholy condition of
patients, that from the moment a patient is struck by this affliction
of Providence, from that hour he becomes, civilly and morally, dead in
respect to his relatives."

We presume that no one will question liis lordship's position
respecting the inadvisability of throwing unnecessary impedi-
ments in the way ol the early treatment of lunatics, yet it is to
the persistent misapprehension of the efforts made by medical
men to bring about this early treatment, that several of the most
important difficulties of lunacy legislation are due; and this
must be so if, as in Lord Shaftesbury's evidence, mere suspicions
of the most offensive character are to be permitted to take the
place of facts, and to overlay all that the medical proprietors of
asylums, and medical practitioners in general, have done for the
amelioration of the care and. treatment of the insane. " If
you wait," says liis Lordship, " until the symptoms are so
clear and so developed that there can be no doubt about it,
then you will have waited till such a time that the man is
probably become an incurable patient." But who is to decide
upon the incipient symptoms of lunacy necessitating treatment,
if, as his Lordship asserts (with what consistency we have
already seen), the opinion of a sensible layman upon the symp
toms of lunacy is of greater value than that of a medical man
(Qy. 192) ; or if his Lordship's views concerning insanity are
to be taken as our guide.

"193. Mr. Conitif/Jiam.'] Insanity is always accompanied, is it not, ' '' "
; by a morbid condition of the brain ??It may be so or not; still it cA.h<>^
iwjvAMiu js 110t always apparent. Insanity is often accompanied with bodily
derangements and symptoms which the medical man alone can deal
witli; but it is not in all cases the object so much to determine whether
a man is out of his mind or not, as to tell whether a man, although
being a little queer, as it is called, is capable of managing his own
affairs. A man is not to be shut up because he is eccentric, or some"
what strange. If a man is altogether harmless, capable of taking
care of himself, and of managing his own affairs, and not in an early
stage of the disorder, there is no reason why that man should be
shut up.

"194. But insanity is invariably accompanied, is it not, by a ] i'
morbid condition of the brain ? ? I am afraid of going into that (J
question. Many men say that there is such a thing as moral in-
sanity, which is not connected with any functional disorder. However
that may be, it is clear that the value of the certificate must depend
upon the experience of the people so sign it." ' K o
If the dicta contained in the answer to Query 193 are to guide
us of course the early treatment of cases of insanity would be
rendered an impossibility, and an asylum would become solely a
house of detention for chronic and incurable lunatics.
As may be imagined, from what we have already said, his Lord-
ship does not entertain a high opinion of the value ol the medical
certificate, as a medical certificate. His remarks upon this point
are worth noting, as they show good reason for the greater cul-
tivation of the study of mental disorders among medical men,
but they also afford another example of his Lordship's inconse-
quent method of reasoning.

" 197. Sir Ershine Perry.'] But your Lordship does not consider this
medical certificate of much intrinsic value, as the medical men know
no more of lunacy than any other educated men in society ??In many
cases they do not; if you were to look at many of these certificates,
and read the reasons which are assigned by them, you would think
that some of them were less capable than many others in society.
" 198. Then what is the value of such a certificate ??Many of these
medical men do not judge from their medical knowledge, but from
their general experience of mankind. They see a person, and they see
that he is mad; but some of them may give very bad reasons, although
their conclusions may be just, for shutting him up.

" 199. Then if it be as well to have the certificate from some edu-
cated man, a medical man is as good as any one you can get ??Yes ;
they will always ascertain whether there is any functional disorder.
" 200. Chairman.'] They are at any rate as good as any other men,
for they possess knowledge which other men have not Yes. As I
said before, the certificate has been on the whole very efficacious, and
I think, as I said before, that not more than one or two cases have
been admitted into asylums without a foundation."

The chief point with which we have to do in this quotation is
the reiteration of the opinion that few unnecessary or unjustifi-
able certificates of insanity have been given by medical men.
This may well lead to a doubt whether any benefit would result
either to the patient or to his friends from requiring that any
other precautions against improper confinement than those already
in vogue should be had recourse to. Lord Shaftesbury states
that the establishment of medical examiners who should examine
and countersign the certificates within a brief period after a pa-
tient's removal to an asylum, was suggested by the Commis-
sioners " only as an expedient, with a view of satisfying 'public
feeling, and not with any hope that it ivould really be effective'
(Qy. 81); and subsequently his Lordship states, "I do not see
any necessity for it " (that is for the appointment of medical ex-
aminers : Query 823). But surely the public would be better
satisfied with the facts and proofs, which the Commissioners
apparently have at command, and which would show that indivi-
duals were already sufficiently guarded against being unduly con-
fined, than with suggestions for useless and expensive legislation ?
Mr. Bolden (Queries 2625?29) proposes to give greater
security to the public through the magistrates. He suggests, that
no lunatic should be admitted into an asylum unless the certifi-
cates were accompanied by the warrant of a magistrate, who
should have the power of satisfying himself of the necessity for
the confinement. The sheriff exercises a judicial function of this

kind iii Scotland, but from the first Report of the Scotch Com-
missioners in Lunacy, we learn that from the exercise of this
function, a serious impediment is often thrown in the way of the
early treatment ot cases, and that, indeed, the evils arising out of
the arrangement far outweigh the good. The Commissioners do
not, however, advise that the sheriff's authority in regard to
lunatics should be entirely done away with, but that it should be
so far modified as not to interpose any obstacle to the immediate
reception of cases into asylums when requisite. The Scotch ex-
perience is in reality far from favourable to the exercise of a
power such as that which Mr. Bolden would vest in a magistrate.
A suggestion of Lord Shaftesbury's, having reference to the
prevention of unnecessary detention of lunatics, is worthy of
consideration, and would seem to be well-calculated to give in-
creased confidence to the public. He says :?

"201. * * * The only suggestion that I can make with regard to the
certificate is this, that supposing the present system to go on, I think
that some benefit would be gained by granting in the first instance a
certificate for only three months ; now it is granted in perpetuity, so
long as the patient is under the disorder; but in the first instance, I
would have it given for only three months, and I think the effect would
be to compel a revision of the case by the family or friends; the relatives
would then be obliged to look again into the matter, as they would
know that in all probability, if they did not do so, the patient would
be returned upon their hands.

" 202. In order to justify the retention of a patient for more than
three months, that form of certificate would have to be gone through
again P?Yes, but only in the first instance; I should not have it
every three months; I should say that it would be necessary at the
end of the first three months after the detention that the certificate
should be reviewed. That I know was the opinion of Dr Heberden
in 1815, when he gave evidence before the House of Lords."
His Lordship laid considerable stress upon the value of a power
which would have been given to the Commissioners, by Mr.
Walpole's proposed amendment of the Lunacy Law, and by which
they might authorise the provisional discharge of patients from
asylums for periods say, of two, four, or six months, the original
certificates of insanity remaining in force during the interval.
This power doubtless would prove of no small benefit.
The condition of single patients in private houses was entered
into tolerably fully during Lord Shaftesbury's examination, and
his Lordship spoke even more unfavourably of the position of
lunatics so circumstanced than of those in piivate asylums. He
asserted that he had reasons for the belief that many of the
single patients, " of whom we (the Commissioners) know no-
thing, are in a very bad (' most frightful: Qy. 354) condition"
(Qy. 280); but when asked for the grounds of this belief, his
400
rnorosED legislation in lunacy.
Lordship quoted examples from the year 18-10?a period when the
powers of the Commissioners in Lunacy had hardly come into
operation, which powers were specifically designed, among other
things, to remedy the then acknowledged ill-treatment of single
patients ! If now we turn to his Lordship's evidence as it hears
directly upon the state of single patients at the present time, we
find ns follows :?

"352. Chairman.] In the cases that you have recently discovered
within the last three years of single houses, where single patients were
kept, and where a certificate ought to have been sent to you, hut it
was not, did you find the treatment particularly bad ??No, not par-
ticularly bad ; in a few instances we found that there had been a good
deal of neglect; the poor patient has been in a miserable isolated state,
and very little attended to; in one or two instances they were very
well taken care of; but in the vast proportion of instances, I should
say, that there was a great deal of neglect, in consequence of people
feeling that there was no supervision over them.

" 353. It is more a want of sympathy, and the state of isolation in
which they are, than any actual cruelty which you believe to be
practised towards them ??Exactly so. "VVe did llot find any cases of
special ill treatment, but we were obliged to take all our evidence from
persons interested to give the most favourable representation of the
case, while the poor patients could give no evidence in the miserable
position in which they are placed, and Heaven alone knows how they
are treated."

Here, then, it would appear that the only evidence his Lordship
lias to offer in support of his assertions of cruel neglect, are sur-
mises grounded upon .suspicions similar to those which formed the
basis of his assertions respecting the " indefensible and abomi-
nable" character of private asylums. Of the value of these sus-
picions as evidence, his Lordship has given us the measure, by his
frank confession as to their origin (ante, p. 384) ; but we may
well ask what good is to arise from raking up events which
occurred many years ago, and advancing them as illustrations of
an existing state of things, when we are seeking to know the
present condition of a class of lunatics, and the mode in which
the law operates for their protection?that law having specific
provisions to prevent the abominations which Lord Shaftesbury
named, and having come into operation since they occurred ?
His Lordship thinks that the law should be so extended that a
large number of single patients, so-called nervous patients, and
others not strictly lunatics, hut almost verging on lunacy, should
come under the jurisdiction of the Commissioners in Lunacy.
The addition which his Lordship is desirous of making to the law
is as follows :?

" 432. * * * 1 Whereas many persons suffer from nervous disorders
and other mental affections of a nature and to an extent to incapacitate
them from the due management of themselves and their affairs, but
not to render them proper persons to betaken charge of, and detained
under care and treatment as insane ; and whereas such persons are
frequently conscious of their mental infirmity, and desirous of sub-
mitting themselves to medical care and supervision, and it is expedient
to legalize and facilitate voluntary arrangements for that object so far
as may be compatible with the free agency of the persons so affected,
be it enacted as follows :?

"1 Subject to the provisions hereinafter contained, it shall be lawful
for any duly-qualified medical practitioner, or other person by his di-
rection, to receive and entertain as a boarder or patient any person
suffering from a nervous disorder or other mental affection requiring
medical care and supervision, but not such as to justify his being taken
charge of and detained as a person of unsound mind.

"' No person shall be received without the written request in the
form, schedule , to this act, of a relative or friend who derives 110
profit from the arrangement, and his own consent, in writing, in the
form in the same schedule, the signatures to which request and
consent respectively shall be witnessed bv some inhabitant house-
holder.

" ' The person receiving such patient shall, within two days after his
reception, give notice thereof to the Commissioners in Lunacy, and
shall at the same time transmit to the Commissioners a copy of the re-
quest and consent aforesaid.

"' It shall be lawful for one or more Commissioners, at any time
after the receipt of such notice as aforesaid, and from time to time, to
visit and examine such patient, with a view to ascertain his mental
state and freedom of action; and the visiting Commissioner or Com-
missioners shall report to the Board the result of their examination
and inquiries.

" ' No such patient shall be received into a licensed house.'
" So that we should say that every person, professional or not, who
receives a patient into his house, or attends a patient in such circum-
stances, should notify it to the Commissioners ; but we should not
require them to notify it until after three months should have elapsed,
because a patient might be suffering from brain fever, or a temporary
disorder; but I would say that any person accepting or attending a
patient in these circumstances should notify it to the Commissioners,
after three months shall have elapsed from the beginning of the
treatment.

"433. Sir George Grey.] Do you think that this would include a
class already not included under the general terms of ' unsound mind,'
the description being, ' Whereas, many persons suffer from nervous
disorders and other mental affections, of a nature and to an extent to
incapacitate them from the management of themselves and their
affairs.' Would not that definition almost be included already in the
description of persons of ' unsound mind ? J. he distinction is so very
fine-drawn that it is almost impossible to say, for there ax*e many
persons in a nervous state, though not of unsound mind, and yet who
- cannot take the management of their own afiairs.

"434. Sir JLrslcine Perry.'] It seems tome rather an objection to
that form of drawing the clause, that it makes it lawful for any medical
man to do so and so, whereas, by the present state of the law, it is
lawful for any person to receive any person into his house ??I should
not wish to throw any impediment in the way of that; no impedi-
ment in the early treatment of cases of that kind; I only want, in
giving facilities, to take care that there shall be no abuse.
" 435. But it is lawful now for anybody to do it ??We might alter
it; it is not drawn with sufficient technicality, no doubt."
It is needless, perhaps, to indicate any other objections to his
Lordship's suggestion than those pointed out by Sir George Grey
and Sir Erskine Perry; but we may add that we are much afraid
it would be necessary to increase greatly the number of Com-
missioners, if their jurisdiction were to extend to all "nervous"
cases, and it would be cruel and monstrous to class the nervous
with insane cases and treat them as lunatics.

There is nothing in his Lordship's observations upon criminal
lunatics which requires particular notice, but an incidental com-
mentary upon the plea of insanity in criminal cases is deserving
of regard:?

" I am unwilling to say, [remarked his Lordship, in reference to the
life-confinement of persons who have committed great crimes under
the influence of insanity] that in every instance a man should be
condemned to imprisonment for life because he had committed, bow-
ever fearful an act in a sudden aberration of mind. That must be left,
I think, to the discretion of the Secretary of State ; but then it is be-
coming more delicate and complicated every day, because, it will be
observed, that the medical men who are called to give evidence, in 99
cases out of 100, give evidence in favour of insanity, and persons who
have any great crime to perpetrate know that very well. I am told
that there is one medical man of considerable reputation, who has
openly said that it is his rule always to give evidence in favour of in-
sanity, as he has such an opinion of the general misconstruction of the
whole human mind; and even when it is not so, see how juries are
influenced by the profession. They bring in other arguments which
perplex the jury very much, who are told that the man is not abso-
lutely insane, but that he is labouring under the effect of an impulse
that he cannot control. I must say that the medical men oftentimes
talk an immense amount of nonsense when they come before juries,
and I believe that that is the received opinion."?(p. 527)
We presume that as his Lordship's suspicions and assertions
respecting private asylum proprietors were dictated by the con-
sciousness (as he avowed) of what lie would do himself if he
were in their position; so the last sentence in the preceding
quotation was dictated by a consciousness of the nature of his
efforts in the preceding portion of his examination to enlighten
the committee respecting the nature of insanity. As to his assertion
respecting the particular medical man mentioned in the quotation,
it is evident that liis lordship has been victimized by a canard.
We can quietly submit to an implication which involves judge,
jury, and the bar in a very comprehensive charge of ignorance ;
but what shall we say to the grave assertion that the plea of in-
j sanity, as supported by medical men, is an incentive to great
crimes ? The assertion is either true or not true. If it be true,
there must be evidence in support of it. Where is the evidence ?
If it be not true, how must we characterize so unjustifiable an
assertion ? The remainder of the paragraph in which the state-
ment is found points too clearly to the kind of evidence (if mere
unsupported assertions can be termed evidence) on which
Lord Shaftesbury would rest his statement, and as clearly
to the opinion which every right thinking man must entertain
of it.

On one of the most important portions of his Lordship's evi-
dence, that on the condition of lunatics in workhouses, we shall
not dwell, as we have elsewhere noticed at length the recent
Report of the Commissioners in Lunacy on that question, and his
Lordship's statements were based upon the facts contained in
that Report.

A few additional remarks will suffice to bring our notice of
Lord Shaftesbury's evidence to a conclusion.

His Lordship urged the importance of raising the character of
the attendants who had charge of lunatics, and the necessity
that they should receive good and sufficient wages, in order that
an intelligent and trustworthy class of people might be secured;
. lie also suggested that the superannuation of attendants in public
asylums should be placed upon a more definite, and in other
respects, better footing. He would fix the minimum number
of attendants in these asylums at one to every twenty-five
patients.

In his remarks upon private attendants his Lordship contrived
to introduce a charge against medical practitioners in lunacy,
which cannot well be passed unnoticed, but which serves only as
another example of the incautious method in which his Lordship's
assertions when affecting medical men were made. The character
of the assertions will be sufficiently understood by the questions
founded upon them in Dr Sutherland's examination:?

? 2135. I will read this statement to you, ' Several of the London
physician's, practising in lunacy, conduct a regular trade in the supply
of attendants to medical men and others. I hey pay them a yearly
stipend, and support them when they are not_ employed; when they
are employed, the physician takes from two-thirds to three*fourths of
the attendants' fees for his own profits ? I think I had better state
exactly how it is; the attendants have a regular salary, and when they
go out, they are on the principle exactly of the Nursing Sisters' In-
stitution of Queen's Square, they have double salary, that is, they have
fifty guineas instead of twenty-five, and then a sum is certainly given
to the asylum they come from, for their board and maintenance, when
tliey return to the asylum.

"213G. Sir George Grey.~\ Do you moan that the attendants
themselves receive fifty guineas, when actually employed, instead of
twenty-five ??Yes.
"2137. Then what is it that goes to the asylum ??A guinea a
week.

" 2138. Paid by the attendant, and deducted from the fifty guineas ?
??No ; when they are out, the attendants have a guinea and a half,
besides the salary which they have, which is twenty-five guineas a
year, they have that half guinea a week per year.
"2139. Is that paid by the proprietors of the asylum ??No, it is
paid by the friends who employ them.
" 2140. And that goes to the asylum ??A guinea a week goes to
the asylum.

" 2141. Colonel Clifford.] Is it the fact that some of these attendants
arc in the apparent position of owners of the houses in which the
patients are, and that when in that apparent position they pay over a
portion of the sum paid for the maintenance of the patient to any
medical man ??I believe it was so in former days ; and when I com-
menced practice, I was asked to do it, but I always refused, and in fact I
never have received anything but my own professional fees, as any
other medical man would receive for attending on his patient.
" 2142. You are not aware whether any other medical man has acted
on that same principle,and refused??I do not know.

" 2143. Sir George Grey.'] Is it the case with regard to those pay-
ments, when one of these attendants is employed in the service of anv
family, that lie receives from the family a guinea and a half a week, a
guinea of it going to himself, and half a guinea to the proprietor of the
house??Just the contrary; the half guinea goes to him, and the
guinea to the asylum.

" 2144. Does he receive that half guinea in addition to the twenty-
five guineas a year salary ??Yes.

" 2145. Sir Ershine Ferry.] Then the salary from the family must
be seventy-five guineas a year, and not fifty guineas ??Yes. It is
supposed that the proprietors of asylums derive a large profit from
this plan, but I know from calculation that it is not so, and that it is
done at a loss, when you calculate the wages and the board and lodging
of these attendants.

" 2146. Can you give the Committee anything like an average of
the time during which these attendants are out of employment ??They
are generally thrown out of employment in the winter. They are em-
ployed more in the spring.

" 2147. With regard to the former practice that existed, as to sharing
the allowance paid for maintenance with the medical man, you do not
know whether the same practice exists now, or have you any reason to
believe that it does ??1 really do not knoWi"

Lord Shaftesbury's assertions were grounded upon the letter
of an unnamed " medical man of great experience in insanity"
received on the morning of the second day of his Lordship's
examination. Has his Lordship made any inquiry as to the
correctness of the statements contained therein ? For our own
part, we were not aware until we read Dr Sutherland's answer to
query 2141, that the custom there indicated had ever existed;
and certainly an example never came under our own observation.
But surely we have a right to expect that if statements of the
kind referred to are made, that the Commissioners in Lunacy
should take at least ordinary trouble to ascertain whether they
are correct now or not, or whether they were correct only many
years ago, and that such statements should not be mentioned on
the irresponsible authority of an unnamed correspondent.
In his remarks upon the Bill, laid before the late Parliament,
" to Amend the Laws concerning the providing Lunatic Asylums for
Counties and Boroughs, and the Maintenance of Pauper Lunatics,"
Lord Shaftesbury approved of the power proposed to be given by
the Bill to the Secretary of State to effect an annexation between
counties and boroughs, without the consent of the Committee of
Visitors of the county asylums, as well as to direct that the
boroughs provided with accommodation for their lunatics in county
t asylums shall pay an equitable sum towards the maintenance of
such asylums. His Lordship also approved of the remaining
sections of the Bill, to wit, that plans, &c., of visitors when not
approved by the Quarter Sessions should be submitted to the Sec-
retary of State ; that land and buildings may be taken from year
to year, on lease, by way of addition to an asylum ; that estimates
are to accompany the plans which are to be submitted to Com-
missioners under 10 and 17 Vict. c. 97, s. 45; that visitors of
lunatic asylums may contribute to expenses of enlarging or pro-
viding burial-grounds; that s. 132, c. 97, 10 and 17 Vict., be
repealed in respect to the signification of the word " county "
therein (to meet a difficulty which has occurred at Norwich) ; that
a patient may be ordered to be discharged if defective medical cer-
tificate be not amended within fourteen days; and that the pro-
visions for the chargeability of pauper lunatics whose settlements
cannot be ascertained when found in certain boroughs, 18 and 19
Vict., c. 105, s. 14, be repealed, and other provisions, making
such'paupers chargeable upon the said boroughs be enacted, as
set forth in the bill.

In the course of his remarks, Lord Shaftesbury made one or two
suggestions which may be noted. He expiessed a desire that a
clause should be added " making it part of the duty at the Quarter
Sessions to read openly in court the entries which are made by
the Commissioners at their several visitations once a year"
(qy. 759). He expressed the opinion that the payment of the
medical superintendents of county asylums was much too low,
and that he hardly knew an asylum where the salary was adequate
to the work done. In this we fully concur with his Lordship, as
also in the subsequent remark, " I cannot think that any super-
intendent ought to receive much less than 500Z. to G00L a year,
besides a house and allowances" (qy. 707). His Lordship ex-
pressed in detail his opinions upon the superannuation of atten-
dants and medical officers, affirming that it should be fixed and
not left optional to the visitors ; and finally we may note that
his Lordship considered that the Secretary of State's power
should be increased in reference to the enlargement of public
asylums, so that some check might be pieced upon the indefinite
and enormous increase of several of the large county asylums.
His Lordship's remarks upon the Bill to " Amend the Law con-
cerning the Care and Treatment of Lunatics," require only brief
notice, as we have already, as will be immediately seen, con-
sidered or glanced at the principal points in his Lordship's evi-
dence which touch upon the provisions of the Bill, and require
attention.

The first clause of the Bill provides that a licence shall not be
granted by Justices of a house for the reception of lunatics with-
out inspection and Report by the Commissioners. This would
not supersede the action of the local magistrates, but would give
them the benefit of the Commissioners' experience, and is so far
good. The second clause provides for an alteration in the form of
the licence, which the first clause would necessitate ; and the
third clause provides that notice of all additions and alterations
in licensed houses should be given to the Commissioners.

Clauses four to nine inclusive, relate to the appointment of medical
examiners; and clauses eleven to fourteen inclusive, detail the
duties of the medical examiners, and the mode in which they are
to be effected. We have already seen from Lord Shaftesbury's
statements, that the appointment of these examinerswould probably
have no other benefit than that of satisfying public feeling. The
tenth clause provides that the copy of order and certificates shall
be sent to the Commissioners within twenty-four hours. The
15th clause provides that certain persons are not to sign certi-
ficates for the reception of patients, the said persons being the
proprietors of or having an interest in licensed houses. This,
as we have already remarked, would deprive the public, as a rule,
i, 'rof the most trustworthy, because the most experienced, opi-
nions upon cases of lunacy under circumstances where the said
opinions are of most moment, to wit, when required to be
stated in a certificate of insanity. The lGtli clause provides
that a patient may be ordered to be discharged if a defective
medical certificate be not amended within fourteen days ; the 17th
provides that patients may he permitted to he absent on trial
from hospitals and licensed houses; the 18th provides that notice
of the recovery of a patient shall he given forthwith to the Commis-
sioners ; the 19th, that every house licensed for fifty patients or
more, shall have a resident medical practitioner; that every house
licensed for more than thirty, and less than fifty, and having no
resident medical man, shall be visited daily by a legally qualified
practitioner; and every house licensed for less than thirty, shall
be visited by one thrice a week, if a medical man be not resident;
the 21st clause defines certain powers to be exercised by the
Commissioners or visitors to require more or less frequent medical
visitation if necessary ; the 22nd clause provides that licensed
houses shall be visited by a single Commissioner once a year in
addition to the visits now required, and that every single Commis-
sioner visiting alone shall have the like powers as two Commis-
sioners would have under section G1, 8 and 0 Vict.; the 24th
clause provides that the Commissioners' shall report specially on
cases admitted within the year preceding each visit; the 25th
provides that copies of Commissioners' entries in the books of
provincial licensed houses shall be sent to the clerk of the
visitors ; and the 20tli clause provides that the proprietors of
licensed houses, and persons having charge of single patients,
shall furnish information to the Commissioners as to payment for
patients.

Lord Shaftesbury approves of the whole of the clauses, quali-
fying, as we have seen, his approval respecting medical examiners.
His Lordship would, however, add a clause to prevent corrupt
agreements between medical men and the proprietors of asylums ;
another to make it " compulsory" upon every medical man re-
ceiving a patient termed a nervous patient, or any medical man
attending a patient called a nervous patient, to communicate the
same to "the Commissioners" (qy. 921); and also a permissive
clause respecting the construction of " middle-class asylums."
To the objections we have already made respecting certain
clauses of the Bill, we would add solely a remark respecting the
2Gtli clause. This clause does not provide that on due and suffi-
cient cause being shown warranting the suspicion of neglect of a
patient, the Commissioners shall have the power of requiring an
account to be submitted to them of the receipts from and expen-
diture for the patient, but gives them an unlimited power of re-
quiring such accounts to be laid before tlieni, when, how, and for
whatever cause they might think fit! Such a proposition as
this evidently emanates from the same suspicious spirit which
infects the whole of Lord Shaftesbury's evidence respecting
medical men practising in lunacy. It is not a bond fide provi-
sion, and would, no doubt, if it were enacted, liave tlie same fate
as all vexatious legislative provisions; hut, in the meantime, it,
and the rest of the clauses of the Bill conceived in the same
spirit, would have a diametrically opposite effect to that which
they were intended to have. It is surely sufficiently disheartening
to the medical practitioner in lunacy to he assailed by foul suspi-
cions which are unsupported by almost a tittle of trustworthy
evidence, and which by their vagueness elude all attempts
thoroughly to crush them by an appeal to facts ; but when these
suspicions are made grounds for legislation, it is clear what must
follow. No man of right feeling, honour, and integrity will ex-
pose himself to the annoying and harassing consequences which
such bungling and disgraceful legislation would certainly entail
upon him ; every man who might be exposed to such conse-
quences, but who had any respect for himself, would as soon as
possible escape from the questionable, suspected, and degrading
position in which he would be placed; and, as a consequence,
the treatment of the unhappy insane would be entirely left to in-
experienced persons, and to those with whom mercenary consi-
derations might outweigh all feelings of personal honour. Thus
we should have brought about the very state of things implied by
the suspicions expressed by Lord Shaftesbury ; there would be a
distinct retrograde movement in all that referred to medico-psycho-
logical science, and the care and treatment of lunatics; and the
present attempt to benefit the insane by throwing about them
more effective legal protection, would become (as it bids fair to be)
a (/ttrtsi-plnlanthropical fiction.

One would, a privri, conceive, that all legislative enact-
f ments regarding the care and treatment of the insane, should
have in contemplation one great essential and important object?
viz., to encourage medical men of reputation, practical experience,
and of high moral character, to identify and connect themselves
with institutions organized for the reception and cure of lunatic
patients, by placing confidence in the honesty and integrity of
their conduct, and legally protecting them, whilst in the discharge
of these trying, anxious, and responsible duties, from all unfair and
unjustifiable attacks and aspersions. Alas! a course the very
opposite of this appears to be the one held up for popular,
admiration and legislative adoption. The design appears to be
to drive men of character, respectability, and honour out of the
speciality, by rendering their position so odious, offensive, and
repulsive, that no gentleman who had any respect for himself
would think of occupying it. For the misdeeds of one or two
delinquents, the whole body of men connected with asylums are
made to suffer! The order of the day is, hunt the " mad-doctors"
down ! extend to them no mercy, give them no quarter! treattlieiri and legislate for them as a suspected class! Is it right,
honest, just, and consistent with English notions of fair play,
thus to join in the hue and cry against a section of the medical
hody who, at great pecuniary and personal sacrifices, engage
themselves in so thankless, but nevertheless if rightly viewed,
honourable and sacred vocation ! " Oh," says the Earl of Shaftes-
bury, " the system of profit vitiates the whole proceeding !" In
reply to this disingenuous remark, we ask, whether the bulk of
men connected with, and having an interest in, private asylums,
are not far above such low mercenary and commercial conside-
rations !

If a physician is, alas ! by nature so dishonest, corrupt, and
so incapable of being influenced by other than sordid and selfish
motives, he has ample opportunities of exhibiting his character
in ordinary as well as in special departments of practice. But
is there a man in the ranks of a profession so honourable as that
of medicine, who would be guilty of such brutal and villainous
conduct? We maintain without fear of contradiction, that there
is no kind of justification or excuse for the imputations made
against the respectable class of men engaged in this country in
the treatment of the insane. It was asserted by the Earl of ^
Shaftesbury, that patients are detained in asylums for considera- ? ?' w'-.
tions of profit longer than their state of health justified! But
we ask, upon what data does his lordship base so serious an im-
putation ? Who is the best judge, whether a patient has suffi-
ciently recovered to warrant his discharge from control and
medical treatment and supervision, the Commissioners who only
see him for periods ranging from.ten to thirty minutes, four
times in the course of the year, or the medical superintendent of
the asylum who has the case constantly under his observation,
and who is most anxious to send him back into the world cured?, *
Is it not a notorious fact, that a large number of patients who
are temporarily removed from asylums return to them shortly
afterwards in an acute state of insanity ? What object is gained
by thus sending them from the institution ? Is not this course
productive, in many instances, of sad results, by seriously inter-
fering with a regular and continuous course of treatment, upon
*vliich the cure in the majority of cases depends ?

If a physician discharges his duty, and says a particular patient
is not y?t in a condition to leave the asylum, that he is not suffi-
ciently well to justify the experiment of his removal even into
lodgings, he unavoidably exposes himself to suspicion, and gives
his enemies the opportunity of saying that he is detaining the
patient for his own pecuniary advantage !

The psychological physician, it must be admitted, has not even
fair play in this country. In France, Germany, and other conti-
nental countries, as well as in America, men of tlie highest
professional standing, of unimpeachable honour, of unsullied
character, and of great scientific eminence, do not consider them-
selves guilty of an act of social or professional degradation by
associating themselves with private asylums for the insane, and
even in deriving what Lord Shaftesbury terms, a " profit"
for their care and treatment. Every labourer is worthy of
his hire; and surely the man who occupies his talent, profes-
sional skill, and time in restoring the poor lunatic to the bosom
of his family in a state of sanity, cannot be overpaid for the
great benefit he has thus conferred. These matters are not to
be estimated as you would the value of a horse or a piece of land.
It is impossible for the Commissioners, or any other body of men,
to establish any scale of remuneration for such cases. How is it
possible for them to strike a balance, and say such a patient costs so
much, and then estimate to a fraction the profit which the pro-
prietor of the asylum puts into his pocket ? Loose calculations
like these are utterly valueless and worthless apart from a know-
ledge of the particulars connected with special and peculiar cases.
One patient may pay a sum of money apparently large and quite
disproportionate to the accommodation afforded; but there may
be circumstances in connexion with such a case known only to
the parties immediately connected with it, which renders it, in-
stead of being profitable, an actual loss to the medical man.
Such is occasionally the case. If it were a mere question of
rooms, chairs, tables, curtains, pictures, beef, mutton, and wine,
the question would be amenable to ordinary commercial consi-
derations and calculations; but there are other and more important
elements that enter into the question, and which remove it en-
tirely from such a basis. Is not the skill bestowed in the treat-
ment of the case to enter at all into the calculation when the
question of " profit" comes to be considered ? Are not the wear
and tear of body and mind, the constant fret, worry, anxiety, and
occasional loss of reason to which the physician is exposed who
has under his care this unhappy class, points to be estimated
when making out the balance-sheet ?* Surely it is monstrously
unjust to ignore this view of the matter in any calculations that
may be made as to " profit and loss" in any asylum or particular ?
case!

Keally one would conceive, after wading through the bulky
Blue Book, that a lunatic asylum was a perfect Elysium, a para-
dise upon earth, and that the physician who had the charge of it
occupied a most enviable, agreeable, and pleasing position ! In
* "We could mention the names of several physicians who have become insane
in consequence of anxiety of mind caused by residing in lunatic asylums, and con-
stantly associating with the insane.
sucli an institution, where the spirit of love, concord, and har-
mony reigned paramount, he would, surrounded by his happy and
contented family, be exposed to no care, trouble, and anxiety. If
one of his associates were from a mistaken impression or an
erroneous judgment, to try to fracture the proprietor's skull, it
would be considered an incident hardly worthy of notice. If
another lively companion, whilst enjoying the social privileges of
dining with the proprietor and his family seized hold of a knife
whilst at dinner, and were deliberately to cut his throat from ear
to ear, in the presence of the domestic circle, thus deluging the
table with blood, it is a mere bagatelle, not entitled to one mo-
ment's consideration.* If another skittish associate concealed
about his person for some weeks a deadly weapon, with the
avowed intention of taking the first favourable opportunity of
waylaying the medical superintendent, and estimating the dis-
tance between the cutis and the right or left ventricle of his
heart ;f if another piece of eccentricity howled like a wild
animal over his head for six consecutive hours, rendering " night
hideous," and all attempts to " steep the senses into forgetful-
ness,'' abortive, these would be nothing but pleasantries and
pleasures, making life happy and agreeable, and a lunatic asylum
the most charming residence that the imagination could by pos-
sibility picture to the mind !

As to the proposed clause respecting nervous patients, we shall
be anxious to know how Lord Shaftesbury will define the term
nervous. When this is done satisfactorily, then perhaps the
clause will be practicable.

Lord Shaftesbury's evidence guided, in a great measure, the
committee in the examination of subsequent witnesses ; but with
his Lordship's evidence terminates the necessity for any further
detailed notice of the statements laid before the committee. Mr.
Gaskell, one of the medical commissioners in lunacy, gave addi-
tional evidence on the duties of the commissioners, and on the
condition of the lunatics in workhouses; and Mr. Farnall, the
Metropolitan Inspector of the Poor, gave also evidence on
lunatics in workhouses. Mr. F. Barlow, one of the Masters in
Lunacy, and Mr. Wilde, the Registrar in Lunacy, gave evidence
on the duties of the Masters and on Chancery lunatics. Dr H.
H. Southey, one of the Medical Visitors in Lunacy, also gave
evidence on Chancery lunatics. Evidence was given by Mr.
Johnson, one of the Visiting Justices of the Surrey County
Asylum; by Sir A. Spearman, the Chairman of the Committee of
Visitors' of Hanwell Asylum ; by Mr. Cottrell, the Chairman of
the Committee of Visitors of Colney Hatch Asylum ; by Mr.
Woodward, the Chairman of the House Committee at Colney
* This circumstance occurred in a private asylum near London. ?}> Ditto.

Hatch ; and by Sir G. Robinson, one of the magistrates of the
county of Northampton, on the condition and general manage-
ment of the insane in lunatic asylums. Dr Conolly and Dr J.
Sutherland, both gave important evidence before the Committee,
that of the former forming a grave and weighty protest against
the unguarded statements of the Chairman of the Commissioners
in Lunacy, and against unnecessary and vexatious legislation;
and that of the latter is very valuable from the light which it
throws upon the condition of single patients in private houses.
Dr Hood, Col. Jebb, and Mr. Everest of the Home Department,
gave evidence upon the condition of criminal lunatics. Dr Hood
expressed the opinion that criminal lunatics would be better
treated in special wards connected with convict prisons, than in a
special asylum such as is now being erected for them by the
State; but Col. .Tebb (qy. 3293) thought such a course highly
inexpedient. Mr. Monckton Milnes, M.P., gave brief evidence
respecting certain lunatics in York Gaol; and lastly, Mr. Gil-
bert Bolden, and Admiral Saumarez, gave evidence as repre-
sentatives of the " Alleged Lunatics Society." Mr. Bolden
makes many suggestions extending over almost the whole field of
lunacy legislation, and his suggestions merit attention, although
they are too frequently based upon evidence insufficient to show
their necessity, and they partake too largely of that perverse,
single-eyed attention to the civil rights of lunatics, as contradis-
tinguished from, and to the neglect of their medical rights, which is
too common with lay lunacy-law reformers. He sees a greater evil
in a person being too hastily confined as a lunatic, than in throwing
impediments in the way of the early treatment of incipient cases of
lunacy. It is, however, the avoidance of both these evils which
should form a chief question in lunacy legislation, but which
has, thus far, been entirely omitted from the consideration of the
Select Committee. How shall we best secure the necessary
treatment of incipient cases of lunacy in private asylums, or
'? middle-class" asylums if established, without branding the
cases from the outset as lunatics ? This is the cardinal point for
the nascent lunatic, and the first and main consideration of the
medical man ; but it is just this point that we cannot get the lay-
friends of hmatics to listen to. We feel convinced that the
question can be solved if the public will rest content for a
short time to regard medical practitioners in lunacy as curative
agents, and not as avaricious ogres, such as Lord Shaftesbury
portrays them ; and we also feel assured that the question might
be solved with due and strict attention to the preservation of the
civil rights of the lunatic.*

* See an important suggestion, bearing upon this question, by the Scotch Com-
missioners in Lunacy, pp. 4-34 and 437 of the present number of this Journal.

III bringing our notice of the Select Committee's Report to a
close, we may remark that, if in reading the minutes of evidence
/we note the details, (where those details are simply records of
facts,) which indicate the manner in which the existing lunacy laws
operate, we may gather much valuable information ; if we note the
spirit which characterizes those portions of the lay-evidence which
may be assumed to represent the public desire for further legisla-
tive interference respecting lunatics, we cannot but regard it with
profound regret, and entertain a fear that it will impede rather
than promote effective legislation, or if it does hasten legislation
forward, will so affect it in certain most important particulars as
to complicate the whole matter still more; and if we note (which
most concerns us at the present moment) what solid material the
voluminous evidence affords us to aid in the formation of a firm
foundation for further legislation, we are constrained to exclaim,
<c 0 monstrous ! But one halfpennyworth of bread to this in-
tolerable deal of sack !"

The conclusion of the whole matter is precisely that which
the Committee came to, that the evidence is not sufficient to
enable any one to form a definite opinion on the subjects to which
it referred, and that " the inquiry is altogether incomplete."
