The Aesthetics of Suicide
===========================

Art. VII.-

"The suicide does not undergo death because it is honourable, but in
order to avoid evil."?Aristotle.
"Do you know, [said Socrates, that all except philosophers] consider
death among the great evils ? "
"They do indeed," [Simmias] answered.
"Then do the brave amongst them endure death, when they do endure
it, through dread op greater evils ?"
" It is so."

"All men, therefore, except philosophers, are brave through being
AFRAID AND FEAR ; THOUGH IT IS ABSURD THAT ANY ONE SHOULD BE BRAVE
THROUGH FEAR AND COWARDICE." Plato.

In the north room of the Royal Academy, at the last Exhibition,
there was hung a painting, the subject of which was somewhat
singular. It represented a garret, within which was depicted,
sitting at the edge of a truckle bed, a young man whose coun-
tenance had a scared aspect. At his feet, upon the floor, sat a
woman, her form huddled together, her head resting upon his
knees, and her face hid by her arms. Nigh at hand, in front of
an overturned stove, was a little heap of fiercely burning char-
coal, and on a table, in the corner of the room, might be distin-
guished the butt-end of a pistol. Through a curtainless window
could be seen the tops of green trees, and a patch of blue sky;
while the pale light of early morning, or of the closing eventide,
and the fiery glow of the burning charcoal, lit the scene.
We have described the picture from memory, and may perhaps
have erred in some of the slighter details, but the chief charac-
teristics were such as we have given.

The artist had done his work featlv, and it did not need a
second glance to see that he had fixed upon the canvas, with no
contemptible skill, a too common phase of every-day-life suicide.
But what recent or sometime past instance of double suicide so far
appealed to our sympathies, or what description of such an event
in literature stood so markedly prominent, from the excelling
power of the writer, that the pencil should add a halo to the
ghastly incident, or to the writer's pen ? We turned to the
catalogue, but appended to the number of the painting there was
simply this sentence?

" The fumes of charcoal."
On the walls of the same Academy, a few years before, Wallis's
wonderful painting of Chatterton's self-murder had hung. This
suicide, however,?the wretched end of one of the most con-
spicuous examples of misdirected genius that the world ever
saw, claims a place in history. Of the limner's representations
of everyday suicide, we know M. Decamp's horrible but nervous
drawing. A young man, wasted by suffering and half naked, is
extended upon a wretched bed, in an equally wretched attic.
A blanket, the sole clothing, envelopes the body. The head has
fallen backwards, and the long, trailing, entangled hair is dabbled
with blood. One hand reposes on the breast, the other rests
flaccidly upon the floor. Near the bed lies a still smoking pistol,
while against the wall lean an easel and a palette, upon which
the colours are still moist. On a rough-hewn plank above the
easel are arranged a few books, and alongside them stand a
plaster statuette, and a death's-head. This painting is simply
termed The Suicide, and in nowise is the terrible story which it
tells, or the terrible lesson which it conveys, mitigated or dis-
torted. We know also Cruikshank's too truthful drawing, the
last of the series named The Drunkard's Children, a sequel to
The Bottle. Who has not shuddered when he has gazed upon
the agonized figure, which, with the hands convulsively clasped
upon the eyes, has sprung from the parapet of the bridge ? How
vividly the mind pictures to itself the sullen wash of the river
against the piers ; the dark glassy surface of the water in the huge
black shadow of the masonry ; the golden gleam of the moonshine
on the distant ripples. How involuntarily we shiver at the thoughts
of the chilly, damp air which hovers over the stream, and sicken
' at the awful'sense of solitariness which is apt to steal over one
when standing on one of the bridges, he is hemmed in by the
midnight sounds of the city. Alas! for the friendless who at
such an hour and on such a spot may listen to them !* Then
the sharp, painful recoil of the feelings, as the slight, scarcely
heard splash strikes the ear from below, and the eager gaze
with which we peer into the gulf, and mark the two or three pale,
fleeting gleams of silvery light which crest the diminutive waves,
tossed up by the cloven water. " God help the poor unfortunate !"
we exclaim ; rather should we cry, " God help us"?to read
aright, and to act aright after having read, the legend written
beneath the picture?" The maniac father and the convict
brother are gone ! The Poor Girl, homeless, friendless, deserted,
destitute, and gin-mad, commits self-murder J"
" Alas ! for the rarity Of Christian charity
' Under the sun!
Oh ! it was pitiful!
Near a whole city full,
Home she had none."

* "When I first saw the river as I passed over King's College Bridge," said
Robert Hall, speaking of the Cam, to Dr Olinthus Gregory, " I could not help
exclaiming, Why, the stream is standing still to see people drown themselves!
and that I am sorry to say, is a permanent feeling with me." How many, doubt-
less are affected b v a very similar feeling on looking at night upon the Thames, where
We know also that little sketch of Thackeray's, which illus-
trates "A Gambler's Death." It is hut a roughly executed
drawing, hut it is taken from nature, and set in the tale to which
it belongs, is of surpassing interest. (See the Paris Sketch-Book.)
Decamp's, Cruikshank's, and Thackeray's drawings tell the rigid,
ghastly truth of everyday suicide ; and the drawings of the two
latter men convey a lesson not easily overlooked or forgotten, and
free from a certain terrible fascination, which rivets the attention
to the painting of the former man, even from its very truthfulness.
But the "Fumes of Charcoal" is a picture which, judging from
its title and execution, aims at depicting suicide from an sesthe-
tical point of view. The horrible character of the act is partly
overshadowed by a certain unhealthy sentiment, and the painting
appeals to a morbid sympathy, rather than to a sound feeling of
abhorrence tempered with an active and well-directed pity.
We may be wrong in our estimate of the artist's work, and we
hope wre are. It may, moreover, be simply an illustration of
peculiar notions on his part of the functions of the painter's art;
but we cannot help regarding this painting as one of several in-
dications, which seem to point to a growing sympathy towards the
act of suicide in this country.

Our coroners' juries have become so sensitive of the fame of
suicides, that (so far as can be judged from newspaper reports*)
the rule is to pronounce a verdict of temporary insanity in cases
of self-murder. This legalized apology for suicide is not only
too often an evasion both of the law and the gospel, but it tends
to throw discredit upon the doctrine of temporary insanity, and
what is even still more important, to convert the act of suicide
into an object of legitimate pity.

We have no special literature of suicide in England at the
present time ; but our Gallic neighbours supply us in this respect
superabundantly. With them suicide holds a very similar posi-
tion in popular writings, and is invested with the same kind of
sentiment as "broken-hearts" and consumption with us. We
meet with self-murder at every turn in some of the most popular and
widely-spread forms of French literature, and the act is clad with
so many charms of a highly sesthetical character, and altogether
takes so respectable a position among the legitimate causes of
death, that one recoils in fear from the insidious doctrines (absurd
though they may be) implied or taught. Witness the Memoires
d'un Suicide recueillis et publics par Maxime du Camp, (Paris,
it winds within the metropolis,?a feeling often increased if not originally prompted
by the sad associations connected with the bridges. It is to be feared that many
who have been foiled at every turn in life's struggle, have become fascinated with
the terrible idea and yielded to it.

* Cannot Mr. Samuel Redgrave help us to some more definite and satisfactory
information upon this subject ?

1855,) and tlie more recent work, Les Suicides Illustres : bio-
graphic des personnages remarquables de tons les Pays qui out
peri volontav erhent depuis le commencement du JMonde jusquci
nos jours, par F. Dabadie (Premiere Serie. Paris, J 859.)
Charles Nodier had conceived the notion of writing the bio-
graphy of noted suicides, and reading to us the " solemn philoso-
phical lesson which is to be derived from the string of renowned
artists, poets, inventors, legislators, heroes, conquerors, kings,
queens, emperors, priests, and lovers who have murdered them-
selves. " It is singular," remarks M. Sartorius, in a prefatory
notice to M. Dabadie's work, " that for the last thirty years we
have been swamped with celebrated brigands, celebrated kings,
celebrated wives, celebrated children, celebrated animals, &c., but
no one has recounted the tale of celebrated suicides. Thanks,
however, to M. Dabadie, this much to be regretted hiatus in
the French book-trade has been (by our advice) filled up."
We have the book, but the solemn philosophical lesson, and
the biographical research, which would have legitimized its place
in literature, are wanting. " Les Suicides Illustres" appeals to
the dilettanti in suicide. In his Introduction to the work, M.
Dabadie, after having touched in a slip-shod fashion upon several
opinions respecting suicide, writes :?

" Morality?we speak of social not of religious morality [happy
distinction !] which has nothing to do here?morality, we say, which
is elevated above the law by its origin, its function, its end, and which
moves in a more extended sphere, justly disapproves of certain suicides.
For example, every married man has contracted a sacred engagement; he
owes help and protection to the woman he has espoused, as also to his
children. This engagement having been freely entered into, one thing
only can dissolve it?the radical and definitive impossibility of fulfilling
it. Thus the father of a family who is or can be useful to it, is blame-
able if he disembarrass himself of that life which does not belong to him.
" To recall this incontestible principle is to demonstrate that man
has not always the right to kill himself. But universal opinion would
be wounded?and we are tempted to add morality (!)?if it were sus-
tained that he has never the right. In truth, in the eyes of opinion,
there are suicides which are not only excusable but even pi'aiseworthj^.
Such is the suicide of the commandant of a fortification or of a ship
which he blows up rather than render it to an enemy. Orators,
poets, and celebrated historians, as well as heroes, soldiers and sailors,
who have had the bravery to accomplish this resolution, are admired
by the people, and the Church dare not refuse to pray for the health of
their souls. More than once it has happened that suicide has been the
brevet of glory. Witness those Greeks and Romans who fell so nobly
that death was proud to take them, according to the magnificent ex-
pression of the English poet; and without going so far back, the young
officer of our navy (Bisson), who immortalized himself in the waters
of the Archipelago, under the Restoration.

" As to the vulgar suicides, it appears to us better to pity than to
blame them. Rich or poor, old or young, ill or well, man is bound to
existence by so many ties?without noticing the bond of habit?that
he must have suffered cruelly before conceiving the idea of destroying
himself, especially before realizing it " (pp. xxv?xxvii.)
Let it not be supposed that notions such as these are main-
tained by obscure writers solely. We may mark an approxima-
tion to them in a recent expression of opinion by one who has an
enviable position among physicians, and whose scientific writings
on suicide have a world-wide reputation?Brierre de Boismont.
In the course of an inquiry into the suicidal or accidental nature
of an injury which had occasioned the death of a gentleman
in Paris in September, 1858, M. Pinard, the substitute of the
procureur-imperiale, said :?

"We are not of those too-austere legislators who without pity for
the dead would gibbet the bodies of suicides, and drag them through
the streets upon a hurdle.* We live, on the contrary, in the midst of
an enfeebled society which beholds with indifference the multiplication
of suicide, and which regards it more with pity than with anger.
Does societ}' look upon self-murder as a good or an evil ? To listen
to certain doctrines and to witness the ravages of this evil extending
into all classes of society, we should say that it has doubts in this
respect, and that it forgave all those who had recourse to it. Neither
need we wonder at these doubts when we meet with poets who say to
distempered souls, death is a sleep; rest ye and break the vase if the
liquor is too bitter : when we encounter more hardy minds who pro-
claim to all that death is a right and the disinherited may quit a world
which has abandoned them. Against this double cry of feebleness and
pride it is necessary that we should maintain the old principles that
have been taxed as common-place (as if common-places were not
eternal truths), that suicide which arises from madness is a calamity,
that when it is committed by a sane person it is a crime.
" Is not suicide a protest against the life to come, a protest against
the immortal principle we carry in us, a protest against the social
duties which we have given rise to and which we ought to fulfil to the
end ? Then ought every flourishing society to guard against this
disease of eternal faiths. Then ought magistrates always to regard
suicide as a disgrace, a crime to be engraved on a tomb, a dishonour
bequeathed to a family."

Upon these opinions M. B. de Boismont remarks :?
"We are keenly affected by these noble and generous words, but do
they not admit of any exception ?
* " 1598, February 20.?The 20 day of Februar, Thomas Dobie drownit him-
self in the Quarrel holes, besyde the Abbey, and upon the morne he was harlit
throw the towne backward, and thereafter hangit on the gallows."?Robert Birrel's
Diary?Notes and Queries, vol. v., p. 272.

" Philip Strozzi had fallen into the hands of his most cruel enemy,
Come de Medicis, whom he had wished to overturn. He was one of"a
body of conspirators, of whom he possessed the secrets. If he spoke,
their heads would roll upon the scaffold, their property would be con-
fiscated, their families proscribed and reduced to indigence, and his
name and himself would be dishonoured. If he had but to meet an
ordinary death his silence would not be shaken, but torture might
triumph over his courage, as it had triumphed over that of the unfor-
tunate Julian Gondi and many others, and cause him to forswear
himself. He would not brave a like peril. Filled with the learning of
the ancients, whose works had been recently disinterred, after many
ages of darkness, and had electrified Italian imaginations, he de-
scended to the tomb, invoking the name of Cato, and of those virtuous
men who had likewise killed themselves. If Strozzi be criminal, truly
his crime is of a nature every way peculiar, because his memory does
not lack the sympathies of many men, and his memory will always be
respected.

" In the midst of the agitations which disturb the world, perhaps
there would be fewer villanies, and more great actions, if those who are
called to play a part upon the political scene took the resolution to
die rather than to abandon the triumph of their ideas, or preferred
honour to life. There are epochs, says M. S. De Sacy, when to die
with readiness is a noble science; and if Christianity, from a more ele-
vated point of view, condemns absolutely suicide, after the courage of
maintaining life in obedience to God, it must be admitted that there
is no greater courage than that of quitting it voluntarily in order to
avoid beino- sullied by a baseness."?IiechercJies Medico-Leg ales sur le
Suicide cl Voccasion d'un cas douteux de mort accidentelle on violente.
Par A. B. de Boismont. Annales d"Hygiene Publique. July, 1859.
M. B. de Boismont's reasoning would leave a tolerably wide
path open and an ample verge, capable of unlimited enlargement,
for suicide. For who is to lay down those rules whicli would
enable us to determine with precision the circumstances when
suicide becomes not merely justifiable but even praiseworthy ?
Honour and the world's-opinion are not synonyms of virtue as
the world goes, and to take them as guides would leave us in
precisely the same predicament that the world has been in with
regard to suicide ever since it began to play a conspicuous par i
in history.

If M. Boismont's in extremis doctrine of political conduct were A
adopted, it is evident that it would not be the ideas contended
for, but the success or not of those ideas which must govern the
act of self-murder, for the doctrine is applicable to every shade,
every variety of belief entertained by politicians. Think for a
moment of Louis Napoleon struggling against the evils of penury, \
of expatriation, nay, of seemingly hopeless exile in a back street
of London; his .most cherished notions crushed; his greatest
efforts not merely unsuccessful, but a mark of ridicule. Pic-
( til re to yourself this man discovered one morning, amidst all the
bustle and hurry of the huge city, stretched upon his bed, his
head shattered, and the instrument of the foul deed within the
grasp of the stiffened fingers; picture the stolid jury; the remarks
of contemptible pity; the execrations of creditors; and the final
interment in some obscure spot of one of the many desolate
burial-grounds, or of the crowded cemeteries of London. Yet
in what instance could M. Boismont's aspiration concerning self-
murder have been more justified ? But think of Louis Napoleon,
Emperor of the French, and making for himself a colossal name
in history, and reflect on the horrible absurdity of suicide as a
last political resort. This is no question of Buonapartism or
not; for the lesson belongs to every creed of political faith, but
it is of the most value to those creeds which are for the nonce
depressed, nay apparently hopeless.

Again, sympathy with the motives which may have led to self-
murder is one thing; to hold them up as lights for our guidance
is another and very different thing. Philip Strozzi dying on
the rack, silent amidst his torments, or throwing a noble scorn
at his executioners; Philip Strozzi emulating the courage of
many Christian martyrs and warriors, and not the bastard courage
of a Cato, would have as far excelled the Philip Strozzi dying by
his own hand in a dungeon, as Lucifer the angel excelled Lucifer
the fallen one. But, alas ! for the ill-example to his supporters?
alas! for any cause whose adherents are taught so ready a way to
avoid difficulties ; his physical courage failed, and Florence lost
the example of a martyr and got the old-fashioned one of a
mere conspicuous man. We pity Strozzi, but we should no more
hold him up as an example to be followed, than the Red Indian
would hold out to his son as an example the man who, to avoid
torture when a captive, had destroyed himself, or who had suffered
a groan to escape him under the torture.

It is recorded that when Charles Y. was told of Strozzi's death,
and the fashion of it, he remarked, smiling, " may all my enemies
perish thus." It may be surmised that the Emperor shrewdly
suspected that Strozzi dying by his own hand would have a less
exciting effect upon the Florentines than Strozzi dying by the
executioner. The Emperor's opinion of Strozzi and his co-
workers, as expressed to Antonio Doria, is not to be overlooked
when the question of the patriot's death is noted for admiration.
" You little understand these men," said Charles V.; " they do not
wish the liberty of their country, but their own greatness ; for if we
were to remove the duke, they themselves would become lords of
Florence, in spite of the citizens, who really love the liberty of
the city, but who could not resist the influence^ and wealth, and
power of these ambitious leaders."

The most transcendental of sesthetical views concerning suicide
is that of Elias Regnault (Nouvelles Reflexions sur le Suicide),
quoted by M. Dabadie. M. Regnault writes :?

" Suicide is the last term, the highest expression of man's liberty.
It is the most energetic protest of the superiority of his nature. Why
have not animals ever conceived suicide ? Because their nature is
every-way passive. They have not the choice and the preference.
Man, on the contrary, eminently active and free, has been able to push
his activity even to the destruction of himself."

The thought is borrowed from Pliny, but it is a pity that it
should have been truncated by Regnault. Here is the missing
fragment:?" Indeed," says the pagan writer, " this constitutes
the great comfort in this imperfect state of man, that even the
Deity cannot do everything. For he cannot procure death for
himself, even if he wished it, which, so numerous are the evils of
life, has been granted to man as our chief good."?(Nat. Hist.
B. II. c. V.)

But Regnault and his co-thinkers have it that suicide is "la
manifestation la plus eclatante de la personnalite humaine," only
when the act is essentially voluntary. Suicide under the influence
of anger or mental alienation is exempted from the category.
And really if, with these reservations, it were accepted that
suicide is the highest expression of man's liberty, it would simply
lead to the conclusion that the act of self-murder involves the
highest degree of his responsibility, social, moral, or religious. f
A more recent apology for suicide than Regnault's, and one
much more novel and curious, is that of 3VI. Bourdm. He holds
that suicide is suicide only under certain circumstances. He
writes:?

" Sacred and profane history furnish us with many examples of men
who have exposed themselves seriously and voluntaril to death, with-y
out having nevertheless committed suicide. For example, Samson,
become blind, buries himself beneath the ruins of a temple which he has
overturned. Eleazar suffers himself to be crushed to death by the
falling of an elephant which he has killed. Epaminondas, after having
asked if his shield was safe, wishes the javelin to be torn from him,
although its removal will cause death. Curtius devotes himself to the
gods, and casts himself into a gulf to save his country. Regulus
returns to Carthage, loving better to meet death than to violate his
sworn faith. Christian history is fdled with edifying examples of holy
women who have preferred to expose their life than undergo a shame
(potius mori quam foedari). Saint Domnine and her two daughters,
Saints Berenice and Prosdoce, drowned themselves in order to save their
chastity; Saint Pelagie and her mother threw themselves from a roof
to evade the violence of the governor of Antioch.? (Saint Ambrose, De
Virginibus, lib. iii.) Saint Ignatius, bishop, wished that the faithfulat Rome should not sue for his pardon: Voluntarius moriar, in quit,
quia mild utile est mori. It would be easy to cite a great number of
sacrifices as generous, inspired by faith, by political beliefs, or even by
tender but exalted sentiments, such as love, friendship, &c. In these
different acts are not found the characteristics of suicide ; because to
expose one's self to death, to place one's-self even in circumstances
which render death inevitable, is not to wish to kill one's-self?is not
to act with a formal and exclusive intention of killing one's-self.
This delectable piece of reasoning is somewhat akin to a
casuistical opinion of Luther's. He was told of a young girl
who, to avoid violence offered to her by a nobleman, had cast her-
self out of a window and was killed. The question was asked,
was she responsible for her death ? Luther said, " No : she felt
that this step formed her only chance of safety, it being not her
life she sought to save, but her chastitv."?(Luther's rTable
Talk.)

" If," to continue M. Bourdin's remarks, " suicide does not exist
in the conditions that I have named, all the more does it not exist in
regard to those tender but passionate souls, who, feeling the emptiness
and nothingness of all around them, ardently lay claim to another
country. Still less does it exist in the instances of those members of
the National Convention, who, as it is said, have committed suicide to
maintain their honour. This last distinction is not as vain as it may
appear to be at the first sight, because the confusion that it destroys
has been made by able thinkers who have not sufficiently studied the
matter.

" This preliminary explanation was necessary in order to destroy
every species of equivocation and to define exactly the limits within
which suicide exists ; it was necessary also, in order to eliminate from the
pathological classifications of suicide those facts which do not belong to
them."?(Du Suicide considere comme Maladie. Paris, 1849.?p. 9.)
When, therefore, as the result of his researches and of " simple
inductive ratiocination," M. Bourdin writes, " I say that suicide
is always a disease and always an act of mental alienation ; I say,
consequently, that it does not merit either praise or blame,"
(Op. Git. p. 9); we know that he is not using the term suicide
in its ordinai'y sense.

M. Bourdin's conclusion that suicide, in his restricted sense of
the word, merits neither praise or blame, would, however, seem to
be the right deduction to attach to a certain quasi-scientific
theory of suicide, in the most extended sense of that term, which
has been declared by Mr. Buckle in his History of Civilization
in England. He asserts that all the evidence we possess points
" to one great conclusion, and can leave no doubt on our minds
that suicide is merely the product of the general condition of
society, and that the individual felon only carries into effect what
is a necessary consequence of preceding circumstances."
The reasons adduced for so remarkable a conclusion deserve
to be gravely considered. Mr. Buckle writes :?

" Among public and registered crimes, there is none which seems so
completely dependent on the individual as suicide. Attempts to
murder or to rob may be, and constantly are, successfully resisted;
baffled sometimes by the party attacked, sometimes by the officers of
justice. But an attempt to commit suicide is much less liable to
interruption. The man who is determined to kill himself is not pre-
vented at the last moment by the struggles of an enemy ; and as he
can easily guard against the interference of the civil power, his act be-
comes, as it were, isolated; it is cut off from foreign disturbances, and
seems more clearly the product of his own volition than any other
offence could possibly be. We may also add, that, unlike crimes in
general, it is rarely caused by the instigation of confederates ; so that
men, not being goaded into it by their companions, are uninfluenced
by one great class of external associations, which might hamper what
is termed the freedom of their will. It may therefore very naturally be
thought impracticable to refer suicide to general principles, or to detect
anything like regularity in an offence which is so eccentric, so solitary,
so impossible to control by legislation, and which the most vigilant
police can do nothing to diminish. There is also another obstacle that
impedes our view: this is, that even the best evidence respecting
suicide must always be very imperfect. In cases of drowning, for ex-
ample, deaths are liable to be returned as suicides which are accidental;
while, on the other hand, some are called accidental which are volun-
tary. ' Thus it is that self-murder seems to be not only capricious and
uncontrollable, but also very obscure in regard to proof; so that 011 all
these grounds it might be reasonable to despair of ever tracing it to
those general causes by which it is produced."

Are the circumstances and the motives which lead to or deter-
mine the act of suicide so exceptional as to present no aspect,
even at a slight glance, of regularity of recurrence ? Have the
assumed remote and proximate causes of the deed been of so
erratic a character, and so seemingly irregular in their manifesta-
tion, as to exhibit no indications of uniformity of action? Have
the many physical and psychical troubles which have impelled
man to destroy himself played so unimportant a part in the his-
tory of society and of races, manifested such marked characteristics
of the incidental and not of the general, that any one of the results
to which they have given rise should be expected to present a
" capricious" stamp ? Is self-murder " so rarely caused by the
instigation of confederatesis this the lesson taught by the
history of suicide among the Greeks and the Romans of old, the
Japanese, the Hindoos, and the Parisians of our own days ? Do
experience and history show that the motives which affect the
volition, which bring the mind into the state of pleasing to do a
thing or not,* are so different in different people; do they show
that the operations of the emotions and of the thoughts, as well as
the action of the motives which influence them are so eccentric,
that " what is termed the freedom of the will" is alike and mani-
festly eccentric ? To each and all of these interrogatories all
ordinary individuals, we have little doubt, would unhesitatingly
answer, No ! Why, it seems to us that all a 'priori reasoning
hitherto has led to the very reverse of Mr. Buckle's assertion that
it might " very naturally be thought impracticable to refer suicide
to general principles, or to detect anything like regularity in an
offence which is so eccentric." That the recurrence of suicide
was governed by definite laws is a belief as clearly implied in the
writings of the ancients upon the act, as that the conviction in the
existence of those laws has been a principal incentive to frequent
research concerning suicide in all its aspects among the moderns.
As to the impossibility of controlling self-murder by legislation
and a vigilant police, that is a question of fact which Mr. Buckle
deals with as if it were a mere matter of opinion, for he contents
himself with the bare assertion at some length, and a reference or
two which may, perhaps, be quoted legitimately by those who hold
the opinion of the inutility of the present system of legislation on
suicide, but can afford only slight or very problematical grounds
for the belief in the impossibility of controlling suicide by any
legislation. We shall have to examine this subject at a greater
or less length in a subsequent portion of this article, conse-
quently, we shall simply make here the additional remark, that
the fullest and most careful account that we are acquainted with
of the history and legislation of suicide among different nations,
that of Lisle's (Du Suicide. Paris, 1850,) shows not only that
there is no sufficient foundation for the opinion that legislation,
at all times and under all circumstances, is inoperative in check-
ing suicide, or that the belief of lawgivers that by their enact-
ments they can diminish suicide, is, as Mr. Buckle asserts,
"folly," (Note, p. 24,) but also that there is good ground for
hope that well-considered legislation would prove beneficial in
checking or controlling the evil.

Mr. Buckle's preliminary propositions are in the main mere
assumptions. But to continue his argument:?
* Bailey. Letters on the Philosophy of the Human Mind. 2nd Series.?p. 173.
"These being the peculiarities of this singular crime, it is surely an
astonishing fact, that all the evidence we possess respecting it points
to one great cone union, and can leave no doubt in our minds that
suicidc is merely the product of the general condition of society, and
that the individual felon only carries into effect what is a necessary
consequence of preceding circumstances. In a given state of society a
certain number of persons must put an end to their own life. This it
the general law; and the special question as to who shall commit the
crime, depends, of course, upon special laws, which, however in their
total action, must obey the large social law to which they are all subor-
dinate. And the power of the larger law is so irresistible, that neither
the love oflife nor the fear of another world can avail anything towards
even checking its operation."

Now, notwithstanding that Mr. Buckle states that " all the
evidence we possess" points to this conclusion, he refers only to
four sources of evidence, Dufau's Traite de Statistique, Winslow's
Anatomy of Suicide, Quetelet's Statistique Morale, and certain
tables in the Assurance Magazine. Certainly one cannot heln
admiring the hardihood of fixing so magnificent a conclusion
on the confessedly and necessarily slender data contained in these
works. Why we assume that Mr. Buckle's references constitute
at least the head and front of his "all the evidence we pos-
sess" will be seen presently. As indicating the value 0f these
references in relation to Mr. Buckle's conclusion, we niay re-
mark that Quetelet seems to constitute his chief statistical
authority, and he is spoken of by him as " confessedly the first
statistician in Europe," a sentiment which one might suppose
would have a,t least induced Mr. Buckle to respect his opinions
Now Quetelet has expressly defended his researches from the con-
clusions which Mr. Buckle is desirous of attaching to them
Quetelet has written?

" That which precedes shows us that man, in general, proceeds with
the greatest regularity in all his actions. Whether he marries begets
kills himself, robs, or murders, he invariablyseems to act under the in-
fluence of definite causes independent of his free-will.
" We must carefully guard ourselves here, nevertheless, from conclud-
ing that this constancy is the result of a desolating fatalism. For
OURSELVES, WE SEE IN IT BUT THE PROOF OF THE PERMANENCE OF
THE MORAL CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH GIVE RISE TO SUICIDES DURING
THE PERIOD WHICH OUR OBSERVATIONS EMBRACE."*

* ? Tout ce qui pnScfede nous montre que l'homme, en g^ne'ral, procfcde avec la
plus grande r^gulantd dans toutes ses actions. Qu'il se marie, qu'il se reproduisP
ou qu'il se tue, qu'il attente k la propria ou k la vie de son semblable touiour* il
semble agir sous 1 influence de causes determinees et placees en dehors de son lib
arbitre. re
"Nous nous garderons bien cependant de conclure de Ik, que cette constance e,f
le resultat d un fatalisme d&olant. 2S ous n'y voyons, pour nous, que la preuve de
A
Again, Mr. Buckle's assertion tliat " suicide is merely the pro-
duct of the general condition of society, and that the individual
felon only carries into effect what is a necessary consequence of
preceding circumstances," is much the same kind of proposition
as if it were said that the quotient determined the value of the dif-
ferent figures and the method of working of a sum. " In a given
sum," to adopt Mr. Buckle's phraseology, " certain results must
follow. This is the general law ; and the special question as to what
position each figure shall take in the sum depends, of course, upon
special laws ; which, however, in their total action, must obey the
large arithmetical law to which they are all subordinate. And the
power of the larger law is so irresistible, that neither the vexations
of multiplication, nor the still greater troubles of division, nor the
perplexities of rule of three, nor the maddening irritations of
vulgar fractions,* can avail anything towards checking its opera-
tion." Thus the different psychical and physical elements, which
are usually supposed to concur in forming the general result com-
monly spoken of as the state or condition of society, are to be re-
garded as having their value defined, or regulated, or governed by
the results to which they have given rise ; or the psychical elements
are to be looked upon as not being concurrent causes with the
physical in bringing about the state of the society, the former ele-
ments being products of the latter, which, in some unexplained
manner, constitute or engender the general state spoken of; or
the said state of society is a something per se?an active entity,
or anything, or nothing, as the case may be. The first supposi-
tion strikes one as the meaning of Mr. Buckle's proposition at the
first glance; the second is necessary to explain certain peculiari-
ties of his explanation of that proposition ; the third will be
found generally useful in reading the introductory chapters of
his work, and the continuation of his argument, which proceeds
thus:?

" The causes of this remarkable regularity I shall hereafter examine;
but the existence of the regularity is familiar to whoever is conversant
with moral statistics. In the different countries from which we have
returns we find year by year the same proportion of persons putting an
end to their own Existence ; so that, after making an allowance for the
impossibility of collecting complete evidence, we are able to predict,
la permanence des circonstances morales qui font naitre les suicides, pendant la
p^riode qu'embrassait nos observations."?(Quetelet. Lit Systeme Social et des
Lois qui le regissent. Paris. 1848.?p. 327.)
* Multiplication is vexation,
Division's twice as bad,
Rule of Three it puzzles me,
And Fractions make me mad.?School Song.
within a very small limit of error the number of voluntary deaths for
each ensuing period ; supposing, of course, that the social circumstances
do not undergo any marked change."

In fact, suicide is subject to the ordinary laws of causation-
Then what are the "social circumstances" spoken of which arp
liable to variation ? They are not of a moral character, because
Mr. Buckle teaches "that the moral actions of men are the
product not of their volition but of their antecedents" (p 29) ?
and that "suicide^ is merely the product of the general con-
dition of society, and of "preceding circumstances." It is
evident, therefore, that the term " social circumstances" is not
used here by Mr. Buckle in the sense in which it is ordinarilv
used, and that it is equivalent to the terms "general condition
of and state of society, * " antecedents," and " preceding cir
cumstances," as used by him ; and that the two former phrases as
well as the two latter are used in some peculiar sense. This
sense seems to be capable of no other explanation than a some
thing per se?an active entity; and Mr. Buckle, in endeavouring
to escape from a metaphysical Scylla has apparently plunged into
a profouuder Charybdis.

But how do Mr. Buckle's assertions, that " in the different
countries from which we have returns, we find year by year the
same proportion putting an end to their own existence," and " that
we are able to predict, within a small limit of error, the number
of voluntary deaths for each ensuing period; supposing of
course, that the social circumstances do not undergo anv mnvhnrl
change," tally with.the facts and his authorities ? We have not
unfortunately, Quetelet's Statistique Morale by us, but there are
certain remarks in his work on Man, freely referred to bv Mr
Buckle, which have a direct bearing on this question. In that
work, Quetelet bases his observations on the annual variations of
suicides, on five years' records of suicides in France, ten years in
the department of the Seine, and seven years in the Canton of
Geneva; and he states, "we recognise in all the preceding
figures a frightful concordance between the results of the diffe-
rent consecutive years. This regularity in an act which appears
so intimately bound to the volition of man, is manifested more
strikingly (as will be presently shown) in all that appertains to
crime. Nevertheless, society may be modified in a country and
bring about changes in that which offers, at the first, a remark-
able constancy for a short period (qui offrait d'abord une con-
stance remarquable pour une periode de temps peu etendue)
According to Dr Casper, G2 suicides were committed in Berlin
from 1788 to 1797, 128 from 1797 to 1808, and 54G from 1813
to 1822." {Sur L'Homme, L. II., c. ii. s. ii.) Quetelet, indeed,
596 the esthetics of suicide.

tells us in effect, that tlie regularity in tlie recurrence of
suicide, although true for the " periode de temps peu etendue," .
to which his data referred, cannot be assumed to he true of any
other period, unless there be other and more extended observa-
tions, because such a conclusion would be inconsistent with Dr h
Casper's researches, and unwarranted by the very brief character
of his own researches. And such, if our memory serves us ?
right, is the carefully guarded character of all M. Quetelet's re-
searches concerning the annual recurrence of suicide, a care
rendered necessary from the comparatively limited character of
the statistics with which he had to deal.

Let us here glance for a moment at the French statistics of
suicide, and see how they bear upon Mr. Buckle's assertion of
the yearly recurrence of suicides in the same proportion, except
when marked changes in society occur. In France the number of
suicides in proportion to population, was in 1830, 1 in 14,207.
From this year there was a progressive increase in the number
of suicides year by year, with six exceptions (1841-44-45?46-
48?49), until 1852, when the number had increased to 1 in 9340 !
(Lisle, Du Suicide, p. 22.) This is scarcely compatible with Mr.
Buckle's assertion.

But again, Dufau's statistics of suicide refer to France, and
are confined to the ten years 1827?37. In the former year the
proportion of suicides to population was, according to him,
1 in 20,000; in the latter, 1 in 14,338 (13,083, Lisle), conse-
quently the French statistics of suicide show a steady increase
from 1827 to 1852, and this, with little variation, from year to
year. But M. Dufau's returns, considered alone, from the limited
period of time to which they refer, although very suggestive,
afford but a slight foundation for any general conclusions, and so
conscious is he of this truth, that he carefully avoids doing any-
thing else than setting forth the facts told by his figures, and
when he points out an interesting relationship which seemingly
exists between the prevalence of suicide and the mean age of j
the population of a district, he immediately adds that " we state
this simply as a conjecture. The investigation relative to
suicide has but commenced," &c. (Op.cit. p. 302.)

If we now take Mr. Buckle's third authority. Dr Winslow's
work, we shall find in the chapter on the statistics of suicide,
first, an account of the number of suicides committed in London
for a century and a half, the bearing of which on Mr. Buckle's
notions we shall have to refer to presently. Then Dr Winslow
quotes the interesting report of a committee of the Statistical
Society, on suicides in Westminster, which is preceded by the
very proper remark, that " The committee deems it right to
premise that caution must be used in drawing too general in- u
ferences from these statements, on account of tlie comparatively
small number of cases to which they refer." Next follows an
outline of M. Guerry's researches, the value of which will he
best shown by his own words,?" These first attempts rarely lead
then to an immediate application; they destroy error rather
than establish truth, and their utility consists less in (living rise
to theories than in developing the spirit of criticism and re-
search" (et leur utilite consiste moins a elever des theories qu'a
repandre l'esprit de doute et d'examen). (Essai sur la Statis-
tique Morale de la France, p. G9.) Lastly follows gn account
of M. Prevost's researches on suicide in the Canton of Geneva,
for the ten years 1825-34, which, as they show (putting aside
the short period of observation) an annual mean of 13, a mini-
mum of 0 (1825-182G), a maximum of 24, and a difference of
18, with a population increasing at the rate of about 500
n year, can hardly be supposed to aid Mr. Buckle's ideas
much.* Of the value of the statistics of suicide for the me-
tropolis, we shall take Mr. Buckle's own opinion. After re-
ferring {note, p. 27) to Mr. Jopling's paper on the subject, in the
Assurance Magazine, Mr. Buckle adds, " These are the only
complete consecutive returns of London suicides yet published
[they extend over five years], those issued by the police being
imperfect."

Now the foregoing is the character of the references of Mr.
Buckle concerning the statistics of suicide, yet he precedes his
remarks on suicide and murder with the following sentence re-
specting the statistical evidence on crimes. " This evidence has
cine on accumulating until it now forms of itself a large body of
literature, containing, with the commentaries connected with it, an
immense'array of facts, so carefully compiled, and so well and clearly
digested, that more may be learned from it respecting the moral
nature of man. than can be gathered from all the accumulated
* The following is an approximative calculation of the proportion of suicides to
filiation in the Canton of Geneva, from 1825-34, according to the data given by
SPPrevo^t. Population, 1822, 51,113 ; 1834, 50,655
Suicides in 10,000 Population.
1825 .... 1.1
1826 ....11
1827 . . ? ? 1'fi
1828 .... 2-0
Suicides in 10,000 Population.
1830 .... 2-9
1831 .... 3-2
1832 .... 2-2
1833 .... 4-1
1829 .... 2-0 J 1834 .... 2*8

In the thirteen years 1S3S-47, 1853-55, the annual number of suicides in the
Canton of Geneva ranged from 11 to 20, the average being 15'6. These figures
exhibit a much less degree of variation llian those for 1825-34, and show clearly the
necessity for a long period of observations before any veiy absolute rules can be laid
down respecting the annual recurrence of suicides in a country.?(See Dr Marc
d'Espina's Essai Analijtique et Critique de Statistique Mwtuaire Compare.?(p 93
et seq.) '

experience of nges." (!) It is certain tliat the statistics liere
spoken of are not those made use of by Mr. Buckle in his exami-
nation of the question of suicide.
But to continue Mr. Buckle's argument, lest an iota of it should
be lost:?

" Even in London, notwithstanding the vicissitudes incidental to the
largest and most luxurious capital in the world, we find a regularity
greater than could be expected by the most sanguine believer in social
laws ; since political excitement, and the misery produced by the dear-
ness of food, are all causes of suicide, and are all constantly varying.
Nevertheless, in this vast metropolis, about 240 persons every year
make away with themselves ; the annual suicides oscillating, from the
pressure of temporary causes, between 266, the highest, and 213, the
lowest. In 1846, which was the great year of excitement caused by
the railway panic, the suicides in London were 266; in 1847 began a
.slight improvement, and they fell to 256 ; in 1848 they were 247 ; in
1849 they were 213 ; and in 1850 they were 229."?(History of Civi-
lization,?-pp. 24, 27.)

Truly five years constitute a somewhat narrow basis of obser-
vation or illustration for so important a conclusion in respect to
the annual variations of suicide in the metropolis ! But letting
this pass, we would mention a remarkably interesting fact or two,
connected with the moral statistics of the great city, and which have
an immediate bearing upon Mr. Buckle's notions of suicide and
crime, although not mentioned by him. From 1701 to 1829 the
tendency to suicide in London remained nearly stationary, but
the tendency to commit murder rapidly decreased during the
same period. In the seventeenth century 4*6 murders occurred in
every 10,000 deaths from all causes; in the nineteenth century
only 0'5.* These results are obtained from the weekly Bills of
Mortality; they are but approximative, but they are quoted and
made use of on the authority of Dr Farr. If then suicide, the
product of a general state of society, is to be taken as an index of
that state from 1701 to 1829, it would appear that during that
period the said state underwent no very manifest change. But
murder as well as suicide, indeed crime in general, is said by Mr.
Buckle to be " the.result, not so much of the vices of the"indi-
vidual offender, as of the state of society into which the individual
is thrown."t ? Consequently the fixed character of the state of
* London Bills of Mortality.?Proportion of Deaths from Suicide and Murder
in 10,000 Deaths from all causes.

Suicide. Murder.
1647 to 1700 8.5 . 6.5
1701 ? 1749 16.2 3.4
1750 ? 1799 15.0 2.1
18.00 ? li329 _ 18.6 1.7

+ Mr. Buckle quotes (note p. 37) in support of this conclusion, Quetelet's state-
ment that " Experience demonstrates conclusively this opinion, which might seem
society?"theirresistible larger law"?governing suicide, is entirely
inconsistent with the progressive and constant change manifested
in the state of society governing and necessitating murder in the
same period. If then the " state of society " is to he regarded as
an equivalent term, as used by Mr. Buckle in reference to both
murder and suicide, we are reduced to the dilemma of believing
that each crime either comports itself in a fashion of its own
towards the general law, and modifies in a constant and regular
fashion the action of that law, in which case, what becomes of
Mr. Buckle's assertion of its irresistible character ? Or that
there is a general state of society peculiar to each crime, governed
by very different laws, and of which the crime is the product,
in which case the phrase may mean anything or nothing (as
we have already had occasion to remark), as may be most con-
venient.

paradoxical at the first sight, that it is society which prepares crime, and that the
criminal is but the instrument which executes it." (Sur I'Homme, L. iv. c. ii.) But
the word " society " is not used by Quetelet and by Mr. Buckle in the same sense.
In the sentence preceding that quoted, Quetelet says, that "since the crimes that
are annually committed seem to be a necessary, result of our social organization,
and that the number can diminish only as the causes which lead to them are pre-
viously modified, it is for legislators to recognise these causes, and remove them as
much as possible." Here social organization is used in the ordinary signification?
the moral actions of man being conceived to play a primary part in it; and legis-
lation would (as it does) refer as well to the moral as to the other causes which
concur in bringing about a social organization or state of society. But with Mr.
Buckle the moral acts of men become entirely subsidiary to the action of " what is
called Nature,"and they play an ambiguous disturbing effect, not a primary causa-
tive effect. Hence his notion of " society" is very different from Quetelet's, and the
signification to be attached to that writer's remarks widely varies from that which
Mr. Buckle would attach to them, and by the mode in which he quotes them, we re-
gret to say, seems to wish to convey to others. " We must not conclude," writes
Quetelet, "from what I have said, that all the actions of man, that all his ten-
dencies, are submitted to fixed laws ; and that consequently I suppose his free
will to be absolutely annihilated. In order to remove any misconception in
this respect, some explanations will be so much the more necessary, sinae they
will throw light upon the question of free-will, one of the most difficult and
most interesting questions that occur in the studies which occupy our attention,
If, for example, we consider the tendency to crime in man, we mark first that this
tendency depends upon his peculiar organization, his education, the circumstances
in which he is placed, as well as his free-will, to which I accord willingly the greatest
influence in modifying all his propensities .... As to the free-will, very far from
causing perturbations in the series of phenomena which occur with this admirable
regularity, it prevents them, on the contrary, in this sense, that it restrains the
limits within which the variations of our different propensities are manifested ....
Thus then, free-will, very far from interposing an obstacle to the regular production
of social phenomena, favours it on the conf rary. A people formed only of sages
would exhibit annually the most constant re mrrence of the same facts. This will
explain that which seems at first a paradox?that is to say, that social phenomena,
influenced by the free-will of man, proceed from year to year with greater regularity
than phenomena purely influenced by material and fortuitous causes." (Du Syst&me
Social, pp- 95?97.) Mr. Buckle regards free-will as a metaphysical figment;
he conceives this belief to be conclusively supported by statistics ; he is evidently
not -a statistician himself; yet the foregoing are the conclusions of his chief and
jnost highly-lauded statistical authority!

The key to Mr Buckle's specious and inconsequent argument
is to be found in the following propositions which precede it:?
"It is evident that, if it can be demonstrated that the bad actions
of men vary in obedience to the changes in the surrounding society,
we shall be obliged to infer that their good actions, which are, as
it were, the residue of their bad ones, vary in the same manner;
and we shall be forced to the other conclusion, that such varia-
tions are the result of large and general causes, which, working
upon the aggregate of society [mark the phraseology?causes
working upon society, therefore independent of] must pro-
duce certain consequences without regard to the volition of those
particular men of whom the society is composed.

" Such is the regularity we expect to find, if the actions of men
are governed by the state of the society in which they occur;
while on the other hand, if we can find no such regularity, ice may
believe that their actions depend on some capricious and personal
principle peculiar to each man, as freewill, or the like" (p. 21):?
That is, Mr. Buckle assumes, a priori, that the actions of men,
per Si?, are governed by no regular laws, and that they must, of
necessity, be manifested in " some capricious " manner ; but if it
be discovered by observation that the said actions are governed
by regular laws of recurrence, then it would follow that the cause
of the said laws must be something apart from, and independent of
the individual, consistently with the previous assumption of the
eccentricity of his special action. And if, moreover, it be further
discovered that there is a certain correspondence between changes
in the state of society, and the recurrence of certain actions of men,
those actions must be in obedience to (not simply concurrent with)
the changes in society. Then, murder and suicide being taken,
by Mr. Buckle, among other human acts, to illustrate his propo-
sitions, and he finding that murder and suicide are apparently
governed by regular laws of recurrence under given circumstances
of society, he at once concludes, in accordance with the proposi-
tions, that the regularity is due to the state of society, thus
explaining the facts of correspondence by his previous assump-
tion, and asserting the truth of his assumption by the facts which
he seeks to explain by it! Mr. Buckle first begs the principle
(the key of his entire method of reasoning) which it is necessary
to prove, with this principle thus begged he explains the facts he
considers, and then he assumes that the facts thus explained
demonstrate the principle !

And yet it is upon reasoning of this kind that Mr. Buckle seeks
to obtain assent to a conclusion which is equivalent to the
assertion that suicide is a ghoul-like necessity, against which
neither the individual nor the collective efforts of man can avail
anything ; and wherever Mr. Buckle's reasoning finds acceptance,
it may be anticipated that it will lead to an unfortunate indifference
to suicide in its social relations. Meriting neither praise nor
blame, and uninfluenced by moral restraints, the act must be sub-
mitted to as a disagreeable necessity of every-day life, and we
must accustom ourselves to it in the best way we can. And how
will this be brought about ? Shall we rest content to have this
revolting creation of a new Frankenstein hunting its victims day
by day to death among us in commonplace ghastly guise ? Surely
not. We shall strive to hide the most horrible features beneath a
profusion of conceits; we shall fence in the pathways of the
demon with a wealth of fanciful sentiment, and, it may be, we
shall end as many others have done (as we shall have in due time
to tell), by enshrining an image of him, and worshipping it. In
short, the pseudo-philosophy of Mr. Buckle tends towards the
same end?the same unhealthy tone of sentiment concerning
suicide, which is found to pervade the quotations which we have
given from French writers on the subject, and the more intricate
workings of which we have still to trace out.

Let us have a care. We have our present artists, who find a
charm in suicide; we have an apologist for the act in certainly
one of the most facile and attractive historical writers of the day;
and the prescriptions of both the law and the gospel in reference
to it are, in a great measure, unheeded. This is not a bad
starting-point and groundwork in favour of a reactionary move-
ment, sympathetic of suicide; and if we do not take heed, we
shall have our young men and maidens looking upon the deed as
a matter of feeling, and riot of morality. And so, in due time,
we should come to hear the legitimacy of suicide babbled of at
our fire-sides and in our workshops, while sympathy would
find an outlet in song. Would you have an example of the song ?
llead?

i.
Up, up, my page! and saddle quick,
And mount my fleetest steed,
And over field, and over fell,
To Duncan's castle speed.
Lurk in the stable till thou spy
Some horse-boy of the train,
Then ask him, which the bride may be
Of Duncan's daughters twain ?
And should he say, " The olive maid,"
Hide back without delay ;
But should he say, " The fair-haired girl,"
Then linger by the way.
Then hie thee to the ropeTyard, boy,
And purchase me a cord:
Ride slowly home, and give it me,
But do not speak a word.

II.
The suicide lies at the cross-roads,
Interr'd at the midnight hour;
And there a blue floweret blossoms?
The poor sinner's flower.
I stood at the cross-roads sighing ;
'Twas hard on the midnight hour;
There waved in the moonlight slowly
The poor sinner's flower.*
" Give me an ounce of civet, good apothecary, to sweeten my
imagination."
We have not reached the core of our subject, and yet we are at
the end of our space. We hope, however, at another time to
pursue our theme.
* Heinrich Heine's Book of Songs. Translated by John L. Willis. London :
1856.
