On the Obscure Mental Disorders of Criminals
==============================================

Abt. IV.-

The mental disorders of criminals are of singular interest, more
particularly those obscure affections which may he arranged as a
transition series between positive criminality on the one hand,
and criminality as the result of manifest insanity on the other.
Cases of this kind are distinguished, perhaps, more by the ano-
malous mode in which the vicious or criminal propensities are
manifested than in any other fashion; and their importance (as
yet, perhaps, not sufficiently recognised) can scarcely be exagge-
rated ; for, from the circumstances under which they are observed,
they offer to the psycopathist an excellent opportunity for the
careful and systematic study of many of those slight shadings off
of the healthy into the morbid action of the brain, which are all-
important in mental pathology and therapeutics. These cases,
moreover, are equally important to the medical jurist; for from
them, he may, with the greatest probability, hope to obtain many
satisfactory aids in the diagnosis of certain obscure forms of in-
sanity accompanied by criminal acts, for the want of which he is
not unfrequently placed at disadvantage in a court of law.
A prisoner confined in one of our large prisons is so situated
that he may be observed steadily and systematically, and the
conditions under which he is placed, and their influence upon
him, may be fully ascertained and accurately estimated. The evi-
dence, therefore, which would be obtained regarding obscure
mental affections under these circumstances might be expected
to have peculiar value ; and in its bearing upon the legal doctrines
of the responsibility of the insane, it would doubtless have great
weight, removed as it would be from the refracting medium of
the procedure of a court of law. No evidence probably would
more certainly and quickly operate with both the public and the
bar in inducing them to admit the justice of the proposition, that
when positive indications of the existence of a morbid state of
the mind are ascertained to exist in a prisoner at the bar, he
ought to be dealt with after a different fashion to the ordinary
criminal. Punishment in such cases is not only useless, but it
is commonly harmful; and if hopeless insanity be not determined
by it, it most probably will aggravate the vicious disposition of
the prisoner, and at the termination of his period of imprisonment
he will forthwith be guilty of other and more serious criminal
acts.

Prisoners of the class referred to require to be treated as lu-
natics and not as criminals, and their confinement should have
for object the testing of their true state of mind, and the adoption
of such means for relief as may be deemed necessary; while their
release should be made dependent, in a great measure, upon the
condition of the mind at the time.

In illustration of the foregoing remarks, and as a valuable con-
tribution to mental pathology, we may quote several cases of the
more obscure mental disorders of criminals which are recorded in
the recently published Reports of the Directors of Convict
Prisons in England, and also in Ireland.

Mr. Bradley, the able medical officer of the Pentonville prison,
reports the following cases:?

" W. G., aged 34, a labourer from Westmoreland, was tried afc
Worcester, on the 6th of March, 1854, and sentenced to four years' penal
servitude, for a burglary. He was first confined in the city of Wor-
cester Gaol, for about five months, and at his departure the governor
gave him a character to the following effect:?His conduct was
most refractory; he twice attempted to break out of his cell: he
smashed the windows; many times threatened the life of the governor
and surgeon; his ordinary language was too disgusting for repeti-
tion ; and, in short, he was the ' vilest brute' he ever had in custody
during a governorship of 35 years. From Worcester, the prisoner
was sent to Millbank, where he remained but a few weeks, and was
thence passed on to Pentonville. Here he was confined for upwards
of a year, during the whole of which period, his conduct was marked
by insubordination. He disturbed the prison, attempted an escape,
threatened the lives of the officers, and to carry out his threats devised
several weapons of very ingenious construction. When the term of
separate confinement had expired, he was removed to Portland, where,
as may be learned from his papers, he was, on account of highly
mutinous and insubordinate conduct, after about three months' deten-
tion, removed to Millbank Prison, to be placed in the penal class.
When he had been about five months in the last-named prison he
committed a murderous assault upon a warder, for which offence he
was sent to Newgate, tried at the Central Criminal Court, and sen-
tenced to transportation for life. In pursuance of this sentence, he
was, on the 14th April, 1856, sent to Pentonville for the second time.
On entering the prison, and while in that courtyard awaiting his
formal reception, he threatened, repeatedly that he would murder an
officer before the expiration of his imprisonment. His subsequent
conduct was very similar to what it was during his former imprison-
ment here. He opposed himself to the rules, and murmured at the
dietary, which he asserted was insufficient to maintain his strength.
Sometimes he pretended to be too weak to leave his bed, or that he
was actually at the point of death ; at other times he maintained that
immediate death was preferable to the completion of his sentence, and
begged that he might be put to death. All this time his bodily health
was good, and he retained his natural stoutness. The character
originally given him by the Governor of Worcester Gaol was, to a cer-
tain extent, confirmed ; for he appeared to be lazy and ill-conducted,
morose, bloody-minded, and an impostor. His term of imprisonment
in separation having expired, he would have been passed on to one of
the public works prisons, but that the whole tenor of his prison life
rendered it probable that insanity in a latent or unrecognised form
was present, although neither incoherence nor delusion was evident. It
was therefore considered advisable to recommend his removal to
Dartmoor, where he would be under medical observation while his
mental condition continued to be in an unsatisfactory state, and where
the discipline would be better suited to his case than that of the public
works. Before the necessary warrant arrived, he one day preferred a
request to be allowed some indulgences in addition to his diet, and
when this was refused as unreasonable, he savagely attacked the medical
officer, and stabbed him with a weapon he had previously constructed
for the purpose, which he had kept concealed in his coat sleeve,
wounding also two of the warders who came to the rescue. When
spoken to shortly afterwards on the serious nature of his offence, he
expressed no contrition, but, on the contrary, regretted that he had not
' killed the doctor,' as he had intended, alleging that for some time
past his food had been ' powdered' or poisoned by the medical officer's
orders. As this was manifestly an insane delusion, the prisoner was
placed in the infirmary, where he was visited by an ' expert' in
insanity, who pronounced him to be a proper subject for a lunatic
asylum. In accordance with this view of the case, in which I
fully concurred, the prisoner was, on the 9th of April, removed
to Bethlem Hospital, whence, after a detention of somewhat less
than five months, he was, on the 29th of August, sent back to
Pentonville. With murderous threats in his mouth, lavishing abuse
upon the establishment he had just left, and persisting in the story of
the ? powdered' food, his mental condition on readmission was but
little altered since I last saw him. As I was convinced from long-
continued observation of the case that the prisoner was still the subject
of mental affection, and unfit, therefore, for the discipline of the
prison, he was- recommended for removal to Dartmoor, whither he
was sent on the 7th of September, accompanied by a brief statement,
in order to put the authorities of that prison on their guard concerning
him. From Dartmoor I am informed he has been removed on account
of bad conduct to Millbank, where I believe he at present remains, and
in the penal class.

" I am fully persuaded that the above case should be regarded as
one of insanity, with homicidal tendency, an example of the mono-
manie homicide described by Esquirol, and as such to be rather a
subject for treatment in a properly-constructed hospital for lunatics,
than for the discipline of a prison

" W. W., aged 22, a carter and a reputed thief, was convicted at
the Bolton Sessions, October 6th, 1853, of larceny, after a previous
conviction, and was sentenced to six years' penal servitude. It ap-
peared from the Caption Papers that he was first confined for about six
months in the New Bailey Prison, where he was ' sullen,' ' idle ' ' in-
subordinate,' and was whipped for refusing to work. Thence he was
sent to Wakefield Prison, where his conduct during an imprisonment
of nine months was ? bad.' Thence to Portland, where he was de-
tained between 11 and 12 months, and where he obtained the follow-
ing character from the governor : ' very bad,' ' a most insubordinate
and idle prisoner J ' I fear incorrigible? From Portland he was re-
moved to Millbank. There he remained 15 months, during which
period his general conduct was ' bad,' and he was flogged for insubor-
dination. From Millbank he was passed on to Portsmouth. He
remained in the latter prison only 26 days, and was then, on account
of refusal to work and continuous insubordination, removed (on the
20th January last) to Pentonville, to undergo a third period of pro-
bation in separate confinement. During his imprisonment here his con-
duct was very similar to what it appears to have been in other prisons.
He was generally idle and insubordinate. At times he was violent,
smashing the windows, and threatening the lives of the officers.
Although no delusion was manifested, yet the silly laugh, the
motiveless misconduct, and other features of the case, sufficiently in-
dicated the existence of weakness or unsoundness of mind, and the
necessity for special treatment. The prisoner was placed in the infir-
mary, and put to associated labour. Subsequently (on the 22nd of
April) he was removed to Dartmoor, as an unfit subject for separate
confinement. He was visited and examined by Dr * * * *, who
gave an opinion to the effect that the mental condition of the prisoner
was such as to excite a grave suspicion as to his responsibility,
although the symptoms were not sufficiently pronounced to justify a
removal to a lunatic asylum.

" T. K., aged 17, convicted on the 3rd of November, 1856, of bur-
glary, and sentenced to six years' penal servitude, was received at
Pentonville, 6th April, 1857. He was a somewhat weak-minded lad
who, when he had been here about seven months, exhibited con-
siderable excitement, and gave way to paroxysms of ungovernable
violence. Under suitable moral treatment in the infirmary, where he
received special attention from the schoolmaster, he became orderly
and tractable, and at present encourages a hope of amendment and
recovery.

" H. W., a prisoner of sullen disposition, when he had been exactly
a month in the prison, contrived to open a vein in his arm with a
steel pen, avowedly with a suicidal intention. A second time he re-
sorted to a similar proceeding; and when means were adopted to
prevent him from inflicting injuries of this kind on himself, he
threatened to starve himself, and for several days refused food, until
at length, finding that nourishment was about to be administered by
means of the stomach-pump, his resolution forsook him, and he took
his meals in a natural manner. He was treated for some time in the
infirmary in association, and subsequently was removed to Dartmoor
as an unfit subject for separate confinement.

" P. D., received on the 17th of September from Dartmoor, was
removed to Millbank as an unfit subject for the discipline of
this prison, at the first convenient opportunity after his reception.
The prisoner, aged 24, had been a private in the Poyal Marines. He
was tried on the 28th of September, 1854, by a general court-martial,
and sentenced to 14 years' transportation, for striking his serjeant.
In pursuance of his sentence he was first sent to Maidstone Gaol.
His conduct there was violent and disorderly, and after a detention of
four months he was pronounced to be mad, and was removed to
Bethlem. He was confined as a lunatic there and at Fisherton for
about a year and three quarters, and was then re-conveyed to Maid-
stone Gaol. He remained two months in Maidstone, was again pro-
nounced to be mad, and was again placed in Bethlem Hospital.

After the lapse of five weeks he was discharged thence as sane, and
removed to Millbank. At Millbank he was detained about six weeks.
His conduct during that period was ' bad,' and he is said to have
feigned an attempt at suicide. He was then removed to Portland,
where his conduct for two months was ' very bad.' He attempted
suicide, and was sent to Dartmoor. At Dartmoor he used threatening
language, violently assaulted the officers, and was then, after three
months' detention, removed to Pentonville, to undergo a period of
probation in separate confinement.

" Such is a bare outline of this case, obtained from the prisoner's
papers. Prom the time of his reception into Pentonville until his
removal he conducted himself in so frantic a manner as to raise a
grave suspicion of his sanity, independent of his previous history,
which I think sufficiently shows that he was at all events an unfit
subject for the discipline of separate confinement."

Upon three of these cases Mr. Bradley makes the following
pertinent remarks:?

" The above case, that of W. G., and the two cases immediately
following it, possess many features in common, and differ from each
other but little, I believe, except in degree. They illustrate a pecu-
liar class of prisoners received into Pentonville and the convict prisons
at the present time. ' Prisoners of the class referred to are charac-
terized by inveterate idleness, obstinacy, and insubordination, by gross
and apparently motiveless misconduct. They are at intervals violent,
and smash everything within reach. They assault officers, disturb
the prison by shouting, and set all order at defiance. Some are also
intractable malingerers ; others threaten or attempt suicide. Such
men occupy as it were a neutral territory between crime and insanity,
oscillating from one to the other, until at length in some cases inco-
herence or delusion becomes apparent, the mental equilibrium is per-
ceived to be lost, and they fall obviously into the domain of insanity;
in other cases the mental condition continues doubtful, and in the
prisons they are as often regarded as 1 cracked' or crazy as they are in
the lunatic asylums as criminals and impostors. On these the autho-
rized prison punishments are found to be worse than useless, and the
existing systems of discipline, whether 'separate' or associated, appear
to be productive of little benefit. To deal effectively with them
before actual insanity is established, a special and peculiar discipline is
needed ; for, so far as my experience extends, separate confinement is
not attended by any good result; and as they are frequently sent back
to us from the public works, it would seem that the discipline there
is equally fruitless."

Dr Maurice Oorr, the medical superintendent of the Philips-
town Government Prison (Ireland), reports that during the last
eighteen months he had been under the necessity of recommending
that fourteen convicts should be transferred to a lunatic asylum.
Several of the patients were entitled to their discharge at the
time of their removal to the Central Asylum, and of these cases
we are told that they had not expressed any desire for liberty,
notwithstanding a lengthened imprisonment and frequent punish-
ment ; neither had they shown any regret under severe privations,
nor any inclination to amend.

The following cases are quoted from the Appendix to Dr.
Corr's Report:?

" J. H., sentenced to ten years' transportation, October, 1850. Trans-
ferred to Central Asylum, October, 1856. Entitled to discharge, on
commuted sentence, October, 1856.
" Noted on committal sheet to Philipstown.?' Violent, mischievous,
and very easily excited.' Character at Philipstown.?Extremely ec-
centric. Conduct at Philipstown.?He was invariably insolent to his
superiors; disobedient to the utmost ; addicted to inordinate fits of
laughter, particularly during Divine Service, for which reason he was,
at length, kept from attending chapel; repeatedly violent to officers
and prisoners, rendering it necessary to retain him in almost continuous
separation, which did not appear to annoy him in the least. After
constant and careful surveillance I could not arrive at other conclusion
than that this prisoner was of unsound mind, that he offered no hope
of improvement while retained in separation, and that it would be
extremely dangerous to place him in association."

"J. L., sentenced to seven years' transportation, October, 1852.
Transmitted to Central Asylum, January, 1857. Entitled to discharge
on commuted sentence, October, 1856. He-committed to Philipstown
from Central Asylum, December, 1857.

" Character at Philipstown.?Treacherous, excitable to dangerous
violence, insolent, disobedient, and not to be trusted in association.
Conduct at Philipstown.?Attempted to commit suicide, when detected
in a plan to assault an officer; assaulted a warder with a trussel, another
with a stone, the deputy-governor with a bucket?all these attacks
being most treacherous; severely wounded one of a class of prisoners,
at whom he flung a brick, and, although unobserved in the act, he
voluntarily admitted it; stealthily, at night, endeavoured to burn his
clothes by placing them in the stove fire; subject to outbreaks of
passion approaching to frenzy, during which it was absolutely neces-
sary, for his self-preservation, to place and retain him under restraint.
His demeanour and conversation were remarkably strange in hospital,
where he was, on two occasions, treated for violent pain in his head.
In general, he obstinately refused to attend Divine Service. Such were
some of the grounds on which I concluded that ' J. L. laboured under
dangerous mental aberration, ivith periodical Jits of insanitya con-
clusion not unnatural when dealing with, a prisoner (if his conduct had
been exemplary) entitled to discharge, who patiently endured repeated
separations, personal restraint, low diet, &c., and who never expressed
a wish or desire for his liberty. This prisoner, in two days after his
arrival at Philipstown from the Central Asylum, made use of violent
and obscene language to a warder, for which misconduct he was placed
in a punishment cell where he remains up to this date, 11th January."
" J. R., sentenced to seven years' transportation, July, 1853. Trans-
ferred to Central Asylum, September, 1857. Entitled to discharge on
commuted sentence, July, 1857.

" Character at Philipstown.?Treacherous, violent, dangerous ; showed
unmistakable signs of approaching fits, such as doggedness, refusal of
food, eccentric conduct at exercise, hatred of those around him, &c.
Conduct at Philipstown.?Repeated outbreaks of treacherous violence;
broke windows, buckets, and articles within reach; tore up bed clothes
and wearing apparel; made nuisance in cell, daubed the walls with
it; assaulted officers ; blasphemed loudly for hours ; attempted to break
out of cell; wore his clothes in a peculiar way ; continually picked and
scratched his private parts ; prone to destroy walls and furniture.
During lucid intervals spoke most rationally, so as to deceive strangers
as to his real state, displaying considerable powers of reasoning;
evincing desire for books, chiefly scriptural, which after a time he
suddenly tore to pieces; invariably declined clerical advice; ivasper-
fectly indifferent regarding his liberty, though well aware that his
detention resulted from his own misconduct, and recoiled at mention of
being restored to his friends. Trials at association failed, owing to his
frequent treacherous assaults on officers and prisoners. He was kept
in separate confinement for twelve months up to his removal to Cen-
tral Asylum. I considered him to be a dangerous lunatic."
" J. D., or H., sentenced to ten years' transportation, June, 1851.
Transferred to Central Asylum, August, 1856. Entitled to discharge
on commuted sentence, June, 1857.

" Marked on committal sheet to Philipstown.?' Supposed malingerer.'
Character at Philipstown.?Remarkably silent, melancholy, morose,
very quarrelsome when roused, even by speaking to him. Conduct at
Philipstown. Had the habit of sitting for continuous hours on the
sill oi his cell window, shouting incessantly and becoming most violent
when any attempt was made to remove him; would suddenly scatter
and destroy his food, and, if remonstrated with by the warders, became
dangerously excited, making desperate attempts to assault the parties
present, succeeding, on one such occasion, in wounding the chief
warder. After matured observation I considered it extremely danger-
ous to permit this prisoner into association. I looked upon him to be
dangerously insane at intervals. I foresaw no prospect of amendment
in separation.

" The inspectors of Lunatic Asylums state, in their Report for 1855-7
that 1D. is passionate, of very limited understanding; is of un-
sound mind, is a case for detention.' "
" W. if., sentenced to seven years' transportation, July, 1853.
72 ON THE OBSCURE MENTAL DISORDERS OF CRIMINALS.
Entitled to discharge on commuted sentence, July, 1857. Remains at
Philipstown.

" Character noted on committal sheet to Philipstown.?' Repeatedly
punished for insolence?for assaulting officers?afterwards considered
to be of unsound mind.' Character at Philipstown.?While tranquil
he continually laughs like a fool; gives incoherent answers ; appears
to have extraordinary ideas about religion; retained from attending
Divine Service, in consequence of his unruly conduct during it; sub-
ject to frequent fits of extreme violence. Conduct at Philipstown.?
Assaulted officers; destroyed windows, bed-furniture, and body-clothes ;
passed urine and excrement on floor of cell. It has been found neces-
sary to retain this prisoner in uninterrupted separation during the last
twelve months, no appearance of amendment being observed, while he
repeatedly offered such violence as to require personal restraint, reduc-
tion of diet, &c.?treatment endured without a remark and with
evident indifference. He never alludes to his protracted separation;
to his loss of commutation of sentence ; nor speaks of his liberty. I
certified that he was of unsound mind, subject to frequent paroxysms
of dangerous lunacy."

"T. M'L., sentenced to four years' penal servitude, January, 1855.
Transferred to Central Asylum, September, 1856.
" Noted on committal sheet to Philipstown.?' Is extremely violent
when excited; is at all times most insolent; has been for a long time
in separation, under medical surveillance.' Character at Philipstown.?
He was exceedingly quarrelsome and easily excited to violence
when checked ; was an habitual blasphemer, an everlasting talker. His
conduct at Philipstown brought on him repeated punishments with
continued separation, of which he seemed perfectly regardless. His
habits, previously to his conviction, were extremely intemperate, and
led to frequent punishments for drunkenness. After continuous close
observation, while he was in and out of separation, I concluded that he
could not, with'safety, be left in association ; that lie was subject to fre-
quent aberrations of mind, which rendered him irresponsible for his acts ;
that, therefore, he should be deprived of opportunity to commit assaults,
even though his insane paroxysms were interrupted by lucid intervals?
a fact that, under all the circumstances of his case, including his
former intemperance, induced me to recommend his transfer to the
Asylum, as presenting favourable prospects of recovery."

Dr Corr further informs lis that the Philipstown Prison?
" Contains, under medical observation, a class rather numerous, of
weak-minded, passionate, irresponsible convicts, who, without pre-
senting decided symptoms of lunacy, are absolutely unfit for asso-
ciated prisons, by reason of their dangerous propensities, easily-
excited violence, and constant retention of officers and prisoners in fear
of their temper and irregularities. Such a class is entirely unsuited to
undergo the mildest form of discipline, against which each, after his
own fashion, offers resistance, more or less violent. The sane portion
of the prison population act in various ways towards men so affected,
and help thereby to weaken discipline. The consequences are ine-
vitable?the class referred to must be locked up in separation, and thus
a case, in its incipient stage quite curable, steals along, under such
treatment, into confirmed lunacy."

Mr. Awly Banon, the medical officer of the Grangegorman Fe-
male Prison, in his report upon the sanitary and medical condi-
tion of that prison, refers to a series of cases of doubtful lunacy
occurring among the female convicts, in the following words :?
" In my report for the year 1856, there occurs the following para-
graph :?'There is a class amongst the convicts with whom I find it very
difficult to deal; I allude to those who, though they cannot be pronounced
actually insane, are of such defective mental organization as to render
them, in my opinion, not wholly responsible for the violence and
excitement they too often exhibit. Of this class there are about six
at present in the prison, two or three of whom require restraint and
occasional separation.' My attention during the year has been par-
ticularly directed to some of these women, whose conduct has given
considerable trouble. Two of them, especially J. D. and E. P., were
very frequently brought before the Directors for violent and outrageous
conduct, the former frequently assaulting lier fellow-prisoners, and
even the matrons, without any apparent motive or cause whatever.
This woman had been sent up from Cork Prison on the 12th May, 1857,
to Newgate Prison, where she remained, until transferred to Grange-
gorman on the 18th July, 1857. Her conduct in Cork, Newgate,
and Grangegorman, has been throughout bad ; kindness or punishment
being equally unavailing in correcting her in the slightest degree. The
other prisoner, E. P., has been in Grangegorman for nearly three years,
and she also has very often been equally violent, breaking the glass in
her cell, and giving way to fits of passion without the slightest reason,
over which she seems not to have the least control, but soon afterwards
expressing her contrition. Under these circumstances, I have been fre-
quently referred to, as to whether these women are proper subjects for
punishment, or whether I consider them unaccountable for their conduct
from defective intellect, and therefore fit subjects for transfer to the
Criminal Lunatic Asylum. Not having been able, on frequent and careful
examination, as yet to detect any symptoms of insanity, other than those
already mentioned, I have, up to this time, declined to certify for their
transfer, but continue to have them under constant observation, with a
view to their ultimate disposal. Their punishments are generally
modified, being principally confined to restraint, by the wearing of the
new jacket for a short period ; their physical strength not being such as-
to justify, for any lengthened period, their being placed on bread and
water. It is but natural to suppose, that amongst so many, we must
expect to meet with some few cases calculated to give embarrassment,,
and I cannot now give any other suggestions for the better manage-
ment of these women, than to continue to keep them under constant
surveillance and medical treatment when necessary ; and should either
of them exhibit further symptoms of insanity, to have her at once
transferred to the lunatic asylum. One or two others amongst the
convicts exhibit symptoms of weak intellect, but not one of the trouble-
some character of those above mentioned. One of them, M. A., whose
commuted term of imprisonment expired, refuses to tell who her
friends are, and is frequently found muttering to herself, and showing,
by other symptoms, that she is decidedly of unsound mind. I think the
best course, in her case, would be to send her to the district Lunatic
Asylum on being discharged from prison, should her friends not be
forthcoming."

In what manner prisoners of doubtful sanity should be dealt
with becomes a question of very considerable importance. It is
evident, from the cases which we have related, that imprisonment,
whether of the associate or the separate character, aggravates., as
a rule, the morbid condition of mind, and fails altogether of its
proper effects. Dr Maurice Corr suggests the establishment of
an institution, intervening in character between a prison and an
asylum, and conducted on the principles of a lunatic asylum. An
institution so constituted, he conceives (referring particularly to
Ireland), would offer the following advantages:?

" I. It would relieve pressure on the Central Asylum, by pro-
viding certain moral and medical tests for convicts who appear to
be deranged, as to the reality of their symptoms, whether of
idiocy, lunacy, or insanity; and thus, with the most feasible pro-
spect of detecting malingerers, it would be sure to produce fair
results in doubtful cases,

"II. It would secure the best chance of recovery in hopeful
cases.

" III. It would afford ample opportunity for the application of
reformatory treatment to all of those classes."

We entirely concur in the suggestion of Dr Corr, and we be-
lieve that ah institution of the character he mentions is as much
required in England as in Ireland. The lunatic hospitals in
London do not supply the need, and in the provinces the great
county and the borough hospitals cannot be made available for
doubtful cases of lunacy. The projected erection of a state lunatic
asylum affords an admirable opportunity for the formation in
connexion with it, either as a portion of that building or as a
separate building, of a prison for the reception of criminals of
doubtful sanity. Such a prison, duly regulated, would become a
state hospital for cases of incipient or suspected lunacy among
offenders; and its establishment would not only secure the
advantages mentioned by Dr Corr, but it would also put an end
to those unsatisfactory and painful instances of frequent change
from prison to asylum, from asylum to prison, and from prison
to prison, shown in the cases, recorded by Mr. Bradley, of W. G-.,
W. W., and E. D.
