Hysteria in Connexion With the Belfast Revival
================================================

612
AivT. IX.?
/
The revival of religion that is still progressing in the North of
Ireland has been attended by many instances of the nervous dis-
orders which appear to be almost inseparable from similar move-
ments ; and we lind, in the pamphlet before us, a praiseworthy endea-
vour to explain, to the clergy and parents, the line of demarcation
between the beneficial effects of awakened religious feeling and the
rhapsodies of hysterical or cataleptic ecstasy.
Our readers will not require to be told that, in nearly all the
"revivals" upon record, certain phenomena indicative of diseases of
the nervous system have been manifested by many individuals. On
such occasions the widely-spread rumours of miraculous conversions
and beatific visions exercise a magnetic effect upon the weak and
credulous, and attract to the camp meetings, the out-door preachings,
or other centres of excitement, a large proportion of persons who are
prepared to surrender themselves to any morbid impulse. As the busi-
ness of such meetings proceeds, the vehement language from the
pulpit, the exclamations or lamentations of some among the wor-
shippers, and the notoriety accorded to conspicuous " cases," combine to
produce all the most efficient excitants of hysteria; and are too frequently
followed by some of its Protean forms, and some of its direful conse-
quences. Most commonly, as, for instance, among the early Metho-
dists, and in the revival which took place in America at the beginning of
the present century, the instances of hysteria have been hailed as
special manifestations of Divine grace; and the slaves of the most
self-seeking of all diseases have been regarded as the elect saints of
God. From the vantage ground of such a position they have been
able to repel the scrutiny of scientific observers, to avoid any close in-
spection of the morbid phenomena really occurring, and to perfect any
scheme of imposture that might tend to inflame the fervid ignorance,
or to refresh the waning zeal, of the enthusiasts by whom they were
surrounded. The medical records of these cases are therefore ex-
tremely meagre; and physicians, aware of the profligacy and insanity
to which any large aggregate of hysteria must give rise, have probably
placed themselves too much in a position of antagonism to great re-
ligious movements as a whole; so as to lose, in some measure, the
confidence of the communities that such movements sway; and to
forfeit the power of indicating and controlling mere physical disease,
which it should be the province of their profession to exert.
Such was lately the state of affairs at Belfast. Catalepsy, and cata-
leptic ecstasy, were matters of frequent occurrence at certain places of
worship, and were daily on the increase. Mill-girls were praying to
* Th? W.ork ?.d ^ Counterwork, or the Religious Eevival in Belfast, with
an Explanation of the Physical Phenomena. By Edward A. Stopford, Arclidea-
8V0; PP' ,#t D"bli": Wsmilh, * &
HYSTERIA IN CONNEXION WITH THE BELFAST REVIVAL. G13
be "struck." The best " eases " were obtaining a comfortable main-
tenance by relating their visions to daily levees of admiring auditors.
The clergy, of all denominations, were wholly unprepared for the
emergency, were ignorant, speaking generally, of what it was they wit-
nessed, and do not appear to have imagined that medical men could
have any special knowledge of the causes in operation, or any special
duties with regard to the effects produced. Indeed, in the words of a
correspondent, all the pious ladies of Belfast would have combined to
destroy the practice of a doctor who had expressed a doubt of the
Divine origin of the prevailing visitations.
At this conjuncture, Archdeacon Stopford had the discernment to
perceive the nature of the physical effects produced by the popular ex-
citement, and the courage to call these effects by their right name.
His pamphlet is not less remarkable for its cordial recognition of the
devotional movement, than for its indignant denunciation of the
attendant hysteria; and is therefore calculated to eliminate the evil
from the good, or, as the Archdeacon phrases it, the tares from the
wheat, without alarming the prejudices, or alienating the sympathies,
of the most ardent Presbyterian or Methodist. He traces some of the
attacks of hysteria clearly enough to the abuse of certain pulpit arts,
to the reiteration of hell, hell, hell?the accumulation of a depressing
emotion, for which no outlet was provided in active thought or prac-
tical duty ; and others to the kindred but more gradual operation of
the mental atmosphere of the locality ; and he describes the nature and
tendencies of the disease with sufficient clearness to disabuse any candid
mind of the supposition that it can ever, under any circumstances, be
used as an instrument of good. What is still more important, he
points out the manner in which the clergy may so control their congre-
gations as to prevent such outbreaks for the future. Upon these and
other parts of the subject, our space does not allow of quotations at
sufficient length to do justice to the author ; and we must be content
most cordially to recommend the pamphlet itself to the attentive
perusal of our readers. Among other benefits likely to result from its
timely publication, we hope that facilities will be afforded for the
medical examination of any cases of catalepay that may still occur ;
and that the present revival may be so studied, in its physical aspects,
as to throw fresh light upon the most obscure portion of nervous
pathology.
It is only necessary to add, that Archdeacon Stopford's pamphlet
has now gone through three editions; and that, in the last of these,
some trifling inaccuracies on points of physiological detail have been
either corrected or removed.
NO. XVI.?NEW SERIES. S S
