On Puerperal Insanity
======================

Art. II.?

We have selected the comprehensive title of " Puerperal Insanity,
as the heading to some observations on unsoundness of mind
especially attached to the puerperal state, in preference to that of
puerperal mania, which, although much more frequently used, is
certainly imperfect; inasmuch as mania is only one of the various
forms assumed by the intellectual disorder, which so frequently
supervenes during this period. In the outset we would state that
the period to which we here allude as the " puerperal," extends, in
our plan, from the moment of conception to about a fortnight
after the cessation of lactation; or, in the absence of this latter
function, to about two months or ten weeks after delivery. And
this period admits of a natural division into three minor ones,
during which the mental disorder is characterized by phenomena
and reactions sufficiently marked?viz., (1) the period of preg-
nancy ; (2) that of delivery and six weeks succeeding; and (3)
that of lactation and a week or ten days subsequently. During each
of these sub-periods mental disorder may supervene, due to the
physiological and quasi-pathological condition ; and may assume
the forms of mania, melancholia, hallucinations, illusions, and
partial delirium (or monomania). These forms are generally
admitted by writers ; we venture to add to them acute dementia?
an illustration of which we shall give from our own note-book, in
due course. Dementia, in a chronic form, has been allowed by
some authors to form a certain proportion of the cases.
In attempting to give a view, as comprehensive as our limits
will permit, of the present state of our knowledge of this difficult
section of morbid psychology, we propose in some measure to
follow the plan of M. Marce, a recent French writer on this sub-
ject, whose contributions have been for some years appearing from
time to time in the Continental journals; and who has now
collected them, with additions, into one compendious treatise.*
We shall avail ourselves largely of his valuable collection of data,
* Traite de la Eolie des Femmes Enceintes, des nouvelles accoucMes, et des
nourices ; et considerations medico-legales qui se rattaclient & ce sujet. Par le Dr.
L. V. Marc?. Paris, 1858.

and add such observations from other sources as may seem desir-
able for further illustration.

M. Esquirol remarks (in 1819) that although much had been
written concerning the diseases to which women recently confined
were liable, and the consequences of the supposed metastasis of
the lacteal secretion, yet very little had been said on the subject
of the mental maladies which make their appearance after delivery,
or during lactation; and in a brief memoir he treats upon the
frequency, the causes, the nature, and the treatment, of these
affections. For long after this, however, writers passed hastily
over the subject, only enumerating the puerperal state as one
frequent cause of mental unsoundness. We have before us one
systematic work on insanity, of no very ancient date, in which
the whole of this branch of our science is passed over in seven or
eight lines.

And yet it would appear that puerperal insanity was well
worthy of separate study, whether from the frequency of its occur-
rence, the gravity of its character, its clearly-marked etiological
relations, its amenability to treatment, or lastly, its important
legal bearings.

There are many reasons why it is difficult to determine with
any approach to accuracy the absolute number, or the relative
proportions, of these diseases to the number of persons confined.
In private obstetric practice such cases are not generally made
known; the friends of the sufferer naturally wish it to be kept secret;
and the medical attendant in the majority of cases has no interest
in keeping the statistics of his practice with any accuracy. It
would appear that in institutions devoted to lying-in women,
there would be no difficulty in arriving at some definite conclu-
sions ; but here the case is even worse, for instead of having
no data, we get incorrect ones?from this cause, that in such
places, the women generally only remain about a fortnight after
delivery; whereas insanity may occur a month or six weeks
after this period; and, where the child is suckled, it may occur
at any period during lactation. Hence arises the discrepancy of the
accounts, and the generally small stated proportions of such cases
to the whole number of deliveries. Dr lieid stated in this journal,
in 1848, that out of 3500 women confined at the General Lying-in
Hospital in Westminster, where the patients remained three
weeks after delivery, only nine were attacked with insanity. At
Queen Charlotte's Lying-in Hospital, in 2000 cases there were 11
of insanity; this greater proportion was considered due to the
greater number of unmarried females admitted here. In two other
collections of cases we meet with 950 in which no instance of
insanity, and 1888 in which only one occurred, which was very
soon cured.

When we inquire into the proportion which puerperal insanity
hears to the other forms, we are enabled to arrive at some definite
results. M. Esquirol states, in the memoir before mentioned, that
at the Salpetriere from one-twelfth to one-tenth of the females
there received are affected with puerperal insanity. In 1119
women there were 92 such cases ; in 1812 and 1813 there were
60 in 600 cases. In private practice the proportion is still larger,
the same authority giving the numbers are 21 in 144 cases. At
Bethlehem, during five years, there were 111 cases of puerperal
insanity out of the entire number of 899 women admitted. Other
statistics are as follows?the periods of admission not specified
Entire Number of Cases of Puerperal
Females admitted. Insanity.

Hanwell ... ... ... 703 ... ... 79
Keported by Dr Macdonald 691 ... ... 49
By M. Parchappe ... ... 596 ... ... 33
By M. Leller ... ... 97 ... ... 11
By Dr Webster ... ... 282 ... ... 17
By Dr Kirkbride ... ... 2752 ... ... 116
By M. Mitivie ... ... 242 ... ... 9

Summing up these, and many other details, we find that about
one-twelfth part of the women who are received as insane into
asylums, are so in consequence of the puerperal condition, or as
a sequel to it.

It is next proper to inquire at what period of the puerperal
state these cases occur. Bearing in mind the division into sub-
periods above noticed, we find that by far the greater number of
cases occur in the second, or that immediately after delivery, and
in the next six weeks. In the 92 cases mentioned by Esquirol,
54 occurred in this period, and 38 during lactation. In a report
from Hanwell, in this journal, in 1848, 43 cases were mentioned,
of which 4 occurred in the first period (pregnancy), 26 in the
second, and 13 in the third, or suckling period. Dr Macdonald
found, in 60 cases, 4 in the first period, 44 in the second, and 18
in the third. M. Marce, in 79 cases, found 18 developed during
pregnancy, 41 after confinement, and 20 during lactation. M.
Marce has collected 310 cases from various authors, which are
thus distributed:?

Developed during pregnancy ... ... ... 27
After confinement ... ... ... ... ... 180
During lactation   103
Total 310

In forming a judgment upon these statistics it must not be for-
gotten that the absolute number of women confined is much
larger than that of those who suckle. The influence of lacta-
tion, therefore, is not fully shown by such relative proportions
as the above.

After these preliminary considerations we shall proceed to offer
some observations upon these cases of insanity in chronological
order; and first upon those occurring during pregnancy. During
30 or 35 years of female life, the uterus and its functions exercise
a most powerful and important influence, not only over the
animal economy, but also over the moral and intellectual nature.
This influence is very specially marked during pregnancy, when
the entire nervous system frequently acquires an excessive
mobility and sensitiveness to all impressions?evidenced by
vomitings, syncopes, cramps, and vertigo; occasionally partial
paralysis, deafness, amaurosis, chorea, epilepsy, and hysterical
crisis. The moral nature indicates its subjection to the same
influence by an unwonted excitement of the faculties, or more
frequently by a tendency to extreme depression and discourage-
ment. This is in many cases purely psychical, but not ill all. In
primiparse especially, there are many physical causes?such as the
important changes in life, residence, occupations, &c.; in these,
also, pregnancy is not always a happy event; but, even amongst
those who have every cause for rejoicing, the same depression
will often occur, and one fixed idea will often take possession of
the mind. There is a strong conviction of a fatal termination,
or there is a fear of some deformity in the child, &c. At the
same time the digestive functions are disordered, the respiration
and circulation are troubled, sleep is broken and disturbed, and
there is a tendency to fainting. On the other hand, some na-
turally melancholic women present a strange excitement and
gaiety during this period. The singular tastes and propensities
manifested at such times are too familiar to require notice ; but
some of the recorded cases are sufficiently curious to merit quo-
tation. Vandermonde (quoted by M. Marce) relates the case of
a woman who became hydrophobic during the first four months
of each of her eleven pregnancies. Soon after conception she
began to drink very little, and by-and-bye the horror of fluids
was so great, that she could neither drink herself, nor could she
bear others to drink in her presence. To cross a running stream
was almost impossible to her. M. Cazeux relates the case of a
young lady, primipara, who, during her pregnancy, felt the most
unconquerable aversion to her husband, whom at other times she
most tenderly loved; and of another, who took so decided an
antipathy to her home, that she had to go into the country to be
confined, in spite of all the efforts of her reason.

All these peculiarities are not insanity; they are moreover
marked by one favourable characteristic?viz., that they, for the
most part, diminish or disappear as pregnancy advances, and
very rarely last after delivery, or pass into insanity at that
period. M. Marce states that out of 79 cases of disturbed in-
tellect during labour, he only found six who had exhibited any
well-marked peculiarities during pregnancy. This furnishes an
excellent index for treatment. To correct by the mildest means
any marked somatic disorder, to prescribe moderate exercise, and
a careful moral hygiene, are the principal points to be kept in
view?always remembering that, in a short time, nature will in
all probability effect its cure, if not too officiously interfered
with, or disturbed by so-called remedies too potent for the
occasion.

But these intellectual disturbances may pass into veritable in-
sanity ; and between the one form and the other there are innu-
merable gradations, of which it is often difficult to say to which
category they belong. M. Marce has some remarks on this
point, which are valuable :?

" There is one point which has struck us, and which, we believe,
may aid th'e physician in his diagnosis; it is, that the tendency to
sadness, and all the modifications of character and intelligence with
which we meet at the outset of pregnancy, become, in general, less
and less marked as this advances, and especially after passing the
third month. Now, we observe exactly the contrary in the facts of
true mental alienation. Setting aside those cases, where conception
gives immediately the signal for the outbreak of insanity, this does
not generally appear until after the third month?more frequently
the sixth or seventh; and it does not in general disappear during
pregnancy at all."

Two observations, by the same writer, are worthy of notice,
in reference to the causes of the insanity of pregnant women;
the first is that, after heritage, moral influences of a painful
character are amongst the most frequent causes?such as cir-
cumstances requiring a concealment (were it possible) of the
pregnancy. The second is, that this form of insanity is not so
frequent amongst primiparae as amongst those who have had two
or three children. At the same time he states that the number
of his own observations is too small to make this a well-ascer-
tained conclusion.

A previous attack seems to predispose to a recurrence. Some-
times the attacks occur with alternate pregnancies; some are
only observed with male children; and many other varieties are
noticeable. The precise time of the outbreak is variable ; some-
times it is truly and strictly sympathetic j* the appearance of the
mental disorder is synchronous with conception, and its disap-
pearance with delivery. At other (and more frequent) times the
* The word "sympathetica3 here made use of, requires a little definition
being intended to imply something more specific than its usual significance. We
call one affection sympathetic with another, when it is strictly coincident with it as
to commencement and termination ; when the two appear clearly to stand in the
relation of cause and effect; and sublatd causd, tollitur effectus. Thus a lady ex
sympathy is imperfect, and the disorder appears from tlie third
to the seventh month.

The form assumed by the mental disorder is in the majority
of cases melancholy, with tendency, it may "be, to suicide, with
or without hallucinations. In other cases the form is maniacal.
It may he stated here that whatever is the special type of in-
sanity of puerperal women, occurring at any period, whether
mania, melancholia, partial delusions, or dementia, these differ
in no respect from the corresponding form occurring in the non-
puerperal condition. Dr Gooch remarks, that " if a physician
was taken into the chamber of a patient, whose mind had he-
come deranged from lying-in or nursing, he could not tell, from
the mere condition of the mind, that the disease had originated
in these causes." M. Marce says also : " Disons seulement que
rien dans les symptomes, la marche et la physionomie de ces
deux maladies (mania and melancholia) chez la femme enceinte,
ne permet de la distinguer des maladies de meme nature ob-
servees dans des conditions ordinaires de sante." Dr Macdo-
nald," however, considers that there is one sign which attaches
especially to puerperal insanity:?" In the acute form of the
mania which succeeds parturition we observe an intensity of
mental excitement, an excessive incoherence, a degree of fever,
and, above all, a disposition to mingle obscene words with
the broken sentences?things which are rarely noted under other
circumstances. It is true that in mania modest women use
words which in health are never permitted to issue from their
lips; but, in puerperal insanity, this is so common an occurrence,
and is done in so gross a manner, that it early struck me as
being characteristic." Dr Campbell also remarks, that the pa-
tient, " though remarkably devout when sane, now launches out
into such a torrent of obscene language, that one would be as-
tonished that respectable females could have become familiar
with such expressions." These peculiarities belong more espe-
cially to the form of mania which succeeds confinement.
The prognosis of these cases of true derangement is very
uncertain. It is unfortunately not the case that they terminate
periences at each menstrual period violent pains in the face and neck ; a fibrous
tumour of the uterus is detected and removed, and the neuralgia disappears entirely.
Esquirol attended a young lady^ who became deranged on a suppression of the
menses, and was restored immediately they began to flow again. Guislain relates
the case of a girl who had prolapsus of the uterus, and who was affected with the
most profound sadness, with tendency to suicide, whenever the neck of the uterus
presented itself at the opening of the vagina. Such cases as these are illustrations
of what we call complete sympathy: those in which the mental affection lasts much
beyond the organic disease, or physical cause, or where it ceases whilst such causes
are still in operation, are examples of imperfect sympathy. Cases of the former
class are much more favourable as to prognosis and indications of treatment than
the latter.

* "Journal of Psychological Medicine," No. 3, p. 584-5.
with delivery in more than about one-third of the number. In
M. Marce's 19 cases 7 terminated at this period, or near it; but
4 of these cases were purely sympathetic?that is, had begun
at the period of conception ; such as these may generally be ex-
pected to terminate thus favourably. It is rare that an attack of
insanity begins and ends within one pregnancy. M. Esquirol
relates one case, and Madame Boivin another; besides these, M.
Marce has not met with any.* In the majority of cases the
labour seems to exert little influence upon the march of the dis-
order ; some cases remain permanently incurable; others con-
tinue for months and even years, without much change, and then
gradually subside. The termination by death is not frequent.
This fact is of much practical importance, as throwing disoredit
upon the plan that has been occasionally adopted, of attempting
to cut short the mental affection, by inducing premature labour.
This can only be expected to succeed when the affection is of
that strictly sympathetic nature above noticed. The treatment
must be conducted on principles precisely similar to those which
guide us in analogous cases, uncomplicated by pregnancy; being
careful to avoid energetic measures. Indeed, in many cases, it
must be almost entirely expectant; comprising such precautions
as are necessary for the safety of the life of mother and child.
During labour a transitory delirium occasionally supervenes,
which, although not frequent, it is important to notice from its
legal relations. At the latter period of labour, when the pain
becomes most intolerable, some women become so excited as to
lay violent hands upon the child, if possible?to attempt suicide?
and to view with hatred the husband and child to whom they are
most tenderly attached. Osiander delivered of twins a woman,
whom two strong men could scarcely prevent from throwing her-
self out of the window. He also relates the case of a plethoric
woman at Strasbourg, who, in the midst of the most violent
pains, demanded that she should be cut open, and herself ob-
tained a knife to attempt it. Another instance, by the same
writer, would appear to have something incredible in it. It is
that of a negress, who, being seized, with delirium during a long
and painful labour, cut open her body, extracted the infant, and re-
covered ! We shall have occasion to return to this subject, should
our limits permit us to speak of the judicial relations of pregnancy
and parturition: we now pass on to notice the insanity of the
recently-confined and of nurses; and first concerning its etiology.
The earliest notice of this is found in Hippocrates, who an-
nounces in the 40th Aphorism of the 4th section, that " a con-
gestion of blood in the mammce announces insanity." Some
* Since -writing the above, we have met with a few instances, mentioned by
various authors.

writers have quoted cases in support of this opinion. Van Eos-
sum relates that M. Picters saw a woman yielding blood instead
of milk; the fourth day she became maniacal, and died the
seventh. Planchou relates a similar phenomenon;?on the
fourth day of the flow of blood, loquacity supervened, and a ma-
niacal delirium followed which lasted till death, a month after-
wards. But cases of this kind are few in number; and others of
a totally opposite significance abound, in which blood flowed
from the breast, without any evil consequences ; and also in which
insanity appeared without any such symptoms. It would not
tend to any valuable practical result to enter minutely into the
ancient theories of the causes of the mental disorders of puerperal
women. They are all founded upon the hypothesis, that after
labour, the milk escapes by the breasts and by the lochial dis-
charge, and that when from any cause this secretion is turned
from its natural direction it affects the brain, either by being
deposited upon or within it, or by making the blood impure.
Thus, even for such men as Sydenham, Levret, and Van Swieten,
the suppression of the milk or of the lochire is an essential con-
dition for the development of the mental disorder. What are the
facts which bear upon this view ??

Examining the reports of such cases as occurred during the six
weeks succeeding labour, in those ivlio did not suckle, we find that
a considerable proportion did not occur until after the first
month?that is, until a period when the lochial discharge has
naturally subsided. Amongst those which occurred earlier we
find eleven illustrative cases. In one, the suppression of the
discharge coincided with the outbreak of the delirium ; in two
the suppression was subsequent to it. In seven the lochire con-
tinued to flow three weeks or a month, being at most slightly
diminished at the period of the appearance of the mental
disturbance. Lastly, in one case, the patient had attacks of
insanity after repeated confinements, and in some the lochise
stopped, and in others continued to flow. M. Marce, comment-
ing on these facts, proposes to reverse the usual verdict, and to
say that " puerperal insanity in some cases suspends the lochial
secretion, by reason of the general perturbation of the system
which it induces ; but more frequently exetts no influence upon it."
If we examine also the phenomena attendant upon the secre-
tion of milk, in reference to the development of the psychical
disturbance, we shall find that the relation is equally undefined.
Sometimes the insanity breaks out at the very time when the
secretion of milk commences, and at other times at the period of
weaning; moreover, in many cases, the secretion continues unaf-
fected during the whole course of the most marked derangement.
We may conclude, therefore, that the proximate cause of puer-
peral insanity is not to be found in the suppression of milk, or of
the lochise.

In rejecting this theory we naturally wish to fall back upon
some other; and we attribute the development of puerperal insa-
nity to the reactions between a system predisposed to such de-
rangements, and the normal physiological conditions which are
found after confinement: just as in constitutions predisposed to
tetanus, or nervous delirium, these will be developed after the
slightest accidents or operations. The pains of labour, the lively
emotions which often accompany it, and the large suppurating
surface which results after the expulsion of the fcetus, will bear a
very close comparison with the course and results of a serious
surgical operation. After a time, also, temporary secretions are
established, which, both at their commencement and their termi-
nation, necessarily induce serious changes both in the circulating
and nervous systems. Dr Gooch's opinion on this subject is
worthy of much attention:?

" The cause of puerperal mania is that peculiar state of the sexual
system which occurs after delivery."

He afterwards explained and commented upon this as follows :?
" What I meant was this: the sexual system in women is a set of
organs which are in action only during half the natural life of the indi-
vidual ; and even during this half they are in action only at intervals.
During these intervals of action they diffuse an unusual excitement
throughout the nervous system?witness the hysteric affections of
puberty, the nervous susceptibility which occurs during every menstrual
period, the nervous affections of breeding, and the nervous susceptibility
of lying-in women. I do not mean that these appearances are to be
observed in every instance of puberty, menstruation, pregnancy, and
childbirth; but that they occur sufficiently often to show that these
states are liable to produce those conditions of the nervous system.
.... Dr Marshall Hall thinks that the susceptibility of the puer-
peral state is to be explained by mere exhaustion; and does not at all
depend on the influence of anything specific in the condition of the
several organs at that time; but would an equal or a greater degree of
exhaustion at any time occasion the disease ? This is a question of fact,
that I should answer in the negative. I have seen patients who have
been deranged in childbed, and who had recovered, at a future period
much more exhausted by illness, and much more agitated in mind,
without the slightest appearance of mental derangement."

Having a condition of body at least as well prepared for deli-
rium as it would be after a serious operation; and a state of mind
in general much more so ; we cannot feel any surprise at derange-
ment supervening on certain occasions, especially when the predis-
posing causes are powerful.

At the head of these, as is the case in all mental affections, we
may place hereditary influence. M. Esquirol states the propor-
tion of those thus liable, to those attacked, at about 2 in 5. Dr.
Gooch says : " A very large proportion occurred in patients in
whose families disordered minds had already appeared." Dr.
Burrows says that out of 80 women, who became delirous after
labour, above half had an hereditary predisposition to insanity.
The following are other statistics :?

No. of cases of No. of cases of
puerperal insanity. hereditary predisposition.
By Dr Helfft, of Berlin 131 ? 51
? M. Weill, of Stephansfeld 30 ? 14
? M. Maree 56 ? 24

No doubt these proportions would require considerable in-
crease, as there are great numbers of cases where no history can
be got; there are also numbers which are allied to families where
great nervous excitability prevails, perhaps not amounting to
alienation, but liable to be developed into that under any favour-
able conditions.

Anaemia, whether primitive or consecutive to repeated preg-
nancies or haemorrhages, is a powerful predisposing cause of mental
alienation. Its symptoms are here, as in ordinary cases, paleness
of skin and of mucous membrane, small pulse, weakness of the
digestive functions, emaciation, and weakness of the muscular
system ; the bruit cle souffle is likewise heard if the anaemia
passes certain limits.

Authors differ as to the effect of repeated pregnancies upon
the production of mental alienation; it has generally been consi-
dered that the liability is greater in the first pregnancy. M.
Marce disputes this, however, and finds amongst 57 patients only
14 primiparse ; and amongst the 43 remaining cases 13 had been
confined five, six, and even nine times. This he explains by the
greater debility produced by repeated confinements.

The influence of age is sufficiently marked: the further re-
moved is the patient from the most favourable age for childbear-
ing, 20 to 30, the greater is the liability to mental disturbance,
judging from the statistics. These are of rather too complicated
a nature to be made clear in a brief statement.

A previous attack appears strongly to predispose to a recur-
rence of the mental disorder; or an attack of insanity in the non-
puerperal state has very much the same influence. It appears
also, according to some authorities, that the attacks in successive
confinements do not increase in intensity?the patient often re-
covers from the later ones more readily than from the earlier.

Esquirol relates the case of one woman who was attacked by
puerperal insanity ten times; and on the last occasion recovered
in a few weeks. Dr Ramsbotham considers that the chances of
a patient becoming insane after a subsequent confinement, who
lias been so in one, are very small, " Although (he adds) as the
former attack proves that a predisposition then existed, and may
still be operating, that very circumstance would strongly impress
us with the possibility of a recurrence, and would induce us
sedulously to avoid every exciting cause, and to use the utmost
degree of care for its prevention, not only in the next, but all the
following labours." l)r. Goocli appears to hold the same opinion ;
he says?" I have attended many patients who came to town to
be confined, because they had been deranged after their former
lying-in in the country, and, excepting Case No. I., not one of
these patients had a return of their disease." Dr Montgomery
relates a case of a lady who became insane after eight successive
confinements; and several others in a less marked degree illus-
trative of the same position. Our opinion is that one attack
strongly predisposes to another; and that, if the instances of suc-
cessive attacks are not so numerous as might be expected, it is
because the care and pains alluded to by Dr Ramsbotham are not
without their result in preventing them. In some few cases it
has been observed that the sex of the infant acted as a predispos-
ing cause?women having got over the confinement of a girl
with safety, after repeatedly having suffered when the child was a
male.

Of the occasional or exciting causes of puerperal insanity we
are not well informed. It does not appear that difficult labours
exercise much influence in the majority of cases ; nor are many
of the recorded cases connected with extreme haemorrhage. We
cannot speak definitely as to the relation which it bears to
eclampsia ; Merriman, Gooch, Esquirol, Frias, Selade, Billod, and
Dr Reid, each relate one instance of such apparent dependence.
In this Journal, for the year 1850, Dr Webster relates some
cases in which he attributes to chloroform the production of the
mental disorder ; Dr Simpson relates facts having a very opposed
significance. The question is one of very great importance, but
one which must be decided by prolonged experience.

Moral emotions will, no doubt, exercise a strong influence
upon the development of mental alienation; the cases in which
the affection is distinctly traceable to these are certainly not very
numerous; but the number would be very much augmented had
we full histories of each case. In women who do not nurse, the
first menstruation lias a strong influence upon the development
of this affection: in 60 cases mentioned by M. Maree eleven
became insane exactly at this period. It is worthy of notice also
that, amongst those who do nurse, a not inconsiderable number
begin to be insane about the same time?i.e., the sixth week. Out
of 22 cases six were of this nature. It is scarcely necessary to
point out the practical bearing of this observation; nor how
necessary at such a period is the most careful physical and moral
liygiene. Errors in diet, exposure to cold,* imprudences of
various kinds, inflammation and suppuration of the mammse?all
these have been observed to act as exciting causes. We have
ourselves observed one case which in the outset was clearly
dependent upon a sudden pleurisy. In this, as in other diseases,
however, etiology is an obscure science; for the most part the
affection will not be due to any one cause, but to the action of
many upon a constitution enfeebled or otherwise predisposed.
These general observations apply to the insanity of the newly-
confined, and to that of nurses indiscriminately; it will now be
convenient, following the plan of M. Marce, to separate the two
forms, and make some remarks upon each.

The forms of mental unsoundness enumerated by this author as
occurring shortly after confinement are mania, melancholy, partial
lesions of the intelligence, hallucinations, intellectual and instinc-
tive monomania, and " a special variety of mental enfeeblement,
which seems to be caused by excessive losses of blood, and is
easily cured by appropriate treatment." These forms of aliena-
tion are not equally frequent; amongst M. Esquirol's 92 cases
49 were mania, 35 melancholy, and 8 chronic dementia. In the
44 related byM. Marce 29 were mania, 10 melancholy, 5 partial
lesions, and 2, cases of temporary intellectual enfeeblement. It
is worthy of notice that in the insanity of nurses the proportions
between mania and melancholy are much more equal than those
here noticed.

In the form. of puerperal insanity now under notice, the cases
almost all begin at one of two periods; either in the first eight or
ten days after confinement, or towards the fifth or six week. M.
Marce remarks that in his 44 cases, 33 commenced in the first
ten days, and 11 about the sixth week. We do not find in other
authors the same precision of classification.-^
* M. Esquirol lays great stress upon cold as an exciting cause. He says:?
^ f . a VdIVaI / i 1 QOPm PT1 f~. _ 1 1 m T"l T*PCQ1 OTl fill -f*I. y-x ? <1 ,1 ^ n a a vi m * i- 1! A.?
plein air, soit que 1 accouchde ou la nourice plonge
l'eau froide, la coupe des cheveux, l'abus des medicaments chauds, en supprimant
les lochies, provoquent la folie. Chez nos 92 alidndes, quatorze fois Valienation
mentale a provoquee par des causes physiques, et dans ces quatorze cas, dix
fois l'impression du froid a causd la maladie."
+ M. Esquirol's 92 cases commenced as follows :?
16 became delirious from the 1st to the 4th day.
21 ? ? 5th ? 15th ,,
17 ? ? 16th ? 60th ,,
19 ? ,, 60th day to the 12th month.
19 ,, after forced or voluntary weaning.
These 92 cases include both forms of puerperal insanity?that of the newly-con-
fined, and that of nurses.

It is not necessary to enter minutely into the phenomena of
puerperal mania, so familiar to all of extensive obstetric expe-
rience. The outbreak may be quite abrupt, as in the case related
by Dr Reid, where the patient having fallen asleep in good health,
awoke suddenly, crying out that her child was dead, and became
maniacal from that moment. In the great majority of cases,
however, the accession is gradual; the first change noticed is
often in the eye, which assumes an expression easily recognisable,
but difficult of description. The countenance is restless, anxious,
and troubled ; sometimes flushed and sometimes unnaturally pale.
There is great excitement of the special senses; slight sounds dis-
tress the ear, light affects the eyes ; there are often hallucinations.
The temper changes completely, and family affection is appa-
rently changed into the bitterest hatred; and this is particularly
observed as regards the child, which the mother often attempts to
destroy. Then succeeds or accompanies these symptoms the out-
break of violent delirium, with the characteristics before men-
tioned. At the commencement there is not always fever, and if
the pulse be accelerated, it is often from the violence of the
excitement alone ; but after a time it becomes very rapid (espe-
cially in those cases which will be fatal) ; the head is sometimes
hotter than usual, although the general temperature is not much
raised; there is almost complete insomnia; the tongue is foul,
the urine scanty, the bowels often constipated; the breath is
offensive, and the skin emits an unpleasant odour. The condi-
tion of the milk and the lochiee has been before noticed. These
signs of constitutional disturbance, in the majority of favourable
cases, subside long before the mental disorder.

It is of much importance to inquire whether during pregnancy
or labour there are any symptoms which may lead us to appre-
hend insanity afterwards, and so enable us to take every precau-
tion to guard against it. Esquirol states that it is sometimes
announced by sinister presentiments even during pregnancy ; but
such presentiments are so frequent, and are in so small a propor-
tion of cases followed by any evil consequences, that we cannot
found much upon them. Dr Burrows has some important re-
marks on this point:?

" Puerperal delirium consequent on labour is sometimes predicted,
though not absolutely developed during gestation. If, while pregnant,
there be frequent hysterical affections, preternatural sensibility, unac-
countable exuberance or depression of spirits, morbid aptitude to exag-
gerate every trivial occurrence, and attach to it great importance
suspicion, irritability, or febrile excitation; or, what is still more indica-
tive, a soporous state, with very quick pulse?then the supervention of
delirium on labour may be dreaded."

Dr Ramsbotham adds to this, that " if a great loss of memory
be present, such a result is eminently foreboded."

The characteristics of puerperal mania are so well marked, that
it is scarcely likely to be confounded with any other disease.
From the low muttering delirium of fever, the history will suffici-
ently distinguish it, as well as its own peculiar characters. From
phrenitis it is sometimes not so easy ; and cases will occasionally
-occur where the affection seems to partake of both characters.
The delirium of phrenitis is preceded by headache, fever, tinnitus
aurium, and flushed cheeks; the pulse is quick and sharp; all
these are generally wanting in mania. In the former, the eyes
are injected; not usually in the latter. The inflammatory fever
of phrenitis has a character almost altogether wanting in mania.
It is of the highest importance to distinguish between the two
affections ; since the active depletory measures required for phre-
nitis would be ruinous in mania.

Puerperal mania terminates by recovery, by incurability, or by
death ; the first appears to be much the most frequent; the last
is rare. " It used to be the prevalent opinion (says Dr Rams-
botham) that puerperal mania never resulted in a fatal termina-
tion. Even the late Dr Baillie, observant as he was of disease,
and well-informed upon the morbid conditions of the body in all
their forms, when consulted about a case of this kind, remarked,
' that the question was not whether the patient was to recover,
because of that he had no doubt, but how long the disease was to
last!'?she died within a week after this opinion was uttered. Of
Esquirol's 92 cases, 6 died, 1 after six months, 1 after a year,
2 after eighteen months, 1 after three years, and 1 after five years
after delivery. These statistics, however, as well as those of Dr.
Webster and Dr Burrows, include not mania only, but all the
forms of puerperal insanity.* In 24 cases of mania, M. Marce
enumerates 16 recoveries, 2 incurables, 2 in which after one
year there was no amendment, and 4 cases of death ; 1 in twenty-
six days, 1 in nineteen, 1 in sixteen, and 1 in seven days.
Almost all deaths in this disease result from a complication with,
or transition into, acute delirium, the delire aigu of French
writers. Where the insanity has been developed during the first
fifteen days after confinement, it may be thus complicated from the
first, but it may also occur after the mental affection has lasted
many weeks. M. Marce's sketch of this affection is graphic :?
" The agitation augments from day to day, the tongue becomes
dry, the digestive functions are impeded; the pulse becomes rapid, more
than 120 per minute; the face is flushed, the head hot, and the eye
haggard; the skin is covered with a viscous sweat; the patient is a prey
to incessant hallucinations, and exhausts herself by violent agitation and
* As this is the case with all the statistics yet published on the subject, we shall
recur to the various terminations of puerperal insanity, after reviewing the different
varieties.

an unceasing loquacity; she is no longer conscious of anything that is
present; under the influence of her delirious ideas, or even of a veritable
hydrophobia, she rejects all aliments, especially drink, and spits almost
perpetually. M. Baillarger has remarked the expectoration of large
yellowish crachats, which are unaccompanied by cough, or by any pul-
monary symptoms."

Then follows a quasi-typhoid state, with foetid breath, and still
incessant spitting ; the urine and faeces are passed involuntarily;
insomnia is constant, and the powers are speedily exhausted?the
termination being often accelerated by diarrhoea. The signs of
amendment are, that the pulse becomes somewhat slower, and
has more volume; the tongue moistens, the agitation is a little
calmed, and the patient returns either to reason, or to the normal
condition of the previous insanity. But when once the condi-
tion above described is fully developed, there is but very slight
hope of any amendment; the prognosis is most grave. With
regard to the prognosis of puerperal mania in general, the quick-
ness of the pulse is the most serious sign?not that quickness
which is brought on merely by agitation, and is transitory, but
a continuous permanent acceleration, which does not subside
even during moments of calm. The acute delirium would seem
to be merely the maniacal agitation, carried to its extreme limits;
and the constitutional disturbance is merely a consequence. It
is of importance to recognise the beginning of this acute deli-
rium; and fever is the distinctive sign between it and the ordi-
nary maniacal agitation. Meningitis offers striking relations
occasionally to this acute delirium; but in this we meet early
with partial paralyses, contractions, or strabismus; the head is
thrown backward, there is subsultus, coma, and resolution of the
muscular fibres. Those patients who do not die of this affection
are generally carried off either by diarrhoea, or by some pulmo-
nary disease, if the insanity terminates fatally.

The pathology of puerperal insanity is as obscure as that of
mental affections generally; morbid changes are found occasion-
ally after death, of various kinds, but none that are constant or
special; and it must always be remembered that death has taken
place, for which some physical cause must exist, which is not
necessarily connected with the psychical disorder. Esquirol has
examined the bodies of patients who have died of puerperal
insanity, in which there was no morbid change to be detected.
Others have found thickening, or eburnation of the skull, indu-
ration, or softening of the brain, opacity and adhesions of the
membranes, purulent or serous deposits, &c. &c. In one of our
own patients the most careful examination failed to detect any
morbid condition. Dr Gooch relates a case which was exactly
similar. As a general rule, in those cases which are fatal,
whether by reason of acute delirium, or of some intercurrent
malady, the lesions found in the brain are insignificant, and alto-
gether insufficient to furnish a plausible account of the pheno-
mena. Those which have been complicated by meningitis or
cerebritis will present the usual morbid appearances ; but to the
disease itself there is no special morbid anatomy attached. We
quote M. Marce's conclusions on this point in full:?

" I do not wish to conceal the little importance which I attach to the
results of pathological anatomy in this disease: the details which I have
given are the latest data of science, but I am convinced that in a short
time another order of ideas will arise concerning the researches necessary
to be made, in order to try to ascertain the organic cause of the three
or four elementary and distinct forms which constitute mental aliena-
tion. What is it that we now study when we examine the bodies of
maniacs, monomaniacs, or melancholies ? The more or less intense
colour of the white or grey matter, the abundance of the sub-arachnoid
fluid, the state of the membranes, the consistence and general aspect of
the cerebral pulp; and the examination is made by means of approxi-
mative appreciations purely personal, without exact means of verifica-
tion. But these incompletely interrogated elements constitute but a
small part of the diseased organ. The state of the nerve-tubes, of the
intermediate substance, the induration or ramollissement of the organ,
the quantity of water which it contains, the state of the chemical ele-
ments which enter into its composition ; these are all points which we
should examine by the most rigorous methods which science affords;
and, so long as so complex and extensive a labour is unperformed, no
one has a right to say that we are ignorant (qy ? must be ignorant)
of the intimate nature and cause of insanity. The immaterial soul cannot
le diseased; the brain then is responsible for the intellectual disturbance.
Moreover, when I see forms of delirium so clearly characterised as mania,
monomania, and melancholy, in their typical forms, I cannot believe that
one and the same elementary lesion presides over alienations so distinct,
and I am disposed to admit something special in each case."

The treatment is that of mania, in the non-puerperal state. As
a general rule bleeding is utterly inadmissible, unless there are
such inflammatory complications as would render it necessary,
were there no mental aberration. The heat of head, so often
observed, indicates the propriety of the application of ice to the
shaved head; and blisters are often of very great service. The
extremities are often cold, and must be stimulated by hot water,
or mustard, and the usual obvious methods. The stomach and
alimentary canal must be regulated, if necessary, by emetics and
purgatives ; and, after this, opium is of the greatest utility. Dr.
Groocli advises hyoscyamus, and camphor, and is generally of
opinion that narcotics are the most valuable remedies in this
disease. The intellect is often obviously clearer from the rest
obtained by their use. In the chronic stage stimulants and
tonics are often required ; and ammonia is amongst the most use-
ful. Dr Pritchard mentions oil of turpentine, in draclim doses,
three times a day, as one of the best stimulants, when the
stomach will bear it. The diet must be farinaceous, with a
good allowance of milk, so long as the febrile symptoms pro-
hibit animal food; in the chronic stage it must be of a free and
generous order, including a certain amount of wine, or malt
liquor. The rules as to isolation must be as strictly observed in
this form of mania as under ordinary conditions. If it cannot
be accomplished perfectly at home, it must be by removal to an
asylum, as soon as the special circumstances of the case admit of
it. The general management is that of ordinary mania.
Such is an outline of our ordinary English practice; some
other methods have obtained reputation on the Continent, which
we may briefly sketch, as they appear to have been attended with
success. Tartarized antimony has been recommended by Dr Wei-
sener, as reducing the energy of the nervous system, without affect-
ing the general strength so seriously as depletory measures. Dr.
Elsoener relates a case, in which the patient was attacked with
mania five days after delivery; he gave tartarized antimony at
first in fractional doses, and ultimately to the amount of six
or eight grains in the day, applying cold to the head at the same
time; the cure was completed in twelve days. There might,
however, be practical difficulties in carrying out this plan.
Prolonged tepid baths, for two or three hours, or more, are
stated to have produced the happiest results in these cases, on
the authority of M. Brierre de Boismont. It will be remem-
bered that, some time ago, we gave a sketch of M. Pinel's
method of treating delirium tremens?in which prolonged warm
baths, for five, eight, ten, or even twenty-four hours, with constant
cold effusion to the head, formed the principal feature, with or
without the exhibition of opium. In the cases now under con-
sideration it is necessary to bear in mind that the peculiar state
of the patient will not bear so prolonged an exhausting process ;
and the time must be limited to two or three hours at the utmost.
M. Esquirol had great faith in injections of milk and sugar,
three times a day, the diet being at the same time rigorously
attended to. Camphor has at times been resorted to as an
almost exclusive treatment, given both by the mouth and in injec-
tion. M. Marce gives two or three cases where recovery was
rapid under this plan ; but he does not attach much value to it,
nor yet to aether, which has occasionally been employed in drachm
doses.

M. Baillarger has strongly recommended "milk diet" as a
curative measure?alone, or combined with baths, purgatives, or
narcotics. In giving two or three pints of milk daily the thirst
is allayed, and a good deal of nutriment obtained, which is not
exciting. This may be tolerated for a considerable time ; but if
it should begin to purge, it must be relinquished, as it is rare that
the toleration of it is re-established. According to the special
circumstances of each case, a selection, or combination of these
methods of treatment, will be desirable. It is, perhaps, scarcely
necessary to add, that if the delirium be anything more than
transitory, all idea of suckling must be relinquished, as not
only 'would it injure the mother, but the safety of the child
would be materially compromised.

The melancholia of the recently-confined is less grave, at least
so far as life is concerned, than mania; it is also less frequent at
this period by more than one-lialf. Its history is very similar to
that of melancholy in general, and its symptoms the same. The
period of its outbreak is the same as that of the affection al-
ready noticed. It begins by signs of depression from the first,
which may be mistaken for obstinacy or sulkiness ; or it may com-
mence by a degree of excitement almost maniacal, and only
assume its special form afterwards. Hallucinations of the ear,
the eye, and of taste, are very frequent; and there is often a
suicidal propensity; very commonly, also, the child is the object
of extreme dislike, and attempts are made to destroy it. M.
Marce says that in these cases he has repeatedly noticed an
almost complete analgesia; the patient appeared insensible
to pricking or any irritation. Hysterical convulsions, and a
cataleptic state, have also been observed accompanying this affec-
tion. Almost all the patients present the symptoms of anaemia
(as above described), with bruit cle soufflet in the heart and large
vessels.

The prognosis is not very grave, the greater number recover
by far; the duration is from one month to six, or perhaps longer.
The treatment is that of melancholia in general, modified in ac-
cordance with the special requirements of the condition. The
principal indication to be kept in view is that the constitution
is almost to remake. Iron and other tonics are of great service
when the proper period arrives; at a proper interval after confine-
ment the cold affusion may be used daily with advantage; in short,
all means which will raise the powers of life. When this is ac-
complished, opium and other narcotics are as useful in this form
as in mania, to allay excitement, and procure rest.

We have no particular observations to make upon the partial
derangements of intellect in the newly-confined ; they differ in
no respect from those met with in the non-puerperal condition.
They chiefly consist of hallucinations, impulses, religious
scruples, and sometimes partial losses of memory. Some of
these latter are worthy of passing notice. Capuron relates, that
a young lady, after a painful confinement, experienced a severe
emotion, which brought on syncope, lasting three days. On re-
covery she remembered nothing of having been confined; and
this amnesia lasted some months. Louyer-Villermay relates a
similar case: A young lady, after long disagreements and con-
troversies with her family, married a man to whom she was
much attached: after her first confinement an accident hap-
pened, accompanied by long weakness, on her recovery from
which she had lost all memory of the time that had elapsed
since her marriage, although she remembered exactly all the
details of her previous life. Her marriage itself was forgotten,
and she repulsed with every appearance of fear her husband and
her child. Since then she has never been able to recal the
memory of this portion of her life.

A species of chronic dementia is an occasional, but not frequent,
form of puerperal insanity; sometimes it merely depends on
debility, and is relieved by appropriate tonic treatment; but it is
generally more grave in its significance.

In the early part of this paper we have alluded to acute
dementia as occasionally occurring after confinement. It is
mentioned by some writers, but we have nowhere seen any detailed
description of it. A case which occurred to us, some months
ago, seemed to be of this nature, and is certainly worthy of record.
The patient was a woman of about 26 years of age, in her third
confinement, apparently of healthy constitution. There had been
nothing in the two former lab ours, nor in the nursing which followed,
to account for the subsequent phenomena. On this occasion, all
went on well for seven or eight days, when a peculiarity of manner,
more than a derangement of health, awoke the anxiety of the friends.
There was a little headache, and some occasional flushing of the
face ; the tongue was white, rather creamy in appearance, but
there was no thirst. The milk flowed freely, and the lochite were
natural; the sleep was not much affected. The peculiarity of
manner was this : when spoken to, she appeared to understand
perfectly, and to have an idea of the answer in her own mind, but
on trying to express it, two or three words were uttered, and the
rest were lost. Thus, on being asked if she had much pain in
the head, she would say, "No, not in my " and then, after a
pause, she would add, " I know very if I could only
When the attendants tried to explain, she would stop them, and
make another attempt; and, on again failing, she would put her
hand to her head, and appear trying to remember, and the face
would flush with the effort. She was quite conscious that she
forgot words, and seemed a little annoyed at it; but generally the
expression of the face was calm, and even happy. The pulse was
not above 75, and soft. But by degrees the power of compre-
hension diminished, and the faculty of speech was lost: there
was more fever, and the patient became unconscious. The friends
described something like convulsive movements of one arm; a
quasi-typhoidstate supervened, and/mthe eighth day from the com-
mencement of the attack she died. A very careful post-mortem
examination, 36 hours after death, failed to reveal any morbid
change. The brain and its membranes might have passed for an
entirely healthy specimen. The other organs were in the normal
puerperal conditions, without evidence of inflammation, or any
other morbid action. We are unable to offer any theory as to
the pathology of this case.

The insanity which supervenes upon the state of lactation is
closely allied to that of parturient women. The puerperal state
proper is supposed to end with the flow of the lochise; but lacta-
tion maintains a condition which has been not inaptly termed a
" prolonged puerperal state." " In virtue of the lacteal secretion
the woman is so far removed from her physiological state; she
is more nervous, more impressionable, and more accessible to
morbific influences, which she would easily have resisted at
another time" (Marce). The mental alienation of nurses may be
naturally divided into two classes; (1) those which appear within
the first six weeks after labour; and (2) those which do not appear
until after six, eight, twelve, or more months of suckling, or imme-
diately after weaning. The cases of the first class are too closely
allied to those already noticed to require any detailed examina-
tion. If insanity does not appear in the first six weeks, it is very
rare to meet with it before the sixth month : out of 22 cases, M.
Marce states that he has only once seen it appear at any inter-
mediate period ; this was in the third month. An etiological
deduction of some value may be drawn from this fact?viz., that
as the great majority of these cases appear only after prolonged
lactation, the cause is to be sought in the ansemia and debility
produced by this; and it may be inferred that this cause is the
most powerful, after heritage, and the other general causes of
mental alienation.

In all cases of extreme debility or exhaustion, nervous acci-
dents are to be expected in some form?palpitations, vertigo,
weakness of sight, or the other senses, neuralgic pains, partial
paralysis, contractions?all these, with the constitutional symp-
toms of imperfect nutrition, are met with in nurses in whom a too
prolonged lactation has induced an anaemic condition. It is quite
natural to expect, therefore, that in those who are so predisposed,
by the operation of the influences before described, alienation
should supervene.

But if the weakness produced by lactation be so powerful a
predisposing cause of insanity, how does it happen that this so
frequently comes on a few days after weaning ? On a first glance
we should suppose that the cessation of so abundant a secretion
ought to tend to strengthen the economy; and it has sometimes cer-
tainly the effect of checking mental disturbance. M. Marce relates
the case of a woman who had five attacks of delirium after five
successive labours; yet three times she tried to suckle her
children. " When she suckled she was in a state of maniacal
agitation, which came on a few days after labour, lasted during
the whole lactation, and regularly ceased eight or ten days after
weaning. When she did not suckle, the delirium ceased a few
days after the milk fever." Such facts as these are not frequent,
and authors justly attribute a dangerous influence to the period
of weaning. But weaning is not ahvays justly chargeable with the
effects attributed to it: it may be that a patient has evinced ner-
vous symptoms of various kinds, and weaning has been ordered ;
the insanity appears, but it was probably pending before, and the
weaning has simply not checked it. From whatever cause, how-
ever, or combination of causes, it may be, a considerable pro-
portion of cases of puerperal insanity do arise at this period.
Out of 38 cases of this nature, related by Esquirol, 19 occurred
just after weaning ; and in 22,related by M. Marce, six were at this
period. " Enfeebled women, it appears, may nurse for a great
number of months, and only fall ill at the moment when lactation
is suspended; for even an exhausted organism habituates itself
during some time to losses which enervate and weaken it in a
regular daily manner. We see it daily in individuals subject to
hemorrhoidal discharge, or a purulent secretion from an issue ;
if these are suppressed suddenly they produce in the economy a
reaction as dangerous in proportion as the subject is inclined to
nervous accidents. One of our patients, Madame X , had
an accession of insanity after each of her confinements. When
she suckled, the accession was deferred until the time of weaning,
when it broke out in full force" (Marce). But there is still
another condition, and one which has a different etiological
significance. The suppression of an abundant secretion may
determine a state of plethora, to which the insanity may be due ;
and it is of importance to recognise this fact, and the cases which
illustrate it, as the treatment will require to be essentially
different.

As in the insanity of parturient women, so these cases may
commence abruptly, evidently the sequel to some exciting phy-
sical or moral cause; or they may come on gradually, in which
case, almost invariably, the disorder of the physical health will
precede the outbreak "of the mental disturbance. The precur-
sory symptoms are those of anaemia, already mentioned; and
they are of the utmost importance to mark, inasmuch as well-
directed care in this proclromic period may avert the threatened
aberration.

The older authors were accustomed to attribute all these mental
disorders in nurses to suppression of the milk. When the de-
lirium is very intense it does sometimes happen that the secre-
tion ceases; but this is not frequent. In 40 cases, Dr Macdonald
only noted six in which this was the case; and M. Marce states,
that in all his cases of insanity consequent upon lactation, he has
not met with one in which the secretion did not continue, often
requiring special means to prevent the distention of the breasts.
It is worthy of observation, that the cases of mania and me-
lancholia are nearly of equal frequency amongst nurses, although
the causes operating in their production are chiefly depressing.
There is nothing distinctive in any of the forms which insanity
assumes during lactation to require special mention, after what
has been said before. The prognosis is not very grave. M.
Marce enumerates 20 cases, of which 20 were cured, ] uncured,
3 were lost sight of, and 2 dead. Of the 20 cures, 6 took place
in the first five weeks, 5 from ten weeks to three months after
the commencement, 2 in four months, 1 in seven months, 1 in
eight months, 0 in from ten months to two years. Of the 3 who
were lost sight of, 2 were notably improved, and 1 seemed to
threaten dementia. The 2 who died were both melancholic ; one
died of phthisis; the other refused all nourishment, and so
perished.

The general outline of the treatment is the same as that pre-
scribed before for the insanity of parturient women. If the
disease can be taken when the physical disorders are giving evi-
dence of what is impending, much may be done by careful and
gradual weaning, and by a strict physical and moral hygiene, to
prevent the outbreak. In any case the child must be weaned,
were it only for the obvious reason that it is in danger whilst in
the care of an insane mother. When the secretion is stopped,
we must have recourse to a decided tonic treatment?iron, qui-
nine, cold affusions, change of air and scene, moderate exercise,
and generous diet. In that class of cases which depend upon
phethora, of course this treatment is inapplicable; in its place,
mild evacuants, even stronger ones, may be necessary occasion-
ally. In all other particulars the treatment must be conducted
on the general principles laid down for insanity, in its ordinary
forms; and what has been said before concerning isolation is
here equally applicable.

The history of puerperal insanity cannot be made complete
without a few illustrative cases, two or three of which we shall
abstract and condense as far as possible?selecting them from
sources which will be most likely to be new to most of our
readers. A very instructive and interesting case is related by
M. Legrand du Saulle, in the Annales Medico-Psychologiques,
for April, 1857, in which the patient had two attacks, one of
mania, and the other of melancholy ; both yielded to treatment,
but the patient finally succumbed to haemoptysis and rapid
phthisis.

Marguerite B was brought up by poor parents, in the
country, in excellent principles, and had the rudiments of a mo-
derate education ; her conduct was always irreproachable. She
always enjoyed good health, and menstruation was developed,
and continued normally. She married happily when eighteen
years old. In the three first years of her marriage she had two
children, both of whom she nursed, at intervals of one year.
When pregnant for the third time, her habits, tastes, and man-
ners underwent a sudden change; she indulged in gay and ob-
scene conversation, forgot the sentiment of modesty, sought the
society of men, and when her husband remonstrated, she over-
whelmed him with reproaches, and even blows. In trying to
escape from the house, one night, she fell from the window, and
abortion, with enormous heemorrliage, followed. The foetus was
about five months old. After this, during her recovery, she
surprised every one by her calmness, and her perfect return to her
original character. But scarcely was she convalescent, when a
violent mania broke forth, and on May 28th, 1849, she was re-
moved, by order of the authorities, to the asylum of the Cote-
d'Or, almost in a state of acute delirium. Under treatment by
baths daily, and purgatives twice a-week, the excitement rapidly
subsided, and in forty-eight days she went home perfectly well, and
was as before, an excellent manager, and a quiet, staid mother
of her family. She again became pregnant, without any mental
affection supervening; she was confined of a little girl, whom
she suckled eleven months. Scarcely had she weaned the child,
when she fell into a state of emaciation; she lost her natural
affections, and very soon was plunged into a state of utter de-
pression and inertia, which necessitated her entry into the
asylum again, on the 27th of March, 1851, twenty-two months
after she had gone out. " At our first visit, we found Mar-
guerite before a window, immovable and mute, with fixed eye
and open mouth, without consciousness of time, place, or per-
sons ; she seemed in a sort of ecstasy, and living in an imaginary
world. The sensation of hunger was not strong enough to rouse
her; she did not touch anything that was given to her, and had
to be fed like an infant; in a word, she was in a state of melan-
choly, with stupor." She had prescribed a generous diet and
tonic medicines, with alkaline and sulphureous baths. In about
twenty days some amendment was perceived; her eyes seemed
to recognise, even with pleasure, some objects; and at different
times she even articulated intelligible words; she paid some
regard to propriety, which had before been quite neglected. On
the 20th of April she had a blister applied to the arm ; she
spoke a few reasonable words, and then broke into a long and
loud laugh. April 25th : " It seems that Marguerite is awakening
as from a frightful dream, and that she is endeavouring to gather
together her ideas?to retrace her thoughts. She appears un-
quiet, chagrin, frightened; she looks at us with terror, and
hesitates to answer." On the 1st of May she seemed to be
well; on being asked what she had thought about during the
long period of her immobility, she replied, " Oh, I don't know;
I had always before my eyes my little child, which my husband
was cooking in a vessel of boiling water. And then I heard it
cry; but I was as if dead. I would have taken it off the fire,
but could not, my hands and feet were so bound." There were
also hallucinations of another kind. She had seen her niece
taking her first communion, and, on going out of the church, a
gendarme took her away to prison, where she had died. May
10th: The improvement was progressive; she still answered
slowly, but rationally; her physical health was excellent. On
the 25th, " we promised her that she should go home in a few
days; but, on the 1 st of June, on going to inform her that her
discharge was made out, we found her spitting blood in large
quantities." The remainder of the case is but the history of a
rapid phthisis, with perpetual haemoptysis. She died on the
2nd of July.

Autopsy, thirty hours after death :?The body appeared aneemic.
The vessels of the brain were empty; the cerebral pulp was
firm ; its consistence was greater than natural, as if macerated in
alcohol. In the chest the pleural cavities contained about ten
ounces of fluid ; the left lung was full of tubercle, with an
enormous cavity at the apex ; the right lung was less diseased.
The heart was small, flaccid, and empty; the liver was hyper-
trophied. All the other organs were healthy; but the uterus
was large, and its lining was of a vinous redness. M. du Saulle
comments upon this phthisis as follows :?

" In the case which now occupies us, did the phthisis precede the
melancholy ; was it developed during the last period of lactation; or
were the phthisis and the melancholy entirely mutually connected ?
This last opinion is ours; and we believe that the phthisis had existed
and was developed in a latent state, whilst the resources of art were
directed against another enemy. Our practical conclusion is, that it is
very dangerous for a woman who has once been deranged, to suckle
her child. Should she do so, at the period of weaning, she ought
to be confided to the care of an experienced physician, who will insist
upon all precautions which may prevent the return of the mental
malady .... And as phthisis pulmonalis is a disease which appears
so frequently as a sequel to prolonged lactation, and also frequently
accompanies melancholia, and is developed very insidiously, it is
important carefully to examine, by percussion and auscultation, all
patients brought under our notice in these conditions."

We subjoin a very brief sketch of a few of the recorded cases
of insanity in pregnant women. M. Baillarger relates one, of a
young unmarried woman, who in the third month of her preg-
nancy became melancholic, apparently as the sequel to a fright,
her general state having been one of depression previously. She
had hallucinations, chiefly of the ear, and obstinately refused
food ; she had to be fed with a stomach-pump. Her mental
condition gradually improved as pregnancy advanced. She
went home to be confined, and shortly afterwards recovered com-
pletely. The child was healthy and strong. The same writer
gives the details of another case, in which the delirium, dating
from the third month, assumed the ecstatic form. She had hal-
lucinations of both eye and ear. She recovered almost com-
pletely in about sixteen days; but, from another emotion, she
had a relapse six weeks afterwards, which continued in a more or
less severe form until her confinement, after which her recovery
advanced rapidly, and was perfect. Both these were cases of
seduction, and the moral causes appeared well marked.
Madame C , aged 39, evinced maniacal symptoms from
the period of her conception; the pregnancy advanced naturally,
but the patient was always delirious. The labour was natural,
and she was a little calmer after it, for a time; but the mental de-
rangement continued incurable. She died eight years after-
wards of chronic enteritis.

Dr Reid relates an instance of melancholia, dating from con-
ception, with continual desire to destroy the child. The mental
condition became worse after delivery.

In Dr Seymour's work on Mental Derangement a case is
mentioned of melancholia, occurring in the fourth month of
pregnancy, which was aggravated after delivery, but recovered
about twelve months afterwards. M. Morel gives the history of
a case, the termination of which was more serious than these.
It is that of a young, hysterical, married woman, who had suc-
cessive pregnancies, which aggravated the nervous state. Acute
mania supervened in the seventh month of her third pregnancy;
abortion took place, and the mania persisted, terminating in de-
mentia and general paralysis.

These cases sufficiently indicate, as was before stated, that
there is no constancy in the effect to be expected of labour upon
the mental condition. Sometimes it is the signal for its cessa-
tion, sometimes for its aggravation; at other times it lias no
effect whatever.

We extract the next case, of puerperal mania proper, from
M. Marce's collection. Helen Lorig, aged 42, entered the La
Charite, May 13, 1855. Her mother had had nine children ; the
first six confinements had been attended by no evil consequences;
but after the last three she had attacks of delirium, lasting
some months. H. L. was confined on the 5th of May, and gave
birth, to a dead child; all went on well until the 10th, when,
after some moral emotion, the lochise were suppressed; and it
was remarked that there was no evidence of lacteal secretion.
There was no fever ; but the ideas were slightly incoherent. On
the next day the delirium became furious, and continued so till
the 18th, when she was brought to the hospital. The transition
produced a calmness, with which she herself was astonished.
On the 14th she could answer questions for a little time, but
soon began to wander again. She feared poison, and had hallu-
cinations of the eye and ear; there was insomnia, headache,
thirst, a rather dry tongue ; the pulse was 100 ; the patient per-
spired freely, and the skin presented a miliary redness, with
sudamina. There was a little pain on pressure over the region
of the uterus. The delirium persisted, and on the 17tli became
almost acute: pulse 110?tr. opii, gtt. xxv. with musk, 10 grs.
The same condition, and the same treatment, continued till the
21st, when there was more tranquillity, and a desire for food; the
pulse was much reduced. On the 28th the pulse was 72, the
uterus not painful; the patient could give a rational account of
herself, and her past state, but still rambled off into other
matters. Oh the 0th of June the delirium and hallucinations
had all ceased. On the 15th she was still very weak, but
rational, and left the hospital cured at the end of the month.
Our next case is fromM. Esquirol:?S. J., set. 40, entered the
Salpetriere, April 22nd, 1812. Her stature is large, her face
studded with pimples, her eyes and- hair brown, her skin white ;
she is tolerably stout. History: at 12 years, headache, nasal
hfemorrhage. 13 years; first appearances of the menses, ces-
sation of the nasal haemorrhages; since then, regular, but scanty
menstruation. 18 years; a dear friend was guillotined, and she
had an attack of trembling, followed by rambling, for some days.
20 years ; J. married, and became the mother of three children,
which she suckled. 30 years; she was confined of a fourth
child, suckled it, and weaned it without precaution. Two days
afterwards she was attacked with general delirium, with predo-
minance of religious ideas. She was taken to the hospital, and
left it perfectly well after four months. 30 years ; a new acces-
sion, caused by the absence of her husband; she was again
received into the hospital, and was there thirteen months; she
left again cured. 39 years; her fifth confinement; seven months
suckling; the day after weaning, delirium, with imaginary fears,
broke out; she was brought into a maison de sante with a general
eruption over the body, which, after some time, was limited to
the face; twenty months after this she was received at the
Salpetriere. She was sad, melancholy and despairing, and had
religious terrors. On the 24th of May there was a discharge of
matter from the left ear ; since then she became more reasonable;
she eats and sleeps well. During the month of June baths and
blisters to the arms were continued; she went out in perfect
health and reason on the lltli of August, 1812. All her attacks
had been preluded by sadness, ennui, and inaptitude for her ordi-
nary occupations; by degrees her head became confused; and
during the accession she always felt her head hot and embar-
rassed.

M. Esquirol's cases are so instructive, from the careful manner
in which the histories are traced, that we extract further. D. S.
D., cet. 41, entered the Salpetriere, June 19th, 1812. Middle
stature, brown hair, blue eyes, white skin, mobile physiognomy,
moderate stoutness. This woman has an uncle and aunt insane.
She had a fall when 9 years old, and wounded her forehead ; the
cicatrix is still visible. At 14 years she suffered from psora.
16 years; headache, followed by appearance of the menses, few and
irregular. 2G years; D. married?from that time the menses
were more abundant, with leucorrhoea; more headache. At 27
years, she had many domestic troubles during her first pregnancy.
33 years; her husband, having an operation performed without
her knowledge, she was alarmed; her mind began to wander, and
she became furious. She was treated at Charenton ; the accession
lasted five months, and the intellect remained somewhat enfeebled.
She was again confined at 35 years. At 37 years, three days
after her third confinement, she experienced a slight vexation,
after which occurred delirium and fury. Her insanity this time
lasted six months. At 41 years; domestic troubles, and slight
vexations, followed by new accession of fury, lasting a few days.
Received at the Salpetriere, she was calm, but not rational.
August 12th ; she talks much and long, relates everything that
she has heard, seen or known ; but with much incoherence. She
has long ntervals of reason. In October, she was calm, and
worked; but was occasionally incoherent. In December there
was the same condition. The attack terminated in dementia.
These cases, and many others which to quote would swell our
paper to too great length, illustrate many important points as to
the etiology of this form of insanity ; and also as to the tendency
to recurrence under certain conditions when the proclivitv has
once "been developed. We must refrain from further illustration,
as there are yet some important questions connected with preg-
nancy and labour to pass in review; and first, concerning the
terminations of puerperal insanity in general?a subject which
we deferred from the earlier part of the paper. We have stated
that of M. Esquirol's 92 cases, 55 recovered their reason, and six
died, leaving 31 incurables. Dr Haslam reports 50 recoveries
amongst 85 cases; and Dr Burrows cured 85 out of 57. Dr.
Macdonald states that 80 per cent, of his cases recovered. Dr.
Brierre de Boismont says, that cases of puerperal insanity (ex-
cluding melancholia) have recovered under his care in about a
week on an average?a statement which is vaguely worded, and
which is open to some misunderstanding. Dr Gooch (quoted by
Dr Pritchard) has observed that such records as these throw but
little light upon the real proportion of recoveries, and present
a prospect unnecessarily gloomy and discouraging; inasmuch
as the " records of hospitals contain chiefly accounts of cases
which have been admitted because they had been unusually per-
manent, having already disappointed the hope, which is gene-
rally entertained and acted upon, of relief by private care ; the
cases of short duration, which last only a few days or weeks, and
which form a large proportion, are totally overlooked or omitted
in the inspection of hospital reports." Dr Gooch further'adds?
" Of the many patients about whom I have been consulted, I
know only two who are now, after many years, disordered in
mind; and of these one had already been so before her mar-
riage .... Mania is more dangerous to life, melancholy to
reason." It is extremely difficult to form an idea of the average
duration of these cases, as will be understood from the remarks
above. With regard to the prolonged cases, it is very generally
received, that most of the recoveries take place within six months.
In M. Esquirol's 92 cases, 55 were cured, and the recoveries took
place as follows:?

4i took place in the 1st month.
7 ? 2nd ?
6 ? 3rd ?
7 ? 4th ?
5 ? 5th ?
9 ? 6th ?
15 ? in the months following.
2 ? after 2 years.

Thus it appears that 38 out of 55, or more than two-thirds of
the cures, were completed within six months from the outbreak of
the mental alienation. M. Esquirol had but six deaths in the 92
cases, and none of them were fatal before the sixth month; but
this must be judged by the same considerations as above stated?
viz., that the cases received at the Salpetriere were such as had
passed the period generally most fatal, as will be further seen by
a reference to the details already given of M. Marce's fatal cases
of mania, where all (but one) died within twenty-six days.

Esquirol's fatal cases were, one after six months; one after one year;
two after eighteen months ; one after three years, and one after
five years. Dr Burrows' table gives 10 deaths in 57 patients, a
proportion which, under ordinary circumstances, probably gives
too high an average, as M. Esquirol's gives one perhaps too
low.

What influence does pregnancy exert upon previously-existing
mental alienation? On this question authorities differ much.
M. Guislain writes as follows :?" As to the utility of conception
and gestation in disorders of the intellect, opinions are much
divided. I know well that these acts do not always produce the
happy results that we might expect; and that delivery itself has
often been the determining cause of insanity. It is, however, a
truth which we ought not to doubt, that lactation almost always
produces a favourable change in the moral nature of the insane."

MM. Dubois and Desormeaux give this opinion :?"Mania and
dementia are often favourably influenced by pregnancy; but we
can only hope for a complete and durable amendment in such
cases as have depended upon lesions of menstruation, or other
affections of the uterus. Apart from this, pregnancy is probably
unfavourable; not in itself, but by reason of the weakness induced
by confinement." As in all cases connected with mental aliena-
tion so in this, M. Esquirol's opinion is of much weight:?
<c Pregnancy, parturition, lactation, are sometimes the means of
which nature takes advantage to terminate attacks of alienation.
I believe these terminations rare. I have seen pregnancy and
parturition make the patient calmer, without affecting the delirium.
I have known also a lady who became insane during five consecu-
tive pregnancies, and each time was cured by confinement.
Notwithstanding these instances, and many others cited by
authors, I regard as exceptions the cases of insanity cured by
marriage, pregnancy, and labour; so often have I seen the mental
affection persist and even become aggravated under such circum-
stances. Let any one visit the Salpetriere and he will find more
than 100 insane women, although they have been married and had
children." A valuable collection of cases is thus summed up by
M. Buchez :?" In twenty-two observations of the influence of the
uterus or mammse upon the brain affected with mental alienation,
including pregnancy, labour, lactation, and weaning, not one has
presented any diminution of the delirium; all have provoked or
augmented it." M. Marce gives a short collection of cases, from
which it results that in all, at the period of pregnancy, the mental
affection assumed a more serious aspect, and gave cause for sus-
picions of incurability.

In general, the pregnancy of the insane proceeds without any
peculiarities; but there is one circumstance connected with the
labour which is not only curious, but important to bear in mind
Parturition is often unattended by any signs of suffering, and, in
many cases, the dropping of the child upon the floor, or its cry
under the bed-clothes, have been the first announcement that
labour had been in progress. Such was the case in two cases
noticed by M. Lannurien and M. Mitivie. A young lady attended
by M. Esquirol was delivered without appearing aware of it, and
also without any of the attendants knowing. Many cases of
similar import are related by M. Marce, who considers that pain-
less labour is the rule in confirmed cases of insanity. And thus
it appears that the analgesia, which is so frequent an accompani-
ment of mental deragement, may extend to the internal organs.
Nor is this an isolated fact in the history of insanity ; it is borne
out by the phenomena of phthisis, pneumonia, pleurisy, and other
diseases, occurring in such a state, which frequently, or even
generally, occur without the usual constitutional or physical
signs. It results from this that the insane, near the period of
their confinement, require to be watched and guarded with especial
care.

The children born of insane mothers are naturally submitted to
the most unfavourable influences, and can but rarely escape the
hereditary taint?here in tenfold force. Those born of mothers
who have become insane during their pregnancy are not unfre-
quently still-born ; M. Marce states that of 11 such cases five were
still-born. Those born of mothers insane before their pregnancy
are not found to be dead in so large a proportion of cases. The
intellectual condition of those who survive and grow up is gene-
rally most lamentable ; they remain imbecile, or at least of a very
limited intelligence. There are, however, instances in which the
child has betrayed no trace of its disordered source. Catherine,
the daughter of Jeanne la Folle, was born during her mother's
insanity, and afterwards became Queen of Portugal, and presented
no indications of unsound mind. M. Marce has collected a few
cases in which similar immunity was manifested ; some from his
own note-book, and two from those of MM. Calmeil and Bail-
larger ; but these must be looked upon as only exceptional: the
future of a child born under such inauspicious circumstances
must be the subject of apprehension of the very gravest character.
We intended to have appended some observations upon the
legal responsibility of pregnant women ; but the subject is one of
too much importance, and too much contested, to be entered upon
in the brief limits which are still at our disposal.
