Plea or Insanity-Trial for Murder
===================================

"VYe copy from the Times of December 18th and 20th, the subjoined report of the
trial of James: Atkinson for the murder of Mary Jane Scaife. This case presents
sevefaTponifs of interest. It is the first case within our recollection of a judge
admitting, in a most liberal spirit (as evidence in favour of the prisoner), the
fact of his strong hereditary predisposition to insanity. Evidence of this cha-
racter is generally considered as inadmissible in criminal as well as in civil
cases. We are much gratified to find that there are enlightened judges 011 the
bench who do not close their eyes to the importance of testimony of this kind,
and who are disposed to view such facts as important when considered in con-
nexion with the analysis of obscure cases of mental disease set up as an excuse
for crime.

James Atkinson, aged 24, was indicted for the wilful murder of Mary Jane
Scaife, at the parish of Hampthwaite, in the West Hiding of York, on the 1st of
August last. The prisoner refused to plead when arraigned, and by his lord-
ship's direction the jury were sworn to try whether he stood mute of malice
or by the visitation of God. Mr. Anderson, thc^ surgeon to the gaol, was then
sworn, and stated that the prisoner, in his opinion, could both near and per-
fectly understand what was said to him. After this evidence the jury found
that the prisoner stood mute of malice, and by his lordship'p directions a
plea of "Not Guilty" was recorded for him.

The prisoner, who is a young man with dark hair, small head, and narrow,
but high forehead, appeared during the trial listless and indifferent, and as
though incapable of fully appreciating his awful position.

Mr. Price and Mr. West appeared for the prosecution; Mr. Bliss, Q.C.,
Mr. Middleton, and Mr. Maule for the defence.

Mr. Price, in stating the case to the jury, said it was impossible, after the
course taken by the prisoner, to shut his eyes to the nature of the defence in-
tended to be set up. If the facts led the jury to the conclusion that the pri-
soner had inflicted the wounds which had caused the death of the deceased, it
"would be their duty to find him guilty. The father of the deceased was a
small farmer near Darley, and the prisoner was the son of a flax-spinner at
Barley, and acted as his overlooker. The prisoner and the deceased had courted
for several years. Shortly before this sad event there had been a gala at
Bewerley Park, at which the deceased and the prisoner were, and a man named
Gill, a farmer of the neighbourhood, was there and had paid the deceased some
attentions which had apparently excited the prisoner's jealousy. Shortly after
this, on the 1st of August, the deceased met the prisoner as she was coming
from church with her sister, and he walked towards her home with her, a man
named Purness walking with her sister. The prisoner and the deceased were
seen to go up a lane called Stump's-lane, and the prisoner was the last person
seen walking with the deceased alive. The deceased next morning was found
in the ditch in this lane, with her throat cut, and dead, and the prisoner was in
consequence apprehended. It appeared that early that morning the prisoner
had gone into his brother's bedroom, and had made a statement that he had cut
Mary Jane's throat?"the Lord have mercy upon him, he had murdered his
sweetheart." On being taken into custody, he repeated this statement, and
subsequently made a lengthened statement, detailing the particulars of the crime,
when before the magistrates. The learned counsel stated in detail the facts
that will be found stated at length in the evidence.

William Scaife, the brother of Mary Jane Scaife, sworn, stated that he re-
sided at Darley. His father was a farmer, and resided at Darley. The pri-
soner had kept company with his sister for five or six years. They were sweet-
hearts. He last saw tliem together at Hurtwith Chapel on Sunday, the 1st of
August, about eight o'clock at night. They were going in the direction of
Darley, which is about a mile off. They were coming down a lane called Nidd-
lane, and going towards Stump's-lane, which comes out between Darley and a
place called Wreaks. Stump's-lane was the nearest road to Scaife's house.
A week before witness had been at a gala at Bewerley Park. His sister (the
deceased) and the prisoner were both there. A Mr. Gcoffry Gill was there
talking to her. His sister left the gala about eight o'clock.
Cross-examined.?It was a fine summer's evening, and people were walking
about. He heard no cry.

William Downs, a farmer at Darley, uncle to the deceased, also spoke to
seeing the deceased and the prisoner turn up Stump's-lane 011 Sunday night,
the 1st of August. He was courting her, and he had often seen them together.
In August, 1856, she went to Manchester, and returned in September, 1857.
Mr. Geoffrv Gill, a farmer at Kettlesing, had paid attention to his niece. The
prisoner's father had a flax-mill, and the prisoner, who was 24< years of age, was
mechanical overlooker.

Richard Howard, glass and china dealer, living at Darley, knew the prisoner
and the deceased. He saw them together going up Stump's-lane on the 1st
of August About twenty minutes past five o'clock next morning he was out
looking after*a mare in Stump's-lane, when he found the body of a woman laid
in the "ditch bottom. It appeared to be on the knees and fallen back in the
ditch bottom. It was blood all over, and the mouth and eyes wide open. He
immediately went back and alarmed his neighbours, and they returned and
made it out by the dress that it was the body of Mary Jane Scaife. They went
for the police, and Mr. Horton, the surgeon.

Cross-examined.?When he saw the prisoner and the deceased walking-
together they were " linked " together, and appeared as loving as he had ever
seen them.

John Clifton, policeman, of Darley, went to the house of the prisoner's father
on Monday, the 2nd of August. He had previously seen the dead body of
Mary Jane Scaife. He found the prisoner in his bed-room. He charged him
with feloniously murdering Mary Jane Scaife. He said "I have; I have
murdered my sweetheart." I afterwards asked him where the knife was, and
he said he would go along with me and show me. We crossed three fields,
and he found the knife produced (a small clasp knife) in a dry well. It was
open, and the large blade was bloody. On the way to Ripon Gaol he said,
" I have had this on my mind for three weeks, and I told her I would murder
her if she would not have me." There was no blood on his hands then.
Cross-examined.?There was a small scratch on his finger.

Thomas Atkinson, the brother of the prisoner, examined.?He lived at
Darley, with his father. When the prisoner came home 011 the night of the
2nd of August he came into witness's room between four and five o'clock.
Witness was in bed. He said, " Lord have mercy upon 111c, what have I
done ? I have murdered my sweetheart. I must have. Have I done it ? I
must have."

Cross-examined by Mr. Bliss.?I was asleep a few minutes after he came
home before lie came into my room. He was quite undressed. I had ob-
served a changc in him lately. I had seen that he was troubled with some-
thing for some weeks before this happened. He had a brother John, who had
been dead nine or ten years. The prisoner was about 21. Witness was 29
years of age. He had five sisters living and one step-brother, and two older
brothers than himself. Witness could read and write only middling. He
looked over the mill occasionally. The prisoner worked at mechanical work at
the mill, and overlooked a little. He only did simple work. The prisoner
was very passionate, and he had seen him put into a rage for a very trifling
cause. If ever he was checked, he got into a rage for very trifling things. He
was then quite ungovernable. He had seen him fight 011 those occasions like
a madman. He could not say much about the prisoner's behaviour to his
mother, as he was then only ] 1 years old. The prisoner had behaved very
badly to witness sometimes. If he said half a word it would derange his
mincl. The knife produced was his brother's. The prisoner had four watches.
One was a little silver Geneva watch. Witness knew he intended to give
that watch to the deceased. His brother John had been not altogether right,
lie also got into rages for very trifling causes.

Mr. Price objected to this evidence as collateral.
Mr. Bliss said this was the very essence of the inquiry, which was whether
the prisoner was of sound mind at the time or not.
His Lordship admitted the question. It was clearly evidence in such an
inquiry ; what was the state of mind of the brothers and sisters of the prisoner
was most important evidence to establish whether insanity was hereditary or
not in his family.

Cross-examination resuined.?lie had an aunt Ann, the sister of his mother.
She used to get into rages in the same way as his brother for very trifling
causes. She was quite insane once. She got wrong with her own mind ana
was put into an asylum.

He-examined.?'When his brother fought he would seize a hammer or any-
thing. Three of his sisters were married. His eldest brother worked at the
mill. He never heard that his brother had bought watches and sold them to
the mill-hands.

Mr. Richard George Horton, surgeon, at Darley, was sent for on the 2nd of
August to Stump's-lane. When he got there he found the dead body of Mary
Jane Seaife. He examined the body. The cause of death was the division of
the windpipe with some sharp instrument. A knife like the one produced
would have done it. Her dress was saturated with blood. Her bonnet was
lying under her in the ditch, her parasol broken and soaked with blood.
Cross-examined.?He arrived there at six in the morning. The body had
been dead several hours. There were eight distinct cuts or gashes in the
throat, and two punctured wounds, one on the right cheek and one on the left
clavicle. The skin was flayed off near the ear. There were three cuts across
the windpipe, and the left jugular vein was severed. Several of the wounds
he considered must have been given after death, as no blood had flowed from
them. When the body was taken to the inn, the prisoner had desired to kiss
the deceased. Witness had resided seven years in the neighbourhood. He
was the medical attendant of the prisoner's family, and knew the prisoner. He
should consider him a man of very weak mind. He was very readily excited
if at all thwarted, aud to a fearful extent. A man of decent education would
not be excited by such frivolous matters as he had known the prisoner cxcited
by. He had known him in paroxysms of passion and outrageous?almost in
a frenzy. He could not say that he would be absolutely without control at
such moments. He never saw the prisoner insane; but from what he had
known of the prisoner's temperament there was a possibility of his becoming
so. He is afflicted with goitre; it is of no great size, and lie had consulted
witness about it. He did not know that goitre and cretinism are necessarily
associated together. He thought, under similar circumstances, the prisoner
would do the same thing again. But possibly he would never feel the same
with regard to any other girl. He had attended the deceased by the prisoner's
request in March last for a miscarriage.

Re-examined.?When that connexion existed between them lie could easily
imagine that, if she declined to marry him, he would be so excited as to commit
the crime he had done, and he believed the prisoner would do it again under
similar circumstances. Violent passion might be aroused in him from various
causes. Violent passion was not a symptom of weak intellect. The prisoner
was a weak, frivolous, vain young man. In his paroxysms of passion he might
be subjected to momentary insanity. He had been given way to so much at
home, and his temper had been so little thwarted?in every argument they had
given way to him so much, that he considered he was master of all, and if
thwarted, momentary insanity might appear. If lie had been differently
educated, he probably might have been very different.

WilliamPullen, joiner, at Darlcy, saw the prisoner aud deceased in Stump's-
lane on August the 2nd. Witness observed to a friend, " These are close
acquaintances." The prisoner said, "Not so close as some of you think."
Cross-examined.?He did not find so much fault with his sense except in
this case. He was childishly fond of the deceased?never happy except with
her. His conversation was not the same as other young men's. He was
rather deficient. His conversation was not very amiable, and he generally
repeated it over again, and laughed. He was teased for that. He seemed
very passionate, and his passion was excited by mere trifles. Whenever he
was cnecked or thwarted, he was very resolute, even about trifling things.
Witness was related to the Scaifes.

Re-examined.?He had seen other young men after the deceased. The
prisoner seemed jealous of her if he saw any one else talking to her. He would
laugh at his own talk before anybody else would.

Mr. Price proposed to put in the prisoner's statement.
This was objected to, on the ground that it was not taken according to the
provisions of the statute.
The objection was overruled, and the statement, which is as follows, was put
in evidence:?

" The reason I murdered her was because she would not have me. She told me
her parents would not let her have me, and she said, ' My father was not against
it;' and the last words she said were, 'It's all my mother that has caused this disturb-
ance, Jim.' She cried out, three times, ' The Lord help me ; the Lord forgive me
and I hope the Lord will forgive her. I told her I could not be happy without
her; I could not rest in this world. She said it was all false ; that I cared nothing
about her, I had behaved so badly to her. It was all because she was queer with
me made me do it. I told her I should murder her if she would not have me,
because I could not rest. I told her I had not been happy for three weeks, or more
than that. She told me she had not been happy since her parents were against it;
they were always calling her. Her mother was the worst, she said. Her mother
never let her alone day in and day out. Her father never said anything to her,
never changed words about it. I was in the house on Sunday at tea time with her.
Her sister was there, and her mother came in ; her sister and her were in the house
and I was in the kitchen. She came out from her mother, and said, ' Come, go
out before my mother comes in.' I did as she wanted me, and we both thought
she did not see me, and I went out into another house on the contrary side of the
road?my father's house, but not where he lived. I should, perhaps, stop an hour
there, waiting of her and her sister coming out to go to chapel. Her mother and
her sister came out before her, and, perhaps, would stand talking a quarter of an
hour or ten minutes, and then she came out. I went to her, and then the two
sisters went up the lane and the mother went home. I followed them up the lane,
and overtook them in a field that takes into Stump's-lane, where I murdered her.
She did not talk to me much, but her sister did. I went down to the bottom of
the lane called Stump's-lane with them, and my sweetheart told me to go home to
change my coat?to get my black coat on. I said that would do that I had on for
me, and we parted at the bottom of the lane. I said to myself I would go to
Furniss, the other sister's sweetheart. There were some more people with Furniss.
I stopped a little bit and then I walked forward. There was some more people set
and standing on some wood below. I went and sat myself down, and talked a
little bit, and Furniss came up, and some more with him ; and I got up after a little
bit, and I went against Furniss. I asked him if he was going to Hartwith. We
set off down the lane together, and he thought it was a long way to go, he said ;
however, we kept moving on slowly while we got to the new line, and her brother
came to us. We were set upon a wall. We talked a little bit, and I pulled out a
shilling and sixpence, and asked if they could knock the shilling from under the
sixpence, and the sixpence to remain on the finger end. They tried to do it, and
they did it after a little bit. Then we set off all three of us to chapel. The girls
had gone before we set off. When we got to the chapel gates we went forward to
the public-house. We each of us got a glass of ale. Then we came down to the
chapel again. Then all the people came out of the chapel. We followed after
them. I went to my sweetheart, but she did not talk to me much never afterwards.
She said she thought we should have to part, as they called her so. She said they
had been calling her after I left the house ; her mother had near have gone crazed;
and we walked on together and left her sister and Furniss. We walked on to the
Stump's-lane bottom. When we got a little way she took her arm out of mine.
I wanted her to put it in again, and she would not. I told her I could not be
happy without her until I married her. She thought we could not be happy?she
was sure we could not be happy. She told me I should behave badly to her. I
said I should not if she would marry me. I d be content with her, but not without
her. She said we had better part a little bit. I told her many times I could not
part with her unless I did something with her. I told her I thought there was
some one else she wanted, and I could not bide any one else to have her. She
said we could both do without one another a little bit. Then I took hold of her.
She was walking on the side of the road. She was all the while awkward with me,
and would not go on quietly, so I stopped her where she was ; I took her by the
throat, and told her I would murder her if she did not go on quietly. She said it
was all false. She said I only wanted to make her believe so. Then I took her
by the throat and tried to choke her. She cried out when I took her by the throat,
and I thought some one would hear, and we both got up and walked on a little bit,
and I pulled my knife out and showed her it. She cried out, ' Let's go home,
Jim; let's go home, Jim.' I seized her and cut her throat, and she cried out, 'It's
all my mother, Jim, that has caused this disturbance.' Then she cried out, ' The
Lord help me,' three times, to the best of my recollection, and then she fainted
away, and then I left her. I went over the wall; shut the knife and put it into
my waistcoat pocket. I went up the fields and wandered about, perhaps an hour,
or an hour and a half: and T thought I would go and tell her parents, but I could not
go then. I came back. I thought I would go to her again, and I got a little bit
down the lane. My heart failed me, and I could not go to her. Then I got over
the wall again to the other field on the other side of the road, and I took the knife
out of my pocket again and opened it, and put it in the wall top ; then I took
across the field home to a little dam there is of my father's, and washed the blood
off my hands and face; then I took across the field home. When I got home, my
father and them were up. I did not go into the house ; I went into the shed
where the waggons and carts are, and sat me down till I thought they had all gone
to bed ; then I went into the house. I could not eat any supper. I went to bed,
I could not rest all the night. I got up in the morning and told my brother as he
told you, and have nothing more to say. " James Atkinson."
This was the case for the prosecution.

Mr. Bliss then proceeded to address the jury for the prisoner. He said lie
had to desire, what he was quite sure the jury were ready to give him, their
patient attention through this case. They had heard of the part which related
to the prosecution. They and the prosecution had been informed of the nature
of the defence, but they had yet had no opportunity of hearing the witnesses
oil the part of the prisoner who were to prove it. It was to the prisoner's case,
and to the evidence to be offered for him, that he now invited their attention.
He thought they would find, when they had heard the case through, that it
was only to be deplored; that they were not called upon by their verdict for
revenge on the prisoner, although there were grounds for measures of caution
and security, and to provide against any similar occurrence for the future,
upon their conviction that the prisoner was not a man who was to be treated
as having that degree of understanding which was requisite to make him
responsible for such a crime. They saw before them at the bar one of those
objects who, for the mysterious purposes of Providence, had been sent into the
world not gifted with the ordinary understanding of men?not having his
intellect developed beyond that of a child of eight or nine years of age, subject
to passions excited by frivolous causes, and not able to control them when in
paroxysms of rage?one with a mind insensible to the character of the act
which he did, and driven by a blind fury to do what he had not the under-
standing to prevent at the time. They had before them a young man of 24,
afflicted with goitre, or swelling of the neck, which was the not unusual accom-
paniment of the kind of insanity called " cretinism," and they would hear that
he had unhappily come by this from hereditary taint of his family. They would
find that family conspicuous for idiotcy and iunacy; that his brother, was an
idiot; his aunts were lunatics; that his father's brother was a furious lunatic;
that his grandmother had brought lunacy into the family; that this malady
was traceable to even more remote generations, and they would find six or
seven lunatics in the family, in every generation?in the prisoner's own gene-
ration, in his father's, in his grandfather's, and even in his great-grandfather's
generation. They would be told that this unhappy disease was in its nature
hereditary; that its existence in father or mother or grandfather proved that it
existed in the family, and that it might break out in any member of the family
descended from that stock. They would find an effete and worn-out stock
affected with idiotcy and lunacy on both sides of the house; and if the
prisoner had not, from this cause and from defect of understanding and ability.
the power to understand the consequences of his acts, he was not responsible
for them. They would have more than this proved, and it was to this evi-
dence he directed their particular attention. They would have the opinions
of learned physicians of great experience and skill in these matters, who had
carefully examined the prisoner, and whose opinions on such a matter were
infallible, and they would tell them that the prisoner was an imbecile, incapable
of appreciating the circumstances under which he was placed at this time, and
insensible to the nature of the act which he had done; that he was so far
below the average of human understanding and capacity that he c-ould not be
looked upon as acting according to the usual dictates of reason when placed
in any situation which could disturb the poor feeble intellect which he pos-
sessed. By nature his capacity was not capable of being further developed
than it had been, and he stood before them at the age of 24 with the
capacity of a child of ten years of age. With a capacity so unequal
to control his passions and the violence of his animal instincts, he
was utterly unable at the time to resist the impulses of passion, and
would to-morrow repeat this dreadful act, if placed in the same circum-
stances. He need not tell them if he proved this of the prisoner that he
Avas entitled to their acquittal; for our law was not so barbarous
as to exact from such an intellect that which it did exact from everybody else.
Although they might hear idle statements that a man was sane enough if he
could walk about and do something like other people, far be it from the jury-
box, when executing justice, to apply such rules to him. It would be a
cruelty and a barbarism which society had never been able to bear. Not even
in the times when lunacy was so little understood that lunatics were treated
with chains and whips could such a sentence ever be executed. But our law
at the beginning of this century had made a very salutary provision for such
cases as this. Lest such a man should be allowed to go at large who had
committed such a crime as this, and that this might not influence the minds of
jurors, our law had humanely provided that if a prisoner should be acquitted
on the ground of his insanity, it should be so found by their verdict, and that
in such a case he should never have the opportunity of repeating his offence
but that he should be locked up for the remainder of his life. The law was
wise and good, and they would execute it in the spirit of the law, and would
take care that no man was subject to the dreadful punishment of the law
attached to this crime about whose sanity they had a doubt. It was not
necessary that they should believe him to be raving mad, for the word " in-
sanity " applied to various states of the mind. It was sufficient if he was
shown to be incompetent of knowing the consequences of his acts, and was so
far imbecile as not to know the character of what he was doing, whether it
was right or wrong. For the commission of this dreadful crime no motive had
been proved. No jealousy had been proved. Nothing more had taken place
to account for it than a mere lovers' quarrel. Would that in a sane mind
account for such an act as this ? What sane man would have acted as the
prisoner-had done ? He had made no attempt to escape. Nothing had been
denied him by his sweetheart. The intimacy had been carried on for years to
the last extremity; they were walking lovingly together. It was impossible
to account for the murder under such circumstances, except on the grounds
suggested by the defence, that the prisoner's intellect was weak, that trifles
easily inflamed him into rage, and that when in that state he was utterly in-
sensible to the consequences of what he did. The prisoner was the eighth
child of Thomas Atkinson, his father. His brother John, who was an idiot,
now dead, was the ninth child. The prisoner, from early youth, had been in-
capable of learning more than the mere rudiments of education. He knew
nothing of arithmetic or the New Testament. He was unable to do any-
thing but the most trifling things. He had never more capacity than a child
nine or ten years of age; but his passions and animal instincts had grown
with his growth. His statements made after the murder indicated the state of
his mind. His reasons assigned for the act were not such as could have in-
fluenced any sane man. He had given his sweetheart ten wounds, some after
death. What criminal so barbarous and unrelenting that he could not be satis-
fied with the blood of his victim but he must inflict on her wounds after her
death ? If possessed of sane intellect, such a thing could not have happened.

What was there in the circumstances of the case to excite such horrid bitter-
ness and malignity ? This act had been done by tlxe poor girl's sweetheart?by
him who had wished to kiss her after her death. How could such an act be
done by him, unless done under one of those paroxysms of excitement and in-
sanity to which the prisoner was said to be subject, and when he was not re-
sponsible for his acts ? The prisoner had a brother who was an idiot. _ His
mother had two sisters who were both lunatics, and one of them had died in an
asylum, aud the other had attempted to destroy herself. In the next genera-
tion the brother of the grandfather of the prisoner was given to violent out-
bursts of passion, and at last broke out raving mad. He had a daughter
Susannah, who was now alive, an idiot. The grandmother of the prisoner
brought lunacy into the family too. Her mother was a lunatic, and the same
hereditary malady was traceable higher in her family. Here was sufficient to
prove that there existed in this unhappy stock an hereditary taint which re-
duced them below the ordinary level of humanity. He should prove to them
by the testimony of competent men that the prisoner was an imbecile, and that
he was one whom to hang would be an act of barbarity and a disgrace to our
laws. The learned counsel concluded an able speech by calling the following
witnesses:?

Thomas Atkinson, flax-spinner, of Darlcy, the father of the prisoner, exa-
mined.?Is the son of the late Thomas Atkinson, and Grace his wife. His
mother's maiden name was Rcynaud. His first wife was called Mary Dalby. He
had had nine children by his wife Mary, three dead. The prisoner was the
youngest but one. The youngest was called John. He was born in 1837. He
died thirteen or fourteen years ago, at ten years of age. The prisoner went to
school to Snow's and Atkinson's. He could not tell how long he was at school.
After lie left school he turned him into the mill to job, sewing lists and oiling the
machinery, and to look after the hands and see that they were at work. He never
bought or sold for him. He never kept the books for him or wrote the letters.
He was not so sharp as some of his children. When he was put out of the way
he was very dangerous. Any trifling matter that did not agree with his mode
of thinking put him out of the way. There were only five young people in the
mill; he was very violent with them sometimes, and one of them, named Wilson,
he used to caution, as he feared he would do him some harm. Three weeks
before this happened he saw a difference in the prisoner. He got low-spirited,
and seemed to have no talk. His son John was four years before he could walk,
and he never could understand him properly. He was rather curious, and not
right in his faculties somehow. The prisoner when crossed used very bad
language, and was bewildered in his looks; he never dared cross him. On such
occasions he would push about and seem to be in quite a rage. His wife had a
sister called Ann Dalby. She was in an asylum once or twice in her life. She
had a sister called Eleanor. She was wrong in her mind. His grandmother on
the father's side was named Medley; she was before his time. His father had
a younger brother named James. He had heard tell of him, but never saw him.
His grandmother on the mother's side was named Dalviel.

Cross-examined.?His wife's two sisters were in Wakefield Asylum. One
was dead. His son, the prisoner, had attended a night school in the winter for
a year or two. His son attended at the mill, and sometimes took off a wheel
when witness told him. The prisoner "brayed" his younger brother, and was
cruel in his disposition. He had named him as one of his executors in his will,
made two years ago.

Re-examined.?His wages were 5s. a-week.

Joseph Trees, joiner, of Darley, sworn.?He had lived at Darley all his life,
and had known the prisoner. He met the prisoner on the morning of the
1st of August last?the day of the murder. He showed witness a Geneva
watch?a small ladies' watch. He said he had got it from Robert Scaife, and
he thought it would suit Mary Jane. He had three other watches. He saw
him that night walking with the deceased. He looked as though lie was in
trouble. He had noticed that the prisoner was very passionate. He would
throw things about in his passion.

Honan Potter examined.?He had married a sister of the prisoner, and had
lived in the same house with him. He was a very passionate person. In his
mind he considered him " rather short," and very dull. He got into raging
passions for very trifling matters. He always considered him not right. On
the Sunday of the murder he saw him; he iooked in a wild state, worse than
usual, and he had remarked on it when he got home. He seemed very fond of
the deceased, as if he could not bide her out of his sight.

Cross-examined.?He had six children; one of them was 19. Some of them
sometimes got into violent passions and for trifling causes. When in his
passions the prisoner would do anything to be master. He cooled down when
he was taken no notice of.

Re-examined.?The prisoner got into different passions to any he ever saw
his children in.

Richard Gill examined.?Was a yarn dyer and maker-up for the prisoner's
father, and had been in his service for the last eight years. He knew the
deceased; she and the prisoner always seemed very loving. The prisoner used
to call her his intended. He always considered the prisoner as a stupid man,
very much given to passion. If crossed in the least, he was in a passion. He
always considered him as a man not sound in his mind. Witness knew the
prisoner's brother John. He always considered him out of his mind.

Cross-examined.?He was one of the men in the mill overlooked by the
prisoner. He used if crossed to get into violent passions. He thought he
would have killed his little brother once; he was nearly 16. He knocked
him down and kicked him. He never tried to knock a man of his own size
down. Witness never durst cross him. He had crossed witness many a time.
He never attacked witness. Witness was between 60 and 70 years of age.
Re-examined.?He really was afraid the prisoner would have killed his
brother once. The young one got away and got home. Witness dared not-
cross him because of his passion. He feared he would strike him.
Christopher Atkinson sworn.?Is no relation to the prisoner. He was
formerly in the army and in the Peninsular war. He went afterwards to Shaw-
mill, kept by John Atkinson, the uncle of the prisoner, and he then removed to
Darley. He kept a school. The prisoner and his brother John, who was a
complete idiot, attended his school. The prisoner while at witness's school
was very dull, of weak mind and weak intellect. His manner was eccentric
and singular. He was very passionate, and at other times quite low, and would
scarcely answer a question. He had seen the prisoner frequently in a passion,
and had had many complaints against him. Of late years lie had also seen liim
in passions. He raved like a madman.

Cross-examined.?He foamed at the mouth. He would then' cool down and
would scarcely answer a question. He had been a schoolmaster forty years.
The prisoner was by no means fit to be an overlooker.

Re-examined.?He never had a boy of so violent a temper as the prisoner.
He never got master of his letters properly.

Joseph Snow, schoolmaster, examined, gave similar evidence. The prisoner,
in liis judgment, was not capablc of consecutive thought. On one occasion
he was present when the prisoner came home, and smelling a smell of cooking,
he asked what there was for dinner. His mother told him. He then asked
when it would be ready. His mother told him. He said, "I want some now."
His mother told him it was impossible, it was not cooked. He had a stick in
his hand, and he violently struck the clock with it, and his mother, to appease
him, took the dinner out of the oven as it was, and gave him some. He was
then eight or nine years of age. He knew nothing about the New Testament
or arithmetic, or beyond Reading made Easy.

John Dalby examined.?Is the brother of the prisoner's mother. He had a
sister Ann aud Eleanor. Ann was not of sound mind. She was twice in a
lunatic asylum, once twenty-five years ago for a year, and again fourteen years
ago for two or three years. She attempted several times to commit suicide.
She was uneasy and restless, and had delusions. His sister Eleanor was also
taken to Wakefield Asvlnm. She died there.

Jane Dalby, the wife of the last witness, gave similar testimony.
Eormal proof of the insanity of the two Dalbys and the medical certificates
of their insanity were given, and also of the admission of Samuel Reynaud as a
lunatic iu 1824, born an idiot, with hasty temper.

Ann Atkinson, widow of James Atkinson, great-uncle of the prisoner,
examined.?Her husband's mother's maiden name was Medley. She was
married about 54 years ago. Her husband had been in an unsound state of
mind. He studied about his soul till he got quite wrong. He jumped through
a window and injured himself, and was pursued and bound, and taken care of.
He was ill again in the same way several times. One of lier daughters by her
husband was of weak intellect, and wrong.

Isabella lieynaud, wife of John Reynaud, age 81, examined.?Her husband
was brother of the prisoner's grandmother. Her husband's mother's name
was Dowgi'l. She was out of her mind. Her husband at those times guarded
her and took care of her. She shouted and sang all the night long. She
knew Thomas Reynaud, her husband's brother, and he had a son named Samuel,
born an idiot, who was sent to the asylum at Wakefield.

Mr. John Kitcliing examined.?Is a surgeon, and has had the medical
management for 1G years of the Retreat, a Quaker lunatic asylum near York.
He had visited the prisoner, with a view to ascertain his capacity and intellect,
seven times, about an hour each visit. The result of his investigation was
that the prisoner, in his opinion, was an imbecile. He meant by that a person
whose mental powers had never arrived at maturity, but had stopped very far
short of it. His mental powers had not gone beyond the capacity of a child
of eight or nine years of age. He imputed that to arise from a very imperfect
constitution, both mentally and physically. His physical constitution cor-
responded with his mental. His powers of observation were exceedingly low;
his memory very deficient. He had scarcely any power either of reflecting or
judging. The result of his examination was that, in his opinion, his moral
powers had equally suffered in this very defective development. He had very
confused notions of the New Testament, and of arithmetic. These examina-
tions led him to the conclusion that he was not in mind more than a child. He
considered his animal instincts and passions were disproportionably strong com-
pared with his powers of mind, which he believed unable to control them. He
was physically feeble, and had a large goitre. These were appearances usually
found attending an imbecile. Goitre was a common accompaniment of imbe-
cility. Insanity was hereditary. He had heard the evidence, and he had no
doubt whatever the prisoner was in an unsound state of mind when he killed
the deceased. He was not capablc of estimating in a correct and healthy
manner the nature of such an act, nor was he capable of restraining himself
from the commission of any act from a consideration of the consequences.
Nor did lie believe that even now he could be restrained from again committing
the same act under the same circumstances.

Cross-examined.?He had on two former occasions come to give evidence of
the insanity of prisoners. Once was in Dove's case. He did not say the
prisoner's head was the worst he ever saw. He had asked him what a man
thought with?if he thought with his heart ? and the prisoner answered he
thought not. He had asked the prisoner if a man could think with his legs
cut off P and he said he could not tell what he would think then. He had
measured his head, and said it was small. He classed him as an imperfect
idiot and partial imbecile. The development of the intellect depended partly
on the education and partly on the healthy condition and growth of the child.
He should be of opinion that the prisoner had not been a healthy child from
his appearance.

Mr. Ivitching's cross-examination on abstract propositions was resumed at
great length. The general result of it was that lie did not believe that the
prisoner at the time he committed the crime, from its attendant circumstances
and from what he had heard and knew of the prisoner, was of sound mind.
His animal instincts were greatly developed and beyond liis control. He had
heard from him that for a long period he had had sexual intercourse with the
deceased. He did not know the difference between right and wrong in the
sound and healthy manner of ordinary men. Witness had given evidence in
Dove's case. He then propounded the opinion that if a man nourished an idea
until it gained such possession of his mind as to injure his health and produce
a morbid change in his brain, it then might become an uncontrollable condition
of mind, impelling him to carry out the idea, and that he then would not be
responsible.

Mr. Bliss objected to this reference to Dove's case, the object of which was
to import prejudice into this.

Re-examined.?He had 112 patients in his establishment; 10 or 12 of them
were imbeciles, and some of them could read and write and attended religious
services. He had some imbeciles in his establishment who knew more of
religious truths than the prisoner. There was no difference of opinion among
learned men in his profession that a man might nourish an idea until it gained
possession of him and became an uncontrollable condition of mind. He had
learned that the prisoner's religious sentiments had been gained since his
incarceration.

Dr Caleb Williams, licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, had been
30 years in his profession, and was visiting physician to three lunatic asylums.
He had visited the prisoner for the purpose of making himself acquainted with
the state of his mind several times. He thought he had very little power of
reflection and very small power of judgment. His manner was peculiar. He
was slow in answering questions, and his manner indicated a considerable
effort of memory and understanding. He frequently said, " I don't remember,"
" I cannot tell," I am not sure." His memory was very defective. Wit-
ness examined him as to his knowledge of trees and domestic animals, with
which a man in his position was likely to be familiar. He appeared to possess
very little knowledge of the locality where he lived. His moral faculties were
very feeble. His instincts and. passions were very strong. Witness should
think that he had not sufficient mental and moral power to control his pas-
sions or instincts. He appeared to have a very imperfect appreciation of
death. His knowledge seemed scarcely to exceed that of a child of eight or
ten years of age. During a sudden outburst of passion witness believed he
would have no power to appreciate the nature and quality of an act. He be-
lieved, from the evidence he had heard, and from what lie knew of him, that
he was incapable of appreciating the crime he had committed. Insanity was
hereditary, and when it had existed in parents was very likely to show itself in
children, and break out in sudden outbursts of passion. The character of the
prisoner's mind was that of an imbecile?a man of defective mental power. In
his opinion, the murder was perpetrated when the prisoner was in a state of
violent passion, and in that condition he would have no power to restrain him-
self. Imbeciles were liable to violent outbursts of passion. From the oppor-
tunity he had had of judging of the prisoner, he should think he had always
been an imbecile. His appearance and manner suggested the consideration
whether the prisoner was feigning imbecility, and he had directed his attention
to that subject, and came to the conclusion that he was not feigning. He
had used every meaus which his skill could suggest to test the state of his
mind, and he had no doubt that he was an imbecile.

Cross-examined.?He had given evidence in five criminal eases to prove the
insanity of the criminals. Imbcciles were capablc of some education, and
therefore improved; he did not agree in the opinion that they remained always
the same; they sometimes got worse. His memory would improve by exercisc.
The prisoner told him lie had never seen a fir-tree, and did not know what a
beech-tree was, and had an imperfect knowledge of domestic animals. He
said he did not know a hare, ana did not know what a pheasant was. He had
not asked him whether he knew a cat, a dog, a horse, a cow, a donkey, or a pig.
He thought the prisoner had a very imperfect sense of right and wrong. He
did not believe that the prisoner would ask forgiveness of the father and mother
of his victim, unless he had been urged to it. If he did it spontaneously, it
would show he had some appreciation of right and wrong, but he believed the
prisoner to be incapable of such appreciation. A sane man might, probably, steal,
because he had not sufficient power to control his passion for money. He
believed the prisoner when lie committed the crime did know that he was com-
mitting the act of cutting the deceased's throat, but he did not know the
nature and quality of the act; lie did not know the moral nature of it?whether
it was right or wrong. Weak persons, and those descended from insane an-
cestors, are prone to violent passion, and had not the same power of control as
other persons. He had examined the prisoner in arithmetic. He did not
know what 6 times 5 amounted to. He did not know how much 2 and 2
made. He should be surprised to learn that the prisoner had advanced as far
as " Proportionif he had, it did not alter his opinion regarding him. He
might have answered on the trial of Dove, that, " if a man nourished any pas-
sion until it became uncontrollable, that was moral insanity."

Re-examined.?If a man so nursed a passion it usually injured the health,
affected the nervous system, and he became the subject of disease of the brain.
He did not think the prisoner was capable of planning such a " murder"?it
was the impulse of the moment. If lie had hated the girl, lie did not believe
him capable of assuming to the world that he loved her. Education could not
improve the prisoner beyond the range of an imbecile.

Air. Samuel William North, surgeon, of London, and demonstrator of
anatomy at York, had been nine years in practice, and was surgeon to a private
asylum containing 40 patients for four years?Dunnington House, near York.
He was also surgeon to the workhouse at York, where they had an average of
30 to 40 imbecile inmates. He had visited the prisoner in gaol six times, the
last time last "Wednesday, about an hour each time. He had applied tests to
him to ascertain the state of his mind, and had arrived at the opinioii that he
was an imbecile. In his physical structure he had the stooping posture and
bent knees common among imbecile persons. His manner of speaking was
slow and hesitating, as though he had considerable difficulty in apprehending
questions, and his answers were preceded by observations such as " I don;t
know," "happen." He did not change when speaking of the murder. His
mental capacity was far below a man of his years of his class. He had the
capacity of a child of 11 or 12 in his own station of society. The higher
faculties of his mind were deficient. He did not consider "memory" one of
the highest faculties of the mind ; it was frequently possessed to a great degree
by imbeciles; but the prisoner's memory was defective. He was deficient in
the qualities of comparison and reflection. Witness knew the neighbourhood
of Darley. There was a large wood of fir-trees there. He asked the prisoner
what kind of country it was where he lived, but he could get no information
from him such as would have guided a stranger, nor of the people who lived
there. He put to him, " Suppose a man received 2s. 6d. a-day wages, and
worked all the week, how much would he have to receive for a week's wages ?"
He made three or four guesses at the sum, none of which were correct. He
asked several similar questions and got incorrect answers. He asked how much
Is. a-day would be at the end of the week, and that he answered correctly.
He was asked if he knew where he was ; he said, " I don't know; they tell
me it is York Castle." He asked him all the particulars of the charge against
him, and he seemed not in the slightest degree affected. He should say of his
moral power, in the common broad acceptation of the term, he did not know
right from -wrong. The prisoner was examined as to his animal passions, and
his answers showed that he indulged them to an inordinate extent. His expe-
rience of men of the prisoner's class was that they always indulged their
animal propensities, and this was a general character of imbecility. He believed
at this present moment that he was an imbecile?to use a common expression,
" a natural" fool. A " natural" was a common term among the lower orders.
The character of the crime and the prisoner's conduct subsequently were in
keeping with his weak state of mind. He thought he had not a full and sen-
sible knowledge of the criminality of his act. Imbeciles, while violent in their
passions, were also timid. He believed when in those passions they had no
complete knowledge of what they were doing, nor of controlling themselves.
Any one form of insanity in an ancestor might be succeeded by a different form
in the children. It was common experience. The more numerous a person's
ancestors afflicted with insanity were, the more likely was he to have insanity.
It was a conclusion upon which all medical men agreed.

Cross-examined.?This was the first time he had been examined in such a
case. Sometimes idiots were gibing muttering fools, but rapidity of utterance
certainly did not characterize all forms of insanity. He asked liim if he knew
Brimham Rocks, a famous place in his neighbourhood, and he could tell him
nothing about it. He asked him if he knew the road to Hardcastle-garth, a
village two miles from Darley, where the prisoner lived, and he said he did not
know. He thought the prisoner knew that he was cutting the deceased's
throat, but not that it was a crime. Although the prisoner had called this a
crime, witness did not know that he knew it was one. Insane people often
used sane expressions. He believed that the prisoner repeated the words by
rote. In the general and common acceptation of the term he did not believe
that he knew the difference between right and wrong.

Dr Forbes Winslow examined.?Is a physician and a D.C.L. of Oxford,
lives in Cavendish-square, London, and has studied medicine all his life. He
had visited the prisoner for more than an hour the day before yesterday, and
examined him most carefully as to the state of his mind, with a view to this
inquiry. He appeared to him to have the physiognomy of a class of persons
called "imbeciles." The expression was fatuous and vacant, as often seen in
persons subject to dementia. He had the peculiar slouching gait and attitudes
of that class. He has also a large goitre, and knowing that that feature is
often seen with a low order of intellect, particularly among a class of people
in Switzerland called "cretins," and from his general aspect altogether, had
he met him in a room, he should have been much struck by his imbecile
appearance. He was remarkably slow and dull of apprehension. He answered
in monosyllables, and as if he had difficulty in giving an answer. He had a
slow, sluggish style of thought, and answered with difficulty questions which
a child of five or six years of age would have readily understood. He ques-
tioned him as to his unhappy condition, and he did not appear to know where
he was. He said he was told he was in York Castle. He did not know
whether it was in Yorkshire; it might be in London. He asked him if he
knew lie had committed a dreadful crime. He said, "Parson tells me so."
He asked if he was to be tried. He said " I supposed so. Parson tells I
is to go before judge." He asked him as to the existence of a God. He
answered " I never seed Him." He asked him if he knew who our Saviour was.
He said he didn't know; parson told him about hell, and that it was fire. He
did not kuow where it was, it might be in Yorkshire or London. He did not
seem to know things which children of ordinary knowledge were acquainted
with. He did not know whether the Queen was a woman or a man. He was
able to repeat the Lord's Prayer correctly, at which witness was rather
surprised, considering his past answers. He had seen a vast number of
imbeciles, both at home and abroad. It was usual, in some conditions of sad
imbecility, for patients to show a proper knowledge of the great truths of
religion.' They very rarely forgot the lessons of early days. Imbeciles were
capable of being instructed up to a certain point, and even idiots. That
experiment had been tried in the various idiotic institutions. He had never
known an imbecile do a sum in " Proportion but one might, by careful and
continuous training, be educated to that extent. It was utterly impossible for
the prisoner to understand such a sum. It was a lamentable fact that just as
the higher faculties of the mind sunk down, the animal passions began to master
the understanding, and took the place of reason. Imbeciles often showed great
affection. Indulgence in sexual intercourse would be very likely to absorb the
rest of the mind. Imbeciles were constantly put to manual labour in the great
establishments in the country, and were quite capable of many ordinary occupa-
tions. They constantly did it. Most of the land in connexion with our great
lunatic asylums was worked by imbeciles and lunatics. The facts of the pre-
sent murder were consistent with the acts of an imbecile. Prom his examina-
tion of the prisoner, he was ill a state of imbecility, not responsible for his
actions, of stunted intellect, born in that condition, and he could not bring his
mind to believe that he ever could be looked upon as a healthy-minded person
and responsible for his actions. He might have a physical consciousness of an
act done. This was a case respecting which he had not the slightest doubt,
and he never saw a case clearer to his mind than the state in which the prisoner
now was.

Cross-examined.?There were cases of feigned insanity. He had seen such
cases, but had not been deceived by them. He could not tell where Hell was,
nor could witness. He had no idea who God was. Witness should expect a
child of five or six properly instructed would be able to give some notion who
God was. Cretinism was not confined to Switzerland?there was a great deal
in Lancashire. Goitre was not confined to lunatics?certainly not. Imbecility
came on as life progressed. He did not agree with Dr Taylor's definition.
He did not agree with Dr Taylor's opinion that one-half the world might
reason itself into the belief that the other half was insane. Dr Taylor was an
eminent man, but he had not had much experience in this branch of science.
An imbecile was one whose brain was stunted in its development, and as a con-
sequence the mind was feeble, the brain being the organ of thought. He
never knew of a sound-minded ci iminal who had covered his victim with wounds.
He had in a number of cases refused to give evidence in support of a plea of
insauitv, and had made it a rule to refuse to go iiuo a witness-box to prove a
prisoner's sanity on a charge of murder. He had in many cases been called as
a witness in support of a plea of insanity. He thought the prisoner had been
in this stunted state of intellect for years, and lie could not conceive that the
prisoner had a riglit appreciation of the wrongfulness of the act he was doing
when he committed the murder. (A letter written by the prisoner from the
gaol was read, full of religious scraps and quotations.) The witness thought
the letter showed more apprehension than he should have given the prisoner
credit for. (Another letter was read.)

Mr. Bliss objected to this evidence. The defence having been disclosed by
the cross-examination, these letters ought to have been tendered as evidence
in chief.

Mr. Price said the plea of insanity rested on the defendant to prove, and
he could not meet that defence until it was raised. The issue he had to prove
was the murder.

Mr. Bliss, in reply, said his friend was perfectly right if he had not known,
from the defence set up by the cross-examination, that insanity was the defence.
He now changed the case. He went partly into the case before, and now
again went into the other part.

His Lordship was of opinion that the evidence was admissible by way of
reply.

Examination continued.?If the letter read was a spontaneous act, and the
prisoner had not been directed to write it, it exhibited more power of mind
than he should have supposed the prisoner possessed. (A third letter was
read from the prisoner while in gaol.) If spontaneous, the prisoner seemed to
have more appreciation of his position than he should have imagined.
Re-examined.?It was possible for an imbecile visited by a religious man or
clergyman to express himself in the terms of his visitor for a short time.
Unless he had been very much deceived, the prisoner could not retain such
ideas long. There was nothing in his conversation with the prisoner on reli-
gious matters corresponding in the slightest degree with those letters. He
should not for a moment have believed him capable of spontaneously writing
such letters. He had not a shadow of a doubt as to his condition. He might
be taught a few Scriptural phrases. He was not feigning insanity when he
saw him. Many imbeciles were capable of writing long and kind letters. lie
had known many such instances. Taken by themselves, the letters were no
safe test. He had taken for his oonclusions the whole case together.
Mr. North was recalled.?The prisoner's was not a case of feigned imbecility.
This was the case for the prisoner.

Mr. Price called evidence in reply, proving the prisoner's letters.
Mr. Jackman, who taught the prisoner at a night school, was called to prove
'that he had advanced in arithmetic as far as "Proportion."
Mr. Anderson, the surgeon of the York Gaol, was called, and proved visiting
the prisoner in his capacity as officer of the prison. In his opinion the prisoner
was sane, and answered the questions put to him like a sane man of his class
in life.

Cross-examined.?Some four or live medical men in York had devoted their
lives to the study ol lunacy. He did not think that those gentlemen were
better able to give an opinion on questions of lunacy than himself. Such
gentlemen, from devoting themselves exclusively to one subject, were liable to
be a little crotchety.

Mr. Green, Under-Governor ol the gaol, stated that the prisoner had written
letters in the common wardroom, and he believed he had not written any letter
under dictation or in the presence of the chaplain.

Cross-examined.?During the last six weeks the Wesleyan minister had
visited him twice a week. He was not present. There were no writing mate-
rials in the room where they were.

Mr. Bliss then addressed the jury in reply to this evidence with great force.
The learned counsel denounced the attempt which this last evidence showed to
hunt an idiot to the scaffold. He knew the excitement when a verdict was at
stake, and tliat when men got their blood up in such a pursuit, there was no
fox-hunting equal to man-hunting. He denounced the attempt to sneer down
the evidence of men like Dr Forbes Winslow, Dr Williams, and Mr. Kitching
and Mr. North, who had devoted themselves to this branch of sVudy, by the
presumption and ignorance of men like Mr. Anderson, with his limited expe-
rience of York gaol. And for what ? In order that this man might be hanged,
and that an imbecile might be strangled on the gallows?an act of barbarity
sufficient to make the very stones of York cry out against it. He called on the
jury to attach no weight to evidence like this when contrasted with the mass
of evidence he had adduced contradicting it. This was a question of medical
testimony altogether. Which did they believe ? Mr. Anderson, or the medical
testimony opposed to it. The letters of the prisoner put in evidence, he sub-
mitted, established rather the imbecility which was said to be the character of
the prisoner. There was in them an attempt to deal with ideas newly acquired,
and a repetition of the same scriptural quotations, sometimes misquoted, which
indicated imbecility; and they were told that letters alone were 110 test of
sanity, but that imbeciles were often able to write proper letters. The letters
were, he suggested, the promptings of the Wesleyan minister who had visited
the prisoner two or three times a-week, and had been written from his prompt-
ings, with infinite labour. That Wesleyan minister the prosecution had not
dared to call. When examined as to " hell," his answers were, " Parson says
it's so and so." That was the key to the letters. He had been prompted and
urged to write them. Was it upon a conflict of testimony like this that this
man was to be hanged, against the opinion of the men he had called ? The exe-
cution of such a man would be a disgrace to the jurisprudence of this country.
Mr. Price replied at considerable length on the whole evidence, contending
that the facts showed the prisoner to be sane. Feeling the greatest respect for
medical testimony supported by facts, he called on the jury to reject the testi-
mony of a set of hired advocates in that profession, who went about to prove
the theories of their own crotchety brains. The learned counsel then went
with great minuteness and detail through the evidence in an able address, which
occupied upwards of two hours and a-half in the delivery.

The Court was again thronged this morning, but was not so crowded as
during the two previous days of the trial. The prisoner, whose conduct through-
out the trial strangely contrasted with that exhibited by him for some days
after the murder, did not appear to have suffered much mental anxiety, and
during the summing-up, as on the preceding days, he maintained a degree of
xmpassiveness which was painful to witness, and which was only explicable on
the assumption that he was unconscious of what was passing around him, or
was acting a part with the most consummate skill.

His Lordship said, the prisoner was indicted for the wilful murder of Mary
Jane Scaife, on the 1st of August last, and the jury had two questions to de-
cide, first, whether, supposing the prisoner to be of sound mind, he was guilty
of the murder; and, second, whether he was of sound mind at the time he
committed it. The plea set up by his learned counsel was, that at the time he
committed the crime he was not a person capable of governing his actions?
that he was in a state of mental insanity, and was, therefore, not responsible.
They had had a very long inquiry, and he must say that one-half the time would
have done justice to every person, for, on looking at his notes, he found ques-
tions asked over and over again, the only object of which could be to em-
barrass their minds as to the conclusion to which they must come. The real
question for their decision was the state of the prisoner's mind at the time he
committed the offence. It was most important that all persons who were
guilty of great crimes should be punished; but whilst it was important that
the guilty should not go unpunished, both humanity and justice demanded that
they should closely investigate a plea of insanity, so that they might not be
guilty of the barbarity of sending a man, irresponsible for his actions, to the
gallows. The case, as he had previously stated, had lasted twenty-and-a-half
hours, of which five had been consumed by speeches of counsel. When the
wise and salutary rule was laid down with reference to the speeches of counsel,
which was now the practice, it was prognosticated that their criminal courts
would be made, as they had seen the previous night, the arena for display?
the arena in which to struggle for victory rather than for truth?and he put it
to them, whether some of the remarks which had been made were not those of
mere advocates, rather than of gentlemen whose duty it was to instruct the
jury, and aid them in coming to a just conclusion. It was indifferent to him-
self or to the jury whether the prisoner was found guilty or not, provided they
sifted the case, and came, in the exercise of their best judgment, to a true
conclusion. Truth was their object; and it should be remembered that
\ this was not a Nisi Prius cause, where every point was to be fought to the
last, but a case of the gravest importance, involving no less an issue than the
life of the prisoner at the bar. To proceed, they must first decide whether
this was a murder, and next, if the prisoner was of sane mind. There could
be no doubt as to the first question, for they had not only the evidence of
several witnesses, but the prisoner's own confession. That confession would
leave no doubt that at the time he made it he was a person responsible for his
acts, and knew that he had committed the crime of murder; but, as they would
remember, the learned counsel for the defence made no point of that, his case
being, that at the time the murder was committed the prisoner was not master
of his actions?that he was then insane, and unable to distinguish between
right and wrong. The plea of insanity was a very general term, and included
delusion, under which a person might be able to transact ordinary business ;
raving madness, idiotcy, and imbecility, and all classes of mental disease where
a person could not distinguish between right and wrong. The question for
their decision, to establish the prisoner's insanity, was, that at the time he
committed this act he did not know the difference between right and wrong?
that he was not in a state of mind to know that he was doing wrong. That
' i was the definition of the law as laid down in the House of Lords, and by
learned judges?in other words, as they had heard, whether the prisoner knew
lt J, the nature and quality of the act, that lie knew it was a wrong act. If he did,
then he was responsible; if, on the other hand, lie had been visited by the
Almighty, and had been born into the world with a mind not capable of such
a distinction, he was irresponsible, and they were bound to find him not guilty,
leaving him in his Lordship's hands for future detention and security. The
Tio-1- mere fact that he committed an outrageous act was no evidence of insanity,
and he must _ deprecate any such idea as that stated ~by Mr. Pitching, if he
understood him correctly, that a person of sound mind could not have com-
mitted this murder. Do not be carried away with any such notion, because
it would be giving impunity to every person committing a great crime,
as it would lead to the doctrine, the greaterthe crime, the greater the chance
of escaping unpunished. He must also warn them as to" the passion of
a man. If a sane man flew into a passion, and murdered a fellow-creature, he
was clearly responsible, because such a man was bound to control his feelings,
and keep his passions in check. But, if a man was so diseased in his mind
that his passion overpowered his reason, and incapacitated him from knowing
that he was doing wrong, then he was not responsible. They had had a long
argument, and the learned counsel for the prosecution had cross-examined the
witnesses with great ability, but he had never struggled with the real strength
of the case. The case for the prisoner rested upon his early character, his
conduct at the time of the murder, and the influence likely to have been ex-
erted upon Lira by his ancestors, through hereditary descent. As to his early
history, the account generally given was, that lie was a person of weak in-
tellect, a simple person, and liable to fly into paroxysms of passion. They had
two or three witnesses for the prosecution, and four for the defence, who spoke
to this point. It might be said that they were near relatives, but who, their
evidence being received with due care, so well able to know the prisoner's
habits and disposition ? They all said he was subject to paroxysms of frenzy;
and upon that they were told, what they knew, that persons of imbecile in-
tellect were men of strong passions, and liable to paroxysms of rage. Two of
the medical men had examined the prisoner six times, another seven, and
T*r. Winslow had examined him once. They were all well-acquainted with the
subject of insanity, and they all held him to be of a class of insanity called
imbecility. Their distinction between idiotcy and imbecility was this. Idiotcy,
they said, was that state in which" a person was born bereft of reason; imbe-
cility, that state in which a person was born with weak powers of mind, and
which could only be developed within a limited extent. Imbeciles, however,
could do many ordinary kinds of work, as might be seen in most lunatic
asylums. There was another class of evidence well worthy their consideration.
It was proved that insanity in all shapes was hereditary. It did not follow
that a man was insane because his grandfather or grandmother was insane, but
it was said in this case, that such a fact was corroborative?that where insanity
existed in former generations, they might expect to find it in subsequent
generations, and the doctors told them that this was a_ link in the chain, but
only a link. Without knowing the early history of the prisoner, it would
have been weak, indeed a mere matter of opinion; but with that knowledge it
was most important. Now, in the whole of the three hours' reply of the
learned counsel for the prosecution, he never addressed himself to the com-
bined evidence of these three steps in the case?that he was a person of weak
wind, subject to paroxysms, that his conduct at the time of the murder was
extraordinary, and that his family had been subject to the dreadful affliction of
insanity. This was the mode in which the jury must look at the case, and it
was for their consideration entirely?a matter requiring serious consideration.
It might be said that two of the medical gentlemen belonged to a sect, worthy
of all respect, but who entertained a strong opinion as to capital punishments,
and were disposed to find persons guilty of capital offences insane, but they
must not permit themselves to cast such an imputation on those gentlemen,
unless upon very strong grounds. On the part of the prosecution, seven wit-
nesses were called, four of whom spoke to the circumstance of the murder,
and three to the early life of the prisoner. His brother John spoke to his
confession of the murder, and stated on cross-examination that he had observed
a change in him for some weeks, which was fully accordant with the prisoner's
own statement that he had had the murder on his mind for three weeks. As
to that fact, it would be for them to say whether it was a diseased mind pon-
dering on something to be accomplished, or a sane mind brooding with malice
over the commission of a crime. The brother spoke of him as being able to
do only simple work, as getting into a rage from trifling causes, and as fighting
and lookin"- like a madman. He also proved that he had had the knife above
a year, which showed that it had not been got for the purpose. Mr. Horton,
the surgeon attending the prisoner's family, after referring to the post mortem
examination of the deceased, said he was a person of weak mind, readily
excited by trifles to a fearful extent. Mr. Ilortou also told them that lie had a
goitre, and he might as well tell the jury to dismiss that point from their conside-
ration at once, because there were many very clever, sharp people who were
afflicted with the goitre, and its connexion with cretinism seemed to be only
a matter of opinion. On re-examination, the witness said the prisoner was a
weak, vain, frivolous young man, and likely to fall into fits of momentary
insanity, though he had never seen him in that state. The witness Pullan also
spoke of him as having a foolish idiotic laugh, and easily excited to violence.
Here were three persons who spoke of him as of weak mind and subject to
violent passion. Then there were the circumstances of the murder. On the
one hand, it was maintained that they proved premeditation and malice, the
motive of jealousy being suggested; and on the other, it was argued that the
prisoner flew into a paroxysm of frenzy, depriving him of his reason, and that
he then committed the act. It was for the jury to decide, and in doing so
they must take the surrounding circumstances into consideration, and judge
how far it was consistent with the prisoner's imbecility that he afterwards
sobered down to a state of consciousness, so as to make the statement he did
before the magistrates. He now came to the evidence on behalf of the prisoner.
Tour of those witnesses were connected with the prisoner's family, and though
that might be a subject requiring their attention, they were better qualified to
form an opinion than those who only saw him since November last, whilst in gaol,
and when he might be said to be acting. The father, who gave his evidence
very fairly, without exaggerating anything, said he had no control in the mill,
neither bought nor sold anything, could not keep the books, was not so sharp
as other children, and was very violent when excited. He also gave evidence
as to the insanity of two of his sisters. As to the prisoner working in the
mill, they had the evidence of Dr Winslow that it was a common thing in the
Continental asylums to set imbeciles to even more difficult work than that in
which the prisoner was engaged. On cross-examination he admitted that he
had made a will in which he had appointed the prisoner one of his executors.
That was a fact worthy of their attention. It appeared inconsistent with his
other statement that he did not think him so sharp as other children. It was
probable, however, that the thought never crossed the father's mind. Joseph
Trees spoke of him as being passionate and resolute; and Horar Potter, who
married his sister, and had lived with him, said he was passionate and rageous
in trifling matters, and he never considered him quite right. Richard Gill
also spoke of him as not of sound mind. He had already told them
that if a man of sound mind committed a murder in a passion he was
responsible, but if a person of weak mind were overcome with passion, and
did not know whether what he was doing was right or wrong, then he would
not be responsible. The schoolmasters, Atkinson and Snow, spoke of him
as a dull, passionate child at school, who got into frenzy, and foamed at the
mouth for trifling causes. Then they had the four medical men?men eminent
in their profession. They gave their opinions, and the jury must consider what
opportunity they had for forming the opinions they expressed. Scientific men
no doubt did differ very materially as to their evidence in courts of law, and the
only test which could be applied was the means they had of forming their
opinion. In this case, the^ four witnesses called had been long connected
' yS' - with the treatment of insanity, and, as they had heard, paid frequent visits to
the prisoner in gaol, asking him some six or seven hundred questions. The
result was that they all agreed in describing him as an imbecile, and they told
them that it was a characteristic of imbeciles to be subject to violent passions,
which overcame what little reason they had. Mr. Anderson had been much
I abused for giving an opinion, which was forced from him by Mr. Bliss, and for
saving that men who devoted their whole time to one study were apt to
become crotchety. There was no doubt of that; but they must not reject the
opinions of eminent men for that reason alone. He should only direct their
attention to the evidence of Dr Williams and Dr Winslow, as the others
agreed with them on the main points. They both spoke of the prisoner's
physical appearance as being striking. Dr Williams said he had but little
power of reflection and small power of judging. His moral faculties were
also feeble, and his instincts and passions were so strong that he would not have
the power of controlling them. The witness stated that he did not think he
could appreciate the nature and character of the offence he committed;
and iu reply to questions, he said he had examined the prisoner with the
view of testing whether he was feigning or not, and he was of opinion
that such was not the case. Dr Williams was asked whether hatred,
revenge, and jealousy were not the predominating passions which led to
crime, and no doubt they were, but would not jealousy operate as much
upon a diseased mind as upon a sane mind ? Dr Williams had no doubt
as to his being an imbecile, and irresponsible for his acts. The evidence
of Dr Winslow was even stronger. He had only had one opportunity of
examining the prisoner, but he declared it to be the worst case he had ever >
seen,?that his physical appearance was such that it would have excited his
observation anywhere, whilst his mind was only that of a child five or six years
?f age. He said that he might be taught to read and write, and to do sums in
arithmetic, but he was sure that the prisoner could not do a sum in Proportion.

The prisoner's grosser passions were strongly developed, and he had not the
slightest doubt that he was an irresponsible being. On cross-examination, he \
said he did not think this was a case of feigning; but admitted that he should
be surprised if the prisoner could do a. rule of Proportion, and that he must
have been grossly deceived iF~the prisoner could spontaneously write such
letters as some which were read to him. The letters showed more apprehen-
sion of right and wrong than he gave him credit for, and he did not think he
was capable of writing such letters spontaneously. He might write them if
prompted or under pressure. He had known imbeciles write such letters, and
it would not alter his opinion unless he knew the circumstances under which
these letters were written. Here were four witnesses, all eminent in their
profession, who, whilst differing upon some points, agreed in considering the
prisoner an imbecile, and as being incapable of appreciating right from wrong.
In addition to this, they had evidence as to six or seven of his ancestors, both on
the father and mother's side, and of one brother, who were insane. That was the
case for the prisoner. The previous night three lettersfrom the prisoner had been
put in. They contained many most pious observations, and he could not detect
m them any wandering of mind. They were written free from excitement, but,
though quoting a beautiful passage from Isaiah (which in one form or other
was in them all), and speaking of repentance and redemption, they did not
develop anything to show that the prisoner knew at the time what he was
writing about. The doctors told them that imbeciles did write long and
correct letters, showing a just appreciation of religious truth, and unless they
knew the circumstances under which these were written, their opinion would
not be altered. The prisoner, it appeared, had been attended by the chaplain,
by the weekly lecturer (Mr. Stewart), and by a Wesleyan minister, and it was
suggested that these letters might have been written under their suggestion,
and that the prisoner merely used the passages and Scripture terms impressed
hy them upon his mind. After expressing his conviction that the obligation
to call these gentlemen as witnesses rested with the prosecution, his Lordship
proceeded to refer to the evidence of Mr. Anderson. That gentleman had
done nothing more than his duty in attending there. Mr. Anderson had seen
the prisoner three times a week since he came to the Castle, and thought him
sane, but he had not tested him on a variety of subjects, and for that length
of time which the other medical men had done. His Lordship also
referred to the evidence of Mr. Griesbach, the schoolmaster at the Castle,
and to that of Mr. Jackman, as to the prisoner getting to the rule of
Proportion in arithmetic, and remarked that they had no evidence to show
under what circumstances he did so. Such, said his Lordship in conclu-
sion, were the facts. If they thought that the_ prisoner at the time he com-
mitted the act knew the distinction between right and wrong?that the act
was a wrong one, they must find him guilty; if they thought he did not know
that the act was a wrong one, they must acquit him on the ground of insanity,
and he had then the power to commit him to an asylum. lie had gone over
the whole of the case with care, and it was for the jury to return such a
verdict as in the exercise of their best judgment they thought ought to be
given.

The jury retired at five minutes past eleven, and after they had been absent
three hours and a half,
Mr. Bliss reminded his lordship that he had not directed the jury, in case
of doubt, to give the prisoner the benefit of it.
His lordship replied that he had given the jury such directions as he thought
were necessary.

Mr. Bliss pressed the point, upon which
His lordship said:?I did not direct them specifically upon that; but if I
had said more, I might have said something much more injurious to your
client.

The jury returned into court at ten minutes past three.
In reply to the Clerk of Arraigns, the foreman first gave a verdict of
" Guilty," upon which some of the jurors called out, " Not guiltyand he then
corrected himself and said, " We find the prisoner Not Guilty, on the ground
of Insanity."

The prisoner was then ordered to stand down by his lordship. It was
difficult to observe any change in him; but his cheek seemed somewhat
blanched, and his eye struck us as brightening up as soon as the verdict was
returned.

The following article upon the foregoing trial, from the leading newspaper
of the district in which the murder occurred, and the accompanying letter
upon criminal responsibility, addressed to the editor of the Times, are worthy of
being quoted.

The Daiiley Mukdek.?The acquittal, on the ground of insanity, of the
wretched creature who was tried last week at York for the murder of his
sweetheart at Parley will, we believe, be received with general satisfaction.
No one can read the evidence without coming to the conclusion that Atkinson's
intellect is originally of the very lowest type, and that such as it is, it has
received an exceedingly small amount of education, either directly or from
circumstances. At the same time, while his mind was thus stunted, his pas-
sions appear to have been placed under little restraint by those around him,
and the rule both at home and in the factory was to let him have his own way
in everything. It seems to have been generally understood at Darley that the
prisoner was weak and foolish, although, perhaps, no one would have ventured
to call him either an idiot or a madman. We are assured by those who had
the opportunity of seeing him at York, and who were, in the first instance,
rather prejudiced against the defence set up, that his appearance was quite
that of an imbecile. When the history of the prisoner's family was given to
the Court, there was quite enough to explain any amount of insanity
in himself. His younger brother, the next in age to himself, was an idiot,
and both on his father's and mother's side such a fearful amount of
idiotcy and insanity was proved as it is perfectly shocking to contemplate.
The medical men examined for the defence, who are persons of standing
and reputation in their profession, agreed in regarding the prisoner as
an imbecile whose mind was hardly more developed than that of a sane
child of eight or nine years of age, and stated their belief that he could not
correctly appreciate the moral nature of his acts. We are quite disposed to
admit that we cannot go so far as some of these gentlemen in their definition
of insanity; hnt the question in this case is, not whether on some subjects Dr.
Winslow and his fellow-witnesses hold mistaken views, but whether they had
sufficient grounds for thinking Atkinson an imbecile. Those grounds they
stated to the Court, and taking them in connexion with the whole of the
prisoner's previous history, with the opinion which his neighbours had formed
about him, with his striking personal appearance, and with the melancholy
annals of his family, there can be little doubt that the jury came to a proper
decision. It must be remembered that the verdict of acquittal on the ground
of insanity in criminal cases amounts virtually to a sentence of imprisonment
for life among criminal lunatics?a fate not much less appalling to contemplate
than death on the gallows. These acquittals on the ground of insanity are not
likely, therefore, to increase crime ; for no sane man would be induced to commit V / u ?cc ,
murder by the hope that he might possibly by a plea of insanity be consigned (/
to a lunatic asylum for life instead of to the gibbet.?Leeds Mercury.

CRIMINAL KESPONSIBILITY.

To the Editor of the Times.
Sir,?In The Times of Saturday last there is the record of a trial at York,
which has a terrible interest alike for the physician, the statesman, and the
public. I write in ignorance of the verdict which will be pronounced
upon the unhappy man, James Atkinson, tried 011 the Northern Circuit for
the murder of his sweetheart. Before this letter can reach you, how-
ever, that verdict will have been spoken, and will consign the prisoner either
to the condemned cell of the gaol or to the wards of an asylum for criminal
lunatics. Of the fact of the murder there is no doubt. The motives, too, such
as they are, seem plain enough. It is the old, old story?passion and pride,
jealousy and affection, the strongest emotions of the mind and the most un-
tameable lusts of the flesh doing the devil's work in a weak, untaught, unfur-
nished, irascible, brutal nature. The whole essence of the case is contained
in the prisoner's declaration, which is an awfully simple and natural exposition
of one of the lowest phases of humanity. He had threatened to murder the
girl if she would not have him. " I told her," he says, " I could not be happy
without her; I could not rest in this world I told her I should
murder her if she would not have me, because I could not rest." He had fre-
quently been known to be in similar paroxysms of rage; the girl herself, pro-
bably, was accustomed to them?"he had treated her so badly," she told him.
According to other witnesses, the slightest cause sufficed in this poor wretch to
bring on an ungovernable fit of passion. When in this state he foamed at the
mouth, and lost for the time all self-control; when lie cooled down, he would
sot speak to any one. He had once nearly killed his younger brother. " He
knocked him down and kicked him; he never tried to knock a man of his own
size down." This vicious temper was quiteapparent even when he was atschool; a
marked instance of it occurred when lie was eight or nine years of age. Accord-
ing to his teachers, moreover, lie was at that period "very dull, of weak mind and
weak intellect," . . "not capable of consecutive thought.He appears to have
made very little progress even in the most elementary education; and although his
father employed him in his business as a kind of overseer of the workmen, he
never could be trusted with buying and selling. One of the witnesses con-
sidered him "rather short," and "very dull." Another thought him "a
stupid man very much given to passion; andfuither, had always considered
him a man 'not sound in his mind." His brother had been an idiot, and died
&t ten years of age. He himself had a goitie. His two maternal aunts were
insane. Severafof the father's relatives also had been of unsound mind. That
is the whole story in so far as it bears on the question of criminal responsibility.
It is impossible by commentary or argument to make it any clearer.

My object in writing you now is, not to anticipate the decision of the jury
as -to whether this fearful tragedy was the result of an insane impulse or not.
Take either case. Suppose it to be ruled that this young man was not insane
outright, and that his crime was that of a coward and a bully, turned into a
wild beast for the time under the influence of jealousy and lust. The picture
is repulsive enough, and in any case it is not unlike the object. Still, can it be
fairly said that society has done its duty towards this dangerous being F His
tendencies were well known, and had often produced outrages which made him
a terror to his family and to the neighbours Were there no means of bringing
this moral nuisance under the notice of the authorities at a point short of
murder ? and if brought into notice, were there no means by which it could be
controlled in time ?

Suppose, on the other hand, that the jury declare the act to be that of a
madman, will any one doubt that the protection now to be afforded was really
due long before ? Was it necessary that this unfortunate man should cut a
throat in order to prove himself insane ? Or would it not have been at once
humane and just, not to say politic and expedient, to try this question long
before the murder; say when he knocked down his imbecile brother and
kicked him within an inch of his life !

These questions are, perhaps, more easily asked than answered. But they
are of immense importance to the public, and often present themselves in an
embarrassing form to those who, like physicians and magistrates, have to deal
with unhealthy and vicious natures. The medical man of the family in this
case did not see it to be his duty?probably he was never asked?to interfere.
I cannot wonder at it, for it is probable he could only have interfered at the
risk of his own life, or, if he had placed the patient in an asylum, at the risk
of an action for false imprisonment. But more and more every day we who
practise the healing art are led to consider what is to be done with those who,
from hereditary or acquired mental deformities, may be said to be ever on the
verge of insanity or crime, even if they have committed no overt act. Must
the drunkard drink himself into delirium tremens, and how often, before he can
safely be set down as insane ? Must he utterly ruin his family, perhaps at-
tempt his own life, perhaps murder his nearest of kin, as was done the other
day at the Bridge of Ean, and as is recorded in one case in the very paper
which contains the trial of James Atkinson ? Must the low, disgusting, selfish,
corrupting elements be allowed to fester in the breast of an irreclaimable savage,
until they break out into acts of the nature recorded in this and many other
cases ? Or will the opinion of society?will your powerful pen, for instance
?justify the interference of the law to protect those who are clearly un-
able to control themselves, whether they are technically and in the eye of
the law insane or not ? Doctors and magistrates could do much in this
direction; but they cannot ^ act unless supported by the law, and by that
public opinion which gives its application in particular cases.
I am. &c..
Edinburgh, Dec. 20.
.
A Physician.
