For Stutterers
================

By Smiley Blanton, M.D.
and Margaret Blanton. D. Appleton-Century
Co. 7/6.
From the point of view of the stutterer, this
book must of necessity prove a disappointment.
The title For Stutterers suggests that practical
help would be found in its pages, whereas two-
thirds of the book consists of theories?all more
or less vague. There is very little that has not
been said and written before, and the psychology
is of the most elementary.
The question of how far a stammer is due to
home conditions is dealt with in chapter 15, and
some sound advice is given to parents on this
subject, but one cannot help feeling that chapter
18 might with advantage have been written on
the same clear lines, instead of suddenly be-
coming a treatise on phonetics (pages 174 and
175).
The abrupt change from one subject to an-
other is extremely confusing to the lay mind,
no chapter being devoted entirely to psychology
for example. Practically every few pages the
subject changes from speech training to psycho-
logy, then to a smattering of phonetics mixed
up with medical terms.
The suggestion that a stutterer should change
his environment isi good in itself, but rarely ap-
plicable to the average man or woman who in
all probability has his or her living to earn,
and would find it utterly impossible to leave a
particular town or business; the idea is right but
impracticable.
On page 83, the question of imitation is dis-
cussed, the writers saying: " We have never
seen what we believed to be an authentic case of
this." One wonders how much experience of
stammerers the writers have had, particularly
of children in schools, as it is a well known fact
that children will imitate a stammerer and thus
acquire a stammer themselves. The chapter on
Emotional Patterns, deals with such subjects as
Dreaming, Forgetting and Rationalising, and it
is extremely difficult to find any connection be-
tween these subjects and the subject about which
the book is written, i.e., Stuttering.
We venture to suggest that had the writers
devoted themselves to one subject, instead of at-
tempting to write about several, the book might
have been worth reading.
K.E.J.
