Special Education for Retarded Children
=========================================

By GRACE RAWLINGS, B.A.
(Educational Psychologist, C.A.M.W.)
In the early part of 1935 I had the privilege of visiting various Local
Education Authorities in England and Scotland to learn of the provision made
for the special education of backward children. During the summer months
I was helping to arrange three courses for teachers of retarded and defective
children, and more recently I have been engaged in investigating in detail
the problem presented by the backward child in the elementary schools of
an urban area with a school population of about 10,000.
It was suggested in the October issue of Mental Welfare that I might,
therefore, contribute some information on the work now in progress on
behalf of retarded children in the elementary schools.
I.?Administrative Aspects
Under this heading it will be possible only to indicate the steps that
are bein^ taken (1) to ascertain the number of children who are sufficiently
retarded to require special attention, and (2) to describe some methods that
have been adopted whereby this necessary attention is given.
It is desirable to state specifically at this point what is meant by a
2 MENTAL WELFARE
" backward " cliild and a " retarded " child. In practice the term " backward "
is used of all children who fail in their school work whether by reason of
(1) Inferior intellectual capacity.
(2) Emotional difficulties?constitutional or environmental, or
(3) Extraneous circumstances, e.g., poor physical health, frequent change
of school, etc.
The failure of backward children in their work is judged from the average
attainment of children of the same chronological age.*
When it is found that, on intelligence tests, a child has a mental age
markedly below his chronological age, whether he is backward in his school
work (as is usual) or not, he is described as a retarded child. With a slight
degree of retardation a child may be said to fall within normal limits for
intelligence, but if at the age of 5 years he is retarded 9 months or more, at
8 years 15 months or more, at 11 years 20 months or more, and so on pro-
portionately, then a special approach to the education of that child is necessary.
In many areas it is to this problem?the education of the retarded child?
that administrators address themselves, and the backward child who is of
average or superior intelligence receives no extraordinary consideration.
Ascertainment
We may scan first of all the methods now in use for ascertaining the
number of children in an area who are in need of special education.
(1) By far the commonest is what may be called the " teacher's opinion "
method. Head teacher and class teacher confer and, in the light of the child's
progress in relation to the opportunity he has had for learning and his social
behaviour, judge whether he is a suitable candidate for the particular form of
special provision that is available. If there is reason to suppose that a child
is mentally defective, he is, of course, referred to the School Medical Officer
for examination.
(2) Not infrequently this selection by teachers is a preliminary step, and
further investigation is made of the cases they send forward. For instance,
in Oxford, Head Teachers are asked to report any child 7 years old or over
who is a problem, educationally, or on account of difficult behaviour. These
cases are then investigated along Child Guidance lines. In Leicester children
selected by teachers are given an intelligence test by trained workers, and
cases of personality problems and delinquency are further investigated by the
Psychologist to the Local Education Authority.
(3) In some areas there is a systematic use of standardised tests for all
school children as they reach a given age. Standardised tests of educational
attainment may be used to select cases for individual investigation. Thus,
in Nottingham City, Head Teachers are asked to test all children in reading,
addition and subtraction (on Dr. Ballard's one minute tests) as they reach their
*" Backwardness " is an educational term. Although it is commonly used as stated, in scientific
terminology the word has a more limited meaning. It is to be borne in mind that if a child's attainments
in school work are on a level with his "mental age" (however retarded he may be), he is not
technically " backward."
MENTAL WELFARE 3
seventh birthday, and if the ratio between chronological age and educational
age (an average of the three test results) is less than .9 the children are given
an individual test of intelligence.
In other places standardised tests of intelligence are used on the whole
school population. In Dumbartonshire all children are tested with standardised
group tests as they enter the Junior School. Individual cases that need further
investigation are tested by the Psychologist, and, if queried mentally defective,
referred to the School Medical Officer.
There is a growing tendency for both intelligence and attainment tests
to be used and the results considered in conjunction with one another. The
system that is being developed in Kent is that, in time, there shall be on
the staff of each Infants' School two teachers trained in mental testing. Each
child will be tested individually as soon as it has settled down in school. In
addition, tests of attainment in reading and number are to be given annually
to all children of 8 years old and over, and at the age of 11 + there is to be a
supplementary group intelligence test. From these results a graphic record
can be made for each child, and from this record it can be readily seen whether
or not a child is in need of special education.
(4) The methods so far described appear practicable for urban areas or
for large schools in county areas, but they leave out of account the small one
or two teacher schools of rural areas.
In some rural areas the Local Education Authorities employ a peripatetic
teacher whose function it is to test individually all the children who fail to
make progress in their school work, and to advise as to suitable methods for
teaching those children who must, perforce, be left in the ordinary class. If
there is any question of the child being defective he is, of course, seen by
the School Medical Officer and, if necessary, certified; but unless he is excluded
from school, or sent to a residential school for mentally defective children,
the problem of his education is left to the class teacher, and help and sug-
gestions may be sought from the specially qualified peripatetic teacher.
Above are indicated the chief ways of ascertaining the number of retarded
children in a given area. There are, of course, many individual variations with
regard to the tests used and the training of the people who administer them.
Comparatively little experiment has been carried out so far, and until there is
evolved some method, or methods, practicable from every point of view and
demonstrably superior to those now in use criticism is abortive; methods that
have been found useful must continue to serve.
However, I should like to venture on a personal opinion on one or two
points. I prefer the use of standardised tests to the "teacher's opinion" method,
based as it is on inspection of a progress record and the observation of
behaviour. This latter method necessitates a fairly intimate knowledge on
the part of the inspector or organiser who arranges the work for retarded
children, of the people whose opinions are to guide him in his selection and
classification of such children; otherwise he will not be able to interpret these
opinions or to put them on a comparable basis. (He will probably be dealing
4 MENTAL WELFARE
with 20 or more Head Teachers contemporaneously.) Moreover, teachers have
not always at their disposal accurate information on a child's school attend-
ance and past history, and without this information their opinion may be
invalid. Sometimes a child who works well with an age group younger than
his own is not regarded as backward, and again, teachers will occasionally
fail to report children who are complacent and studious although backward
and making effort out of all proportion to their progress. It is exceedingly
difficult to judge solely from observation under school conditions whether
a child is unintelligent, or backward and inhibited, and therefore the standard
conditions of an intelligence test are an exceedingly valuable additional help.
In the matter of ranking children according to innate ability it is, I
suggest, a good plan to include the whole school population and not only
the backward children. It seems to me useful to give a group intelligence
test to all children of a certain age. This test will doubtless reveal a number
of cases that should be investigated further?on account of suspiciously low
marks, or discrepancy between test score and teacher's estimate, or test score
and standard of work. For this further investigation, individual tests must
be used. Among these special cases all the " problem children " as judged
by other standards will be found, and possibly a few others who would other-
wise have been overlooked.
The group test is easily obtained at a reasonable price (about 17/6 per
hundred copies). There is a variety of well standardised tests on the market,
and belonging to each is an explanatory booklet with explicit instructions,
that should be rigidly adhered to, and a table of norms. The results should
prove useful in checking teachers' estimates, indicating cases for further in-
vestigation and as an additional aid in cases that are difficult to classify.
I would, however, like to point out here, the inadequacy of using a group
test alojie for assessing the ability of retarded children. (Or, for that matter,
of classifying normal children.) To begin with, most group tests are largely
verbal and they set too high a premium on the child's ability to read. There-
fore the numerical result is vitiated in the case of backward children. But
further, a group test cannot, under any circumstances, yield the useful infor-
mation of a child's psychology that can be gleaned from a carefully
administered individual test.
Standardised Tests of Attainment in school work have, I think, an
important role to play after the child's intelligence has been assessed. Given
suitable opportunity it is in relation to his intelligence that an emotionally
well-adjusted child achieves and progresses. Therefore, if we know a child's
mental age and as a result of an attainment test his reading level and his
arithmetic level we can state whether or not he is working to capacity and
making satisfactory progress. If he is not we must, if possible, discover the
cause and remedy the defect.
If these tests are used at definite intervals (say 12 months) an unbiassed
estimate of the child's progress can be given, and lastly (and this holds good
whether the child's mental age is known or not), an analysis of the results
MENTAL WELFARE 5
of these Attainment Tests indicates the point at which remedial teaching
should begin and, not infrequently, the course it should follow.
I would offer one last comment on the personnel responsible for testing.
I think it is impossible to over-emphasise the necessity of both a sound
psychological background and a thorough training in the technique of mental
testing for all those who arc to give individual intelligence tests.
The question is often raised as to whether teachers should test individually
the children in their class or school. If a teacher has had suitable training
I see no reason why he should not do so, but I think that if he tests children
who know him well (whether as an object of love or fear!), he is forfeiting
one of the essentials of a psychological examination, i.e., standard conditions,
and by so doing he is influencing his results to an unknown and unequal extent.
Finally, if it is expected of a teacher that he should do individual testing, he
must be granted the necessary facilities which include a separate room and
freedom from interruptions. And, of course, this work will necessitate his
absence from his class to the extent of about half an hour per child.
II.?Provision
When the children who would benefit by special education have been
ascertained by one of the above or similar methods, a decision must be arrived
at as to how they are to be classified and taught.
If a child is retarded by more than two and a half years at the age of
8, he is usually referred to the School Medical Officer (if this has not been
done previously). He is re-examined and possibly certified as mentally
defective. If he is an educable feeble-minded child he is transferred to a
Special School for Mental Defectives, should such exist in that area. The
remaining retarded children (and the educable defectives if no other provision
is available) may be taught: ?
(1) In the lowest stream (D or E) of their age group in large schools.
(2) In a special class in their elementary school, if the school is large
enough to support one or more classes.
(3) In a regional special class, probably in a neighbouring school. Such
a class will be in an elementary school but will serve two or three
neighbouring schools.
(4) Partly in class with their age group and partly in small groups with
children of similar attainment. These latter groups may be taken by
the Head Teacher, a visiting teacher or a floating teacher.
(5) As individuals in a class. This is the only way in small all-standard
schools.
It may be thought that there is little or no difference between a " D "
stream in a large school and a special class for retarded children. The
distinction that I wish to draw is this. A " D " class in all probability is
reckoned as a 40 class for staffing purposes and, although it may be possible
to keep the roll down to 35 for part of the year, that is still too large a class
for the teacher to undertake the amount of individual and practical work
6 MENTAL WELFARE
that is necessary for retarded children. In addition there are very few schools
that are large enough to carry a " D " stream of purely retarded children and
the consequence is that retarded and backward children, who want different
treatment, are taught together.
A special class is usually small enough (roll 25 or 30), for a competent
teacher to plan absolutely individual work at least for the fundamental subjects,
and it is recognised as a small class for purposes of staffing.
The systems now working in Leicester City and Dumbartonshire may
be quoted by way of illustration. In Dumbartonshire mentally defective
children are transferred to Special Schools at the age of 8. Permanently
retarded children are concentrated in tutorial classes in the Junior School.
These are small classes (roll 25) and the work is individual. In one class
there may be children of the whole Junior School age range. Temporarily
retarded children (those backward in school work, but not unintelligent) are
also grouped in other small tutorial classes but the object of these classes is to
coach children in the subject, or subjects, in which they have failed, and
pass them back as soon as possible into the normal school stream. In smaller
schools there are found tutorial classes of mixed type. There is at present
no special provision for retarded children in the Senior Department.
In Leicester City the educable low-grade feeble-minded children arc in
a Special School, but the higher grade feeble-minded and some of the per-
manently retarded children are in special classes in the elementary schools.
These special classes are found in all departments, but not in every school.
For the purpose of elementary education the city is divided into regions and
in each region there are classes to serve that area. In this way it will be
seen that some children who are found to need special education have to
change school. The child who is normal or superior in intelligence but has
difficulty in one or more of the school subjects is (with his parent's permission)
transferred for a period to an Experimental School where it is possible to
dispense with the usual class room discipline and to have an elasticity of time-
table; this is designed to enable a child to pick up his work at the stage
where he can achieve success and do it at his own rate until he can be trans-
ferred back to his own age group to work there without undue strain and
with satisfaction to himself. Also at the Experimental School are children
who are mal-adjusted emotionally, and some delinquents.
In both Dumbartonshire and Leicester City the special classes are
recognised as such for purposes of staffing. The selection of the children
is in the hands of an Educational Psychologist in Dumbartonshire and of
trained workers under the direction of the Psychologist to the Education
Committee in Leicester.
Mention has already been made of the peripatetic teacher, as a form
of provision for retarded children. In rural areas where most of the schools
are small the formation of special classes is out of the question and the only
way of arranging special work for retarded children is by having a teacher
who has specially studied and qualified to teach difficult children, to visit
MENTAL WELFARE
7
the school in a consultative capacity. He will examine the child, diagnose
the difficulty and suggest to the class teacher ways of treating and teaching
each case. This, in broad outline, is the experiment now in progress in
Westmorland and Leicestershire. If occasion demands, the peripatetic teacher
will himself visit a school daily to get a group working or to demonstrate
to an inexperienced teacher methods that are particularly useful with retarded
children.
There is at least one urban Authority that is experimenting with a visiting
teacher. I refer to Nottingham City where there is already established a
comprehensive system of practical classes for retarded children. The visiting
teacher deals not with retarded but with backward children, and teaches only
reading and number. She visits selected schools in different areas of the
city and children attend at that school for short lessons. Each child receives
the equivalent of three half hours tuition a week, and may attend alone or
with a small group. The teacher has special qualifications and experience
and her equipment for the work includes a knowledge of child psychology
and training in remedial teaching.
Under Local Education Authorities where there is no organised provision
for retarded children there are often found excellent classes in individual
schools, but it is difficult to arrange any continuity of work, and sometimes,
owing to the exigencies of staffing, such classes are short lived. Similarly, at
the beginning of the school year there may be a floating teacher who can take
groups of backward or retarded children for special tuition. But by Christmas
or Easter the number of children on roll may have decreased and the super-
numerary may be withdrawn. If such is the case, it is almost inevitable that
this valuable group work will come to an end, and, of course, in fairness to
the staff and to the other pupils classes should not be made abnormally large
in order that tutorial groups may be continued.
I have met and corresponded with scores of teachers who are in charge
of these isolated classes. I have also visited many such classes, and without a
doubt very valuable work is being carried out in many of them. The teacher
in charge has usually volunteered for the task and has a very real interest in
it, besides possessing originality and ingenuity, a good capacity for hard work
and, in many cases a lively understanding of what is suitable and necessary
in the education of retarded children. These individual experiments are much
to be appreciated and admired although it is deplorable that much of this
useful work is wasted, for indeed the time and energy of both teacher and
pupils is, in part, wasted if a promising experiment is arbitrarily discontinued
because the school numbers go down, or if it is stifled almost out of existence
because of the influx to the class of some 10 or 15 extra children. The value
of special class work may be reduced if there is a break in its continuity either
in the way indicated above or on account of there being no other special class
in the department from which, or to which, the child is moving.
Another way in which a great part of the value of this work may be lost
is through the lack of adequate record keeping. One hears sometimes, by word
8 MENTAL WELFARE
of mouth, of interesting educational experiments that have bearing on the
retarded child. One day there comes an opportunity of visiting the school
where such an experiment is being tried, but on arrival there is nothing to be
seen of it because Mr. or Miss X has left, and the scheme has been dropped or
the class disbanded because nobody else had the knowledge or enthusiasm to
carry it on. Such an occurrence is not uncommon and it shows how much is
left to the initiative of individual teachers.
This absence of records implies no criticism of the teacher. In all
probability he has had his time fully occupied without thought of record keep-
ing. And often these teachers are modest people who under-estimate the
value of their own experiments. It is, however, an indication that adminis-
trators and organisers of elementary education are not yet fully cognisant of
the necessity for intensive research before the most suitable methods and
curricula for retarded children can be discovered.
Practical Aspects
i. Curricula for Retarded Children
Personal experience, together with discussion and correspondence with
many teachers, has revealed the fact that, where the organisation of special
classes for retarded children is impracticable, effort is, in many places, being
made to draw up for the " C " or " D " stream curricula that are suited to
the needs of children with inferior intelligence.
The recommendations summarised below may be regarded as embodying
the suggestions of those who are actually engaged in teaching retarded
children: ?
(1) That the attainment in English and Arithmetic expected from a
retarded Senior on leaving school should be limited to the level reached by
an average child in Standard III or IV (10 year level).
(2) That a great part of the skill in Reading and Number should be
acquired during the Junior School period, thus allowing for a late beginning,
and leaving for the Senior School period the applications and uses of these
skills that require more mature reasoning. (Some of the more elementary
applications will, of course, be used in the Junior School for practical
purposes.)
(3) That History and Geography should not be included in the time-table
as such, but suitable facts under the heading of General Knowledge, should
be introduced through conversations and lessons on topical events and every-
day science. The subjects would then be dealt with as they come within the
purview of the child's experience. They thus become more meaningful to
the child and easier to understand.
(4) That every effort should be made, and every means at the command
of the teacher used, to increase the responsiveness of retarded children and to
stimulate their interest in their own surroundings and experience.
(5) That plenty of time should be allotted to expressive work and as much
freedom as possible allowed in the choice of media of expression.
(6) That the amount of written work should be drastically reduced, and
that the children should spend much time in doing things and making things.
I do not think that it is possible to be dogmatic about the detail of
curricula for retarded children. There is urgent need for further experiment.
MENTAL WELFARE 9
ii. Method
I do not propose here to discuss specific methods, but rather to give a few
general suggestions that have proved helpful. First, the child's own emotional
attitude to his work is of far greater importance than particular methods of
approach. We hear frequently nowadays about a " sense of failure," and I
have found it real enough to be observed in a large number of retarded children
who have been trying to make their way in a class of children their own
age. The teacher of a special class or of any retarded child should try to
appreciate the psychological significance of this " sense of failure," and modify
his teaching so that it would be better named " remedial treatment." He
must find out exactly what the child can do and ensure that he succeeds in
it; the time given to lessons must at first be arranged so that the child stops
while he is still succeeding and wanting to do more, and a careful eye must
be kept on the grading of all work so as to avoid introducing a sudden difficulty,
and so on.
When this all-important step of gaining the child's co-operation has been
achieved, then we can consider "methods." This matter, too, I have dis-
cussed with many teachers, and the following points summarise their joint
findings.
(a) Methods of teaching should be practical. For instance, in the teach-
ing of Arithmetic, concrete aids must be retained until the child himself
relinquishes them. There must be ample demonstration, and application and
practice of every item learned.
(b) There should be, as far as possible, continuity of method. For
example, avoid teaching a child subtraction by equal additions when he has
half mastered decomposition. Change in teaching method is a serious matter
for a normally intelligent child and may be the cause of a long period of back-
wardness. In the case of the retarded child it can give rise to even greater
difficulty.
(c) The lesson period should be short at first, because retarded children
often lack concentration and frequent change helps to hold their interest and
to encourage renewed effort and, thereby, to develop concentration.
Conclusions
I was particularly asked to include some recommendations in this article,
but I think that any recommendations I could make are included in the
conclusions which may be drawn from the practical experience of many able
workers.
There is evidence to show that the experience of teachers working under
different conditions leads to some concurrence of opinion on the following
points: ?
(i) That the provision of special work for retarded children must
be recognised by the Local Education Authority before adequate and
efficient work can be carried out in the schools.
10 MENTAL WELFARE
Many Head Teachers complain that they have not sufficient stafT
to afford a class solely for retarded children, since this must be a small
class, or they say that their numbers make it impossible to devote one
room to a small class. On account of the difficulties of this kind in the way
of forming special classes Head Teachers concentrate rather on modifying
the curriculum of the " C " or " D " stream which includes the retarded
children.
(2) That it is useful to investigate as early and as fully as possible
the case of every child who is a problem at school, but that it is also
necessary to make a systematic survey of all children of an age level (not
before they are 8 years old and preferably before they are 11) by means
of intelligence tests and attainment tests.
(3) That the distinction made in some areas between backward and
retarded children is useful, but difficult from the point of view of
organisation.
The child of average or superior intelligence who is backward in
school work, but offers no other problem, may, and probably will, do
well after a period in an adjustment class. There will only be sufficient
children in one school to justify the formation of a class solely for such
cases in certain areas, e.g., new building estates where children have been
3 or 6 months out of school because of lack of school buildings, or where
children are drawn from many different areas and have been subjected
to different methods, or where there is a migratory population, etc.
(4) That there should be more definite appreciation of the fact that
special education for retarded children does not aim at bringing up their
level of achievement to what is normal or average for their chronological
age, but rather at providing means through which each child's personality
will be developed to its fullest extent.
(5) That with regard to the modifications needed in the organisation
of the various departments, in the Infants' Department where individual
methods are used, little modification should be made. Individual methods,
if intelligently used, are suitable for educating practically every retarded
child who can be retained in the elementary school system, i.e., the
backward, dull and educable feeble-minded. Special investigation should,
however, be made into the cases of children whom the teacher reports
as being conspicuously slower than the others in progress. This investiga-
tion could best be carried out by an Educational Psychologist who would
subsequently refer to the Notifying Officer any child whose exclusion
from school was considered desirable.
(6) In Junior Schools in all urban and thickly populated rural areas
provision can be made for special classes for retarded children if there is
a roll of 250 or over. These classes should be small with a maximum of
25 on the roll. Wherever possible, the class should be in charge of a
specially trained teacher having, in addition to a suitable personality,
MENTAL WELFARE u
knowledge of individual methods of Leaching and ability to adapt her
curricula and teaching to the needs of retarded children.
If the numbers of children and the geographical position of the
schools allow it, such classes can be made up of children from several
schools; thus finer classification according to the child's capacity for learn-
ing can be secured. The children to be drafted to these classes must be
selected objectively, by a properly qualified person.
(7) In Senior Schools small classes can be established as in the Junior
Schools, but the area from which children might be drawn could be
wider in the case of Seniors, if some form of transport were provided.
Inevitably an article of this kind raises many issues and some queries,
especially at the present time when, in the field of Education, work with
retarded children is rapidly becoming more widespread, and more popular
with the teaching profession. May I say in conclusion that it is only intended
to be a summary and a basis of discussion and that it is fully recognised to
be incomplete.
A Plea for the " Borderline " Child
In a survey of the mental condition of 703 children reported by head
teachers as being very markedly retarded in their school work, the Fifeshire
County Deputy Medical Officer to Schools Sub-Committee (Dr. R. A. Krause),
refers to the important problem presented by the " borderline " child: ?
" It is with these cases," he says, " that most trouble is found socially.
These cases often seem to be like ordinary children and are treated not
infrequently as if they were normal. It is from them that so many of
our social misfits are recruited, and this is becoming more and more evident
as the result of inquiries, and the increasing difficulties in the labour
market."
" Is it wise that a boy or girl with a three-quarter brain or less should
be held as fully responsible as the ordinary average individual ? The non-
recognition of his retarded mental condition, and the lack of education
and training appropriate for his mental development, may lead to the
branding of such a case as criminal, and doing him a grave injustice. Quite
apart from the social aspect, it is of the utmost importance that these
borderline cases should be early recognised and not allowed to drift on,
or develop into an ' I don't care ' attitude to school matters."
" Because of the large number of such cases and their proximity to the
dull child, it will be obvious that these require a more careful and detailed
examination than is necessary with low-grade mental defectives, the more
so, as we must satisfy the parents who very often see nothing wrong with
their children, except that they are not very good at their lessons. . . . .
If we are to possess that knowledge of the very backward child, that is
educationally demanded nowadays, a much increased amount of time will
be necessary than has been given to this in the past."
