A Guide to Mental Testing
==========================


MENTAL WELFARE 125
By R. B.
Cattell, M.A., 15.be., rn.D., Director ot
School Psychological Service and Clinic,
Leicester. University of London Press. 7/6.
Since the publication of Burt's " Mental and
Scholastic Tests " in 1921, the scope of mental
measurement has extended beyond the spheres
of intelligence and educational achievement.
Theoretical and experimental advances have
given rise to new techniques and to the inven-
tion of a multitude of new tests. The time was
ripe for a new survey of available test material.
It is not surprising that 1936 has seen the publi-
cation of two such surveys, first " The Testing
of Intelligence," edited by Hamley (a mislead-
ing title, since almost every sphere of measur-
able mental activity is covered), and, a few
months later, Cattell's " Guide to Mental Test-
ing" The two books invite comparison. " The
Testing of Intelligence " gives more space to the
critical consideration of theories of mental
measurement and to detailed accounts of re-
search. Each section is contributed by a
specialist. Cattell's "Guide to Mental Testing"
has a somewhat different focus. Its aim is " to
provide (1) A handbook, which shall contain
between its covers sufficient instructions, test
materials and norms to aid the experimenter in
assessing the principal aspects of personality so
far as made accessible to exact examination. (2)
A guide to most other available tests of any
value, with brief comments on their origin, val-
idity and source of publication." The aim is
primarily a practical one, to put into the hands
of psychologists engaged in educational, clinical
and vocational testing the information and the
material, that they need.
Dr. Cattell is singularly well equipped by his
own researches into the measurement of both
cognitive abilities and temperamental traits, and
by his wide experience in the application of
tests to provide just such a handbook for the
practising psychologist, incidentally providing
at the same time an excellent work of references
for those engaged in research. Over 250 tests
are introduced, many of them in full detail.
Thus, we find the actual material, with full in-
structions and norms, given for the Midland
Educational Tests, Retentivity and Word-Asso-
ciation Tests, Tests of Interest, Temperament
and Disposition. Drawing scales, rating scales
and questionnaires are also given in full. The
critical selection of the tests, the notes on
standardisation, the introductory paragraphs to
each chapter indicating the present position of
research, and the appendix dealing with mathe-
matical formulae combine to make the book a
valuable guide to the psychologist rather than
a mere handbook for the psychometrist.
There is little occasion for adverse criticism.
In later editions it may be possible to avoid an
apparent contradiction in the section on tests of
Dexterity. We read that " Cox's results show
definitely that the order of skill obtained on
dexterity tests with unpractised subjects remains
essentially unchanged after any period of prac-
tice," while a few lines below, it is stated that
" any of these tests may be invalidated by
practice."
It will no doubt surprise most psychologists to
fine Gesell's Norms of Development and the
Merrill-Palmer Tests classed as " Paper Tests,"
for paper and pencil play a minimal part in
these tests, while apparatus predominates.
Again, there seems little justification for plac-
ing the Binet-Simon Tests, which are largely
verbal, amongst the Performance Tests These
are, of course, minor matters of arrangement,
that in no way affect the value of the book.
We cannot lay this " Guide to Mental Test-
ing " aside without being aware that the Edu-
cational Psychologist engaged in Child Guidance
Work will find in it a challenge, and one that
cannot easily be ignored. In his final chapter
Cattell points out that " successful diagnosis,
estimation or selection depends partly on skilful
and accurate testing, but even more upon a wise
choice of tests having regard to the particular
physical or sensory defects, education, and tem-
peramental make-up suspected in the individual
to be tested." The test material available in
most Child Guidance Clinics is very limited. It
consists for the most part in tests sanctified by
long usage rather than in those warranted by
scientific progress. Dr. Cattell shows how a
wise selection of approved tests can give a fuller
and more accurate picture of a child's mental
make-up than is possible, if the clinical equip-
ment is limited ,as is usually the case for child-
ren of school age, to the Binet-Simon Tests
supplemented by a few Performance Tests. Will
Child Guidance Clinics persist indefinitely in the
old ways of testing or will they be able to over-
come inertia and timidity, and take advantage
of the researches of the last ten years?
Constance Simmins
