Psychology and Practical Life
===============================

Bv Marv
Collins, M.A., B.Ed., Ph.D., and James
Drever, M.A., D.Sc., D.Phil. Published by
The University of London Press. Price 5/-.
To quote from the Preface:
" This book has a twofold purpose. On the
one hand, its object is to place before the
intelligent reading public, a general account of
the various directions in which modern
psychology has been, or may be applied. On
the other hand, it is intended to provide an
elementary textbook for students of Applied
Psychology."
One doubts at the outset whether it is possible
satisfactorily to combine these two aims. Will
not the student of applied psychology need,
even in an elementary textbook, a quantity of
scientific detail that will both hinder and hamper
the average intelligent reader who is ignorant
of psychological theories and unversed in
psychological terminology? After reading the
book one is left with the impression that it is too
elementary for the serious student, while for the
general reader it is too full of facts that are
insufficiently related and explained. In short,
the aims are not achieved with unqualified
success.
The book makes very factual reading. The
completeness with which each topic is discussed
demands systematic study rather than the more
cursory reading that one usually bestows on a
subject in which one is not a specialist. To the
student its value lies in the comprehensive treat-
ment of the various applications of psychology
rather than in the extent to which any one of
these applications is followed out.
The general reader will be interested by the
chapter headings, several of which are bound
to attract his notice (e.g., Psychology and
Advertising, Psychology and Health, Psycho-
logy and Social Problems), but after reading
the chapters that interest him he will probably
only glance through the remainder of the book.
He will put it by, knowing that he can consult
it, from time to time, on the variety of topics
included under Applied Psychology. This rapid
consulting is made easy by an excellent index.
There is, also, a bibliography carefully arranged
under subject headings which correspond to the
chapter headings, though this bibliography
would be of more use to the general reader, if
some indications were given as to the technical
or non-technical nature of the matter contained
in the volumes mentioned.
6o MENTAL WELFARE
The book cannot be said to have failed out-
right in either of its aims, but it contains ex-
planation and reference to many items that are
common knowledge to anyone who has made a
study of psychology; yet, in spite of this, it may
annoy the intelligent reading public by the some-
what casual reference to a wealth of interesting
experiment and research. It is too heavily laden
with facts for armchair reading, but the facts
need selecting and presenting with more detailed
explanation if they are to meet the needs of the
uninitiated who wish to appreciate fully (without
spending time searching out references) reliable
information on the actual and possible applica-
tions of psychology.
The book is most accurately described as an
elementary textbook. It should be of consider-
able use to students of Applied Psychology.
G.R.
