Prisons and the Mentally Defective
===================================

We learn from the Report of the Commissioners of Prisons and the
Directors of Convict Prisons for the year 1934, issued recently, that during
that year there were 222 persons coming before the Courts who were found
to be mentally defective and were dealt with under Section 8 of the Mental
Deficiency Act. Under Section 9 of the Act, 23 persons found to be mentally
defective were removed from prison to Certified Institutions. In the years
1924-27, the average annual number of prisoners certified as M.D. was 257;
in the years 1928-34, the annual average was 251; the amended definitions in
the M.D. Act of 1927 appear therefore to have little practical effect, so far as
this particular problem is concerned.
With regard to offenders certifiable under the Lunacy Acts during 1934,
112 were certified in local prisons, and 260 remand prisoners were found to be
insane and dealt with by the Courts. In additon, there were 25 offenders
found by juries to be insane on arraignment, and 28 found guilty but insane.
Two thousand, five hundred and ninety-six people coming before the
Courts were remainded to prison for observation and reports on their mental
condition, and the Commissioners observe with satisfaction that the practice
of sentencing a prisoner known to be insane or mentally defective and asking
for a report only after conviction or at the termination of the sentence, is
becoming less frequent. It is regretted, however, " that Courts of Summary
Jurisdiction too often still fail to provide the Medical Officer with information
which might be useful to him when assessing the mental state of a remand
prisoner." Only six courts have adopted the use of Forms of Information for
this purpose, despite the immense value of reports of the kind.
In referring to the work of Dr. W. H. de B. Hubert, as phychotherapist
attached to Wormwood Scrubs Prison. Dr. Norwood East states that the experi-
78 MENTAL WELFARE
ment had not been in existence long enough at the time of writing the Report,
for its value to be assessed, and that certain conditions must be observed if such
psychological treatment of certain types of offenders is to justify itself.
" Cases must be followed up after release as far as practicable, over-
declarations of success must be ignored, our minds must be cleared of the
heresy that moral and criminal offences are identical, and the claims of
the community must be respected. We must remember, too, that the
treatment is concerned with offenders and not with offences."
Dr. East also issues a warning against the "exploitation of medical psychologists
by certain law-breakers," as a contingency which must be strongly guarded
against.
In the Section of the Report comprising extracts from the Annual Reports
of Governors, Chaplains and Medical Officers, some interesting observations,
which are not without bearing on the growing recognition of the need for
special education for retarded children, are made by the Governor of the
Feltham Borstal Institution, now largely reserved for delinquents of subnormal
mentality. He says: ?
" The problem here is not so much to curb or guide a misdirected
superabundance of energy as to remedy defective energy and application
and to instil ambition and initiative. The feature of the Feltham lad as a
type is that he is in need rather of toning up than toning down. He has
to be regarded less as a potentially valuable citizen warped by a bad
environment and lack of training, than as a piece of inherently poor human
material inadequately equipped to cope with the stresses of a normally
healthy environment and in need of shelter and special training if he
is not to remain a social liability all his life. He is not, as a rule, vicious;
just a born invertebrate, instinctively taking the path of least resistance.
He has little interest in life beyond the immediate satisfaction of physical
needs and desires, no ambition beyond the day, and his chief aspiration,
if it could be formulated, would be towards a crude Nirvana in which
no physical or mental effort would be required of him, and in which the
voice of carping authority would be stilled for ever."
The Medical Officer of Wormwood Scrubs Prison reports that the intelli-
gence level of young offenders received is of a slightly inferior order than was
formerly the case, and that a correspondingly lower grade of inmate is passing
on to the Borstal Institutions. This opinion is borne out by the Governor of
the Aylesbury Borstal Institution who states that:
" the type of reception has been deteriorating during the past three years,
but in 1934 the decline was much sharper than formerly. The old hooligan
type of girl with sound character at bottom has entirely disappeared, to
be replaced by crafty girls with low cunning, who are undisciplined and
lazy."
The disclosure of these somewhat disquieting facts seems to offer a
tempting field for research which we hope may, at some time, be followed up.
