Adolescence
============

92 MENTAL WELFARE
By L. A. Averill, Head of the
Department of Psychology, State Teachers
College, Worcester, Mass. Harrap. 8/6.
This is an interesting book about a very im-
portant and difficult subject, and on the whole
the book is a successful one. It is based upon
the case study method of approach and the cases
selected by the author for presentation are
generally significant and interesting.
Material of this type is accumulating more
steadily at the present time, but there is still a
need for a basic understanding of what is normal
and what is usual at any age and in any group
of people. There are those who are eager to
study the development and maturation of primi-
tive peoples, but our own normals have perhaps
too frequently been overlooked or taken for
granted. We assume that we know the normal
frame or reference for the psychiatric problems
with which we have to deal, this assumption is
based more often upon intuition, guess work
and personal prejudice than we would care to
admit.
Adolescence is a period of rapid maturation
both physical and mental with a corresponding
acquisition of new responsibilities and needs for
self-control. The individual at this period has a
strong sense of personal insecurity with a need
to cling to that which offers him certainty and a
definite path of action. Out of this feeling arise
many of the cults, hero-worshippings and ex-
treme idealisms which are so common at this
age. The adolescent is happiest when he is
thinking in terms of black and white, of right
and wrong, without those subtle and perplexing
shades of compromise which constitute the adult
attitude to life.
These facts are most clearly shown by the
author of this book in his consideration of the
various aspects of the life of an adolescent. It
is here, when he is giving us a share of the
accumulated stores of his knowledge and wisdom
that he is at his very best. The section on
" Adolescent Interests " constitutes in itself a
fascinating and valuable record.
One might perhaps have wished that the cases
selected to illustrate the problems of crime and
delinquency had been chosen to show more
typically adolescent problems; most of the
delinquents mentioned appear to be thoroughly
unstable psychopathic individuals. In this
chapter the author lays stress, very rightly,
upon the need for secure and satisfactory rela-
tionships at home. This is probably of infinitely
greater importance than such factors as the
" Movies " or fast automobiles upon which the
author lays some stress. It is the experience of
most workers with children and adolescents that
the harmful effects of such factors are relatively
slight under conditions where the emotional
development of the individual is satisfactory.
Another criticism which might be levelled at
the book is that the author has a tendency to
think in terms of change rather than maturation
at the adolescent stage. For example: " The
thirst for approbation during the pre-adolescent
years is almost completely detached from any
definite sex consciousness." Surely this is by
no means always the case unless a very narrow
interpretation is put upon the term "sex " ?
On the surface, adolescence may be marked by
a series of apparently violent changes, but
underneath there is to be seen a much more
steadily progressive evolution.
The book is a rich harvest of personal observa-
tion and it is liberally spiced with references to
the work of others.
C. H. Rogerson, M.JJ-
