Occupational Therapist, Cambs. Mental Hospital
===============================================

:Author: NANCY ROSS,

In spite of the prominence recently given to Occupational Therapy in
the daily papers as well as in more specialised quarters, but little is generally
known about it.

Some of its branches are almost completely ignored, as for instance,
its value in orthopaedic cases, where it can be utilised as an adjunct to massage
and formal exercise, in restoring movement to disused muscles or in correcting
contractions or other disablements. Again it is of the greatest service in
neuroses and in functional nervous diseases, and, finally there is its use in
Mental Hospitals, which is the subject dealt with here.

The therapeutic value of occupation was known to the ancient Greeks,
by whom it was employed for the alleviation of mental disorders at certain
shrines, where the patients were treated by medicinal baths, soothing music,
and light work of an amusing nature. In the general stagnation of medical
science that later set in, the art of occupational therapy was forgotten though
at various times the value of work in mental ailments has been recognised.
For the most part, however, the work was used for the good of the hospital?
that is to say it was indiscriminately applied to all patients, and only those
tasks which aided in the economic running of the institution were encouraged.
Since the War, knowledge of the effects of work and play has been put on
a scientific basis and linked with the great advance in the science of psychology
and the practice of psychiatry.'

The development of Occupational Therapy in this country has, in recent
years, been marked by a tendency to establish a system which is typically
English in that it is a compromise between two methods. One, for the sake
of clearness, we will distinguish as the American system, and the other, since
it is exemplified at the Provincial Hospital at Sant Poort, near Haarlem, we
will describe as the Dutch method.

The American method is to employ a varying number of fully trained
aids or specialists, each having their workshops, to which the patients are
sent, and only a small proportion of the work is done on the wards, and,
except in the case of " Specials," or selected private patients, hardly any of
it under the nurses.

The Dutch method is to employ the patients very largely on the wards
and entirely under the charge of nurses, with a minimum of assistance from
specialists in such crafts as weaving. The exponents of this method claim
that the nurses naturally know the patients better than the specialist can,
since they are with them all the time.*

*We read in a Report of the Devon Mental Hospital where this system is in force that during 1934,
75% of the patients were occupied daily and that the Hospital has become a " hive of industry."?Ed.
There is much to be said for either method, but there are also disadvan-
tages from our point of view in each. The greatest difficulty in applying the
American method is the expense?not only do special work shops have to
be provided but the salaries of a sufficient staff of trained Therapists to cope
with the numbers of patients in even our smaller mental hospitals amount
to a very considerable sum. The difficulty in the Dutch method is that the
nurse with her nursing examinations to pass and her practical work on the
wards must have considerable difficulty in learning enough craft work to
take entire charge of a class of patients, each of whom will present a separate
problem.

For this reason there is a growing tendency in England to have one
trained specialist-organiser and to give under her supervision, a sufficient
training to the nurses to enable them to carry on the routine work of,classes
in the wards or workshops, while the specialist stands ready to assist or suggest
as necessary. The specialist works, of course, in close touch with the medical
officer and, subject to his orders, selects the type of work for which individual
patients are suited, and regulates the hours and the environment according
to need.

There is an idea in some quarters that to be an Occupational Therapist,
it is only necessary to know some handcraft such as leatherwork or to have
passed through a school of art and perhaps have an interest in mental disease.
Skill in arts and crafts is necessary, but to this should be added a thorough
grounding in Psychology, normal and abnormal, a good knowledge of mental
diseases and a large amount of common sense and tact, coupled with an
ability to approach her patients in the right way. She should be able to teach
elementary rhythmic exercises and games, and know something of dancing,
music, the drama and community singing. Finally, she should have made
a thorough study of the faculties required, the degree of physical skill involved
and the standard of intelligence necessary for each craft or occupation.

A large percentage of the patients with whom she will have to deal
will be of the " mass production " type of mind or will be so deteriorated
by dementia that they will only be able to cope with the simplest processes.
For the former, factory-like processes such as mat, brush, or shoe-making will
be found suitable, and for the latter, rag picking, sand-papering or the like.
It must, however, be borne in mind that even those who appear quite un-
employable may be trained to do simple ward-mending or to knit cotton
polishing clothes and so forth if the Therapist goes patiently and carefully
to work. For these types rhythmic exercises and marching to music will be
beneficial and they can also be taught to join in community singing especially
if the airs chosen are those of familiar hymns.

A higher group can be set to more complicated tasks?simple dress-
making, carpentry, basketry. They should be trained in co-operation by means
of team games, communal projects, charades, and group singing. Finally,
there are those who have definitely creative minds, and who have been thwarted
and frustrated in their endeavours to express themselves, and these may show
but little mental deterioration. For them an outlet in arts and crafts, in music,
drama, and dancing should be provided. If die prognosis is favourable, the
patient will be allocated to the convalescent group where the occupations must
be selected with an eye to the provision of suitable hobbies and pastimes for
the outside world, while, for the others, the aim must be to aid the patient
in adjusting himself or herself to institution life.

All these different groups should be arranged by the Occupation Therapist
who must enlist the help of any nurses who show special aptitude or taste
in one of these directions. The size of the classes must vary according to
the type of patient. A certain number will be suitable for classes up to
twenty-five but others will be better in smaller groups. A few will work
best in comparative solitude. Some will need special attention while others
will have to be trained to work in co-operation. Physical defects such as
poor eyesight or shaky hands must be considered as the patient may require
help in such operations as threading needles. The nurses who are to assist
should understand one craft thoroughly and have a grounding in several others
and it would also be advisable to give them a brief theoretical and practical
training in the planning and selection of work and its application to the cases
of various patients. Very close co-operation between the nurse and the
Occupational Therapist will be necessary.

Whatever system is adopted the ultimate aim of the occupations should
never be forgotten. It is, of course, the cure of the patient or railing that his
better adjustment to the world around him. The benefit of the work to the
hospital, or the sums received for the sale of articles should always be a minor
consideration.

The re-adjustment, re-education, and the re-establishment of habits of
right thinking should be emphasised. In the most retrograde types, training
in self-respect, and cleanliness is indicated. Destructive patients should have
their activities directed into constructive channels. Violence should be
sublimated or soothed by vigorous work such as scrubbing or soothing work
such as knitting. Noisy patients can be taught to relax. Anti-social types can
be made to realise that the work they do evokes the admiration and the
appreciation which society has, in their view, unjustly withheld from them.
Hence the value of good design and colour as these will evoke spontaneous
praise from visitors, apart from the satisfaction which the worker feels in
his own work. Social emotions such as pity or affection, and respect for
others can be aided by practical suggestions such as the knitting of a scarf
for a chilly friend, or by the carrying out of some responsible duty on the
ward or for the Therapist.

Co-operation and team work should be built upon until the patient finds
that he or she takes a real pride in the care of the ward, the appearance of
the garden, or in the production of a patients' concert, quite apart from his
or her own individual effort. Many will halt at each step in this ladder towards
complete cure, but it is safe to say that each one should be, at least, one rung
higher than before the occupational organisation came in touch with him.
The number of crafts which may be used is enormous and they vary
greatly in their value. The best all round appears to be hand weaving, as
there are so many variations of it, ranging from simple raffia weaving on
cards to the artistic and complicated crafts of tapestry and double weaving.
It is a craft with a considerable rhythm which is highly desirable and ic is
suitable for either sex. Its products are both useful and beautiful and in-
cidentally saleable. Embroidery, especially that on counted threads, is good
and helps to develop colour sense. Knitting is a good soothing craft but is
apt to encourage day dreaming. Basketry and the cane seating of chairs,
woodwork and toy-making are all useful especially for the men. Pottery
and modelling are not of great use but wood carving might be desirable
in some cases. Leather work is not of much use as the material is expensive
and easily spoiled. Together with book-binding it is only suitable for a small
percentage of higher grade patients. Articles for the hospital wards, such
as cushions, curtains and rugs are welcome as a rule and the makers like
to see them in use.

The use of machinery is a saving of time in factory processes but an
indiscriminate employment of sewing machines, knitting machines, and so
forth is not advisable. Many patients, before entering hospital, suffered from
present day mechanisation and are consciously, or sub-consciously, in revolt
against machine processes. A patient the other day said she had been making
plain shirts by machine for twenty years and was so glad to make " something
pretty by hand." In opposition to this, a few?but very few?subconsciously
yearn for factory processes, as did a young man of the undergraduate intelli-
gentsia type (outwardly) who, never having used his hands in work or hobby
before, found the greatest satisfaction in mat making. Machinery has another
drawback in that it encourages laziness, which is already too characteristic
of the dementia praecox patient.

The golden rule is to study the individual, and so far as possible sublimate
or satisfy their desires or subconscious yearnings. Interest is necessary and
should be stimulated as much as possible, and there is room for a vast amount
of observation and research into the effects of different work on different
patients. It is clear that this is work for the specialist Occupational Therapist
and that there is and will be a great need of trained workers of the right type.

The profession is in its infancy and though much good work is being
done, much of it in isolation, it is plain that co-ordination, and higher standards
of qualifications are much needed. With this end in view a few occupational
therapists who already know each other are trying to form an association for
those who have, either by long experience and ability, or by special training,
qualified themselves to give a definite contribution. It is proposed to hold
a general meeting in London in order to form such an association, and,
in the meanwhile, those interested in the project, who have not yet
received the circular letter on the subject, should write to Miss E. M.
Macdonald, 19, Grove Way, Esher, Surrey, who is acting as Temporary
Secretary. It should, however, be clearly understood that the association is
not intended for craft workers but for those with definite training or practical
working experience of some length as Occupational Officers in a hospital or
institution.
