Outlines of General Psychopathology
====================================

26 MENTAL WELFARE
Book Reviews

By
William Malamud, M.D. Chapman and Hall,
Ltd., 11, Henrietta Street, W.C.2. 21/-.
This is a lucid and systematic exposition of
the subject matter, relationships and aims of
psychopathology. Dr. Malamud points out that
though this science has a definite and special
value in its own field, yet, as its close approxi-
mation to other branches of science, such as
medicine, psychopathology and education, alone
indicates, its ramifications are both complex and
diverse. None the less, since the personality of
the abnormal individual remains throughout its
most valuable source of information, the investi-
gation of the patient always deserves careful
consideration. In this connection the study of
behaviour stands first in importance from the
objectively scientific point of view. At the same
time a knowledge of the patient's inner processes
is of vital significance, not only with regard
to the individual himself, but also in connection
with the development of the science itself. For
psychopathology not only observes and describes
morbid mental phenomena?these data form in-
deed its groundwork?it also attempts to under-
stand their nature, causation and development.
In this way the ontogenetic, phylogenetic and
organic determinants of morbid mental pheno-
mena have a definite bearing upon the subject.
The related theories and schools of thought
have also a real value in the development of the
science. Malamud instances the psycho-analytic
concept of dynamic relationships. He also
points out that its reference to evolutionary
principles both provides a logical basis for its
theory of " levels," and illustrates the way that
the development of personality, with its arousal
of new needs, calls into being novel methods
of adjustment, superimposed upon old ones. In
other respects, however, he finds that the con-
clusions of psycho-analysis are too strongly
biassed by experience derived from abnormal
mentality. He, therefore, prefers Kahn's method
of approach to the structure of personality,
based as it is upon mental activity in general.
But Kahn's categories of impulses, temperament
and character, being essentially dissimilar, lack
that unity of concept which forms such an asset
in, for example, the psycho-analytic school of
thought. And so with various theories and
hypotheses in turn; in each Malamud finds some
grounds for dissatisfaction.
In this dilemma, and with a view to adding
his quota to the solution of the problems
abnormal psychology, he develops the following
concept. He takes adjustment as his basic
principle in that structuralisation of the pef'
sonality and classification of mental action?
which have for him both a theoretical and
practical importance; for in his opinion it lS
the necessity for adjustment which ultimately
determines those fundamental changes in the
organism which the process of evolution in'
volves. For this reason in the passage froflj
inorganic matter to organic structure, and
again from organic structure to motilc
organisms, three different levels with distinct
methods of expression appear. Self-assertion'
the central feature at the level of inorganic
matter, manifests itself in solids as sen'
preservation, a passive resistance to change,' 111
gases, where self-preservation is at a minimum'
aggression or self-extension in space becomes thf
dominant note. At the level of organic
structure, growth or accretion is the new featnff
involved; the organism not only maintains
individuality, it also grows, it occupies mo1"1
space. Selection is here the new factor in ad'
justment. At the stage when independeH
movement occurs, another need, that of rat10'
cination or the appreciation of relationship5
comes to the fore.
Malamud finds that each of these three lev^5
has a corresponding mental equivalent. F?f
instance, he equates the stage of movement
which involves the need for ratiocination, ^
the mental activities discussed under the headi1^
of intelligence, while the phase of growth, wn
its need for selection, he allies with the feeling5
and emotions. He then proceeds to show
way in which normality results from a balance
relationship between these three functions, win}
psychopathological happenings arise from *.j
disturbance. Finally, he deals in more deta^
with the origin, causation and development
psychopathological phenomena when looked ^
from this standpoint. Altogether this book
of interest to student and research worker alike'
and well repays careful study.
Hilda Weber, M.P-
