The Personnel of a Psychiatric Clinic
=======================================

The New York City Committee on Mental Hygiene of the State
Charities Aid Association, together with the Mental Hygiene Section of the
Welfare Council of New York City, undertook in 1929 a Survey of Mental
Hygiene Facilities in Greater New York and were impressed by the fact
that of the 20,000 patients admitted to clinics every year, nearly 7,000 failed
to return for subsequent visits. The reason for this state of things was not
immediately apparent, but it seemed to certain members of the Committee
that it might have some connection with the standard of training, or lack of
training, of the Clinics' personnel. This and other considerations led the
New York City Committee on Mental Hygiene to undertake, in 1934, a study
of the clinic situation in New York designed to elicit information as to the
professional equipment of Clinic staffs and to ascertain if standards could
be formulated with regard to the minimum qualifications considered essential
for psychiatrists, psychologists and psychiatric social workers.

In a pamphlet recently published, the recommendations arising out of
this enquiry are given, and the following summarises what, in the opinion
of the Committee, should be the minimum qualifications of the professional
members of Clinic staffs: ?

(1) Medical Staff
Junior Assistant?In addition to medical degree, at least one year of
successful in-patient work as clinical psychiatrist in mental hospital with
supplementary experience in clinical neurology, neuropathology, institu-
tional work for defectives, delinquents or epileptics, and/or in general
medical or pediatric practice.

Assistants?The essentials of above, plus at least two years of additional
experience in general or specialised aspects of psychiatry, with experience
in clinical service of at least 2 years of not less than two half-days a week
as Junior Assistant or equivalent, in a fully organised clinic.

Also desirable?preparation for psychoanalytic practice and ex-
perience in community education in mental hygiene.

Director?All the qualifications as above with, in addition, a diploma in
psychiatry or its equivalent, and not less than 2 additional years of
experience in a fully organised psychiatric clinic, which period should
include additional experience in clinic administration or in community
education in mental hygiene.

Also desirable?experience in forensic psychiatry, and directive
ability.

(2) Psychological Staff

Junior Assistant Psychologist?Should have had one year of graduate
study in psychology, equivalent to requirements for degree of M.A., in-
cluding courses in abnormal psychology, psychological testing and measure-
ment, statistics and laboratory training in clinical use of tests.

Assistant Psychologist?As above, with, if possible, training in educational
psychology, remedial measures in educational disabilities and vocational
guidance. Also 2 years of full time clinical experience at level of Junior
Psychologist, of which one year shall involve joint work with psychiatrists
and psychiatric social workers dealing with behaviour problems.

Chief Psychologist?Should have had at least 2 full years of graduate
experience in psychology. Ph.D. degree desirable though not essential.

At least 5 years of experience at level of Junior Assistant and Assistant
Psychologist. Must also possess ability to conduct research as demonstrated
by completed research projects.

As a means of realising the above standards, the Committee make the
following suggestions: ?
(1) That colleges and universities map out courses for the training of
clinical psychologists.
(2) That training centres be established in which Junior Assistant Psycho-
logists may acquire experience under supervision.
(3) That hospitals, agencies and schools be encouraged to employ psycho-
logists who have the requisite experience and training.

Psychiatric Social Workers
---------------------------

Assistants?Should be graduates of college of recognised standing and of an
accredited school of social work with at least 800 supervised field-work
hours of experience in psychiatric agencies.

At least one Assistant should have had also a minimum of one year's
post-training experience under supervision.

Chief Social Worker?In addition to above, should have had minimum
of 3 years post-training case work practice, preferably with two of these
years in a psychiatric clinic and at least one year in a supervisory
capacity.
