A Nerves as a Handicap to Efficiency
=========================================

:Author: May Smith, M.A., D.Sc.
(Industrial Health Research Board)

No one doubts that serious intellectual or physical defect handicaps the
sufferer in his task of earning a living, just as no one doubts that high intellectual and physical gifts are an advantage. There are, however, examples
of people who are lacking neither an adequate intellectual nor physical equipment, but who are nevertheless handicapped. The handicap is due to some
inadequacy of functioning on the emotional plane.

If we knew that A and B were equally intelligent?and it is possible
now to test for intelligence with reasonable accuracy?and that they were
equally equipped physically and practically for a specific occupation, we could
not from that knowledge alone predict equal success in life. A might be
moody, resentful of all criticism, frightened of all people in authority, selfdistrustful, and so on, whereas B might be joyous, able to adapt to authorities
and subordinates, keen on getting on, willing to run risks. These differences
which are emotional in character, may be so great as to neutralise the other
equalities. A word is needed to stand for emotional organisation, and the
Word to hand is " temperament." Literally, the word means " mixture," and
was used by the Ancients to stand for the physiological mixture or the make-up
*Based on an address given at the Annual Conference of the Association oft Mental
Health Workers, Harrogate, March, 1936.

of the individual, differences in the observed behaviour and character being
supposed to be due to differences in the mixture. A person in whom the
elements forming the mixture were evenly balanced had a perfect temperament, while any one element in excess resulted in some degree of imperfection.
What the elements were varied according to the scientific knowledge of the
age, but the importance of the differences, whatever might be the cause, has
been recognised by almost all the great physicians and philosophers.

Now we limit the word to the emotional make-up and it is possible to
investigate this without committing ourselves to the possible cause.
Some years ago the Industrial Health (then Fatigue) Research Board
undertook an investigation into Telegraphists' Cramp, a disability that interferes with the efficiency of telegraphists when sending by the Morse or Baudot
systems. A comparison of two groups of people, one suffering from cramp
and the other not, showed that there was no evidence in support of the view
that muscular defect was the cause. An interview with each person revealed
that the majority of the sufferers from cramp had some form of emotional
instability, whereas the majority of the others were emotionally more balanced.1
This led to a further study of emotional mal-adjustment, or the "nervous"
temperament in other groups, leaving on one side the general question of
emotional make-up or temperament.2 The word " nervous " is here used
without any reference to the organic nerves, merely as a useful phrase which
is in general use, although frequently misused: it stands for some form of
emotional mal-adjustment which may be reflected in behaviour or in personal
unhappiness.

It is necessary to note what is meant by a " nervous " symptom. Keeping
in mind that " emotional " would be really better than " nervous," we distinguish a symptom from a normal characteristic or even some idiosyncracy
by its consequences. The emotion of fear, for example, ought to be aroused
in circumstances where there is some adequate cause, and when experience
has shown that the circumstances involve no reason for fear, then fear should
cease to be aroused. Sometimes, however, such a fixed association is made
between a particular group of circumstances and the emotion of fear, that
whenever the circumstances occur, fear is also aroused, although the sufferer
recognises that it is irrational. For example, it would be reasonable for a person
to fear his chief if the latter had power to dismiss him for a mere whim, or were
a bully; if, however, his actual experience of his chief is that he is reasonable,
and if he has no power of dismissal, then to experience fear invariably in hisj
presence, knowing it to be irrational, is a useless response, and that useless
emotional response is called a " nervous symptom."

Most people in life have to adjust to superiors, to equals, and subordinates,
as well as to themselves and to their environment, and in each of these relationships emotional mal-adjustment can take place. For example, when asked
how he would feel if sent for by his chief, A will describe himself as mildly
apprehensive at first, but the feeling will pass off; B will experience interested
iA study of telegraphists' cramp. Industrial Health Research Board, Report No. 43.
2 The nervous temperament. Industrial Health Research Board, Report No. 61.
wonder and expect a rise; C will feel shaky at the knees; D will prepare for
some most impossible worst. Clearly these reactions represent real differences
in make-up.

Some people have difficulties in getting into touch with their equals,
while others can readily adjust; experience shows that the latter are more
likely to be successful than the former.

In relation to subordinates, some people in authority behave as if the
group were a superior of whom they stood in dread, with the result that they
have to prove to themselves that they are not afraid, and in doing so they assume
a blustering or autocratic manner, or they worry their subordinates widi futile
criticism or tactless opposition.

With regard to oneself, there is at one extreme the person who is never
emotionally sure he is right even when intellectually he knows he is, and at
the other the person who is equally irrationally sure he can never be wrong.
The well-adjusted person can see himself in perspective, and can realise
without emotional disturbance that as there are people who are taller or shorter
than himself, so also there are people who know more and also those who
know less than himself, and he suffers no more in the one case than in the other.
Other fears in disproportionate strength, such as fear of the dark, fear
of observation, or of being alone, need not directly affect the work, but their
presence does point to emotional difficulties that may play a part in weakening
resistance to whatever stress life may set up. Information with regard to these
various attitudes to life was sought in an interview lasting about 20 minutes,
and for statistical purposes subjects were graded according to the severity of
the symptoms. " 0 " meant that within the limitations of a short interview
conducted for research purposes no particular emotional difficulties were disclosed. This group comprised a very wide range of people. At one extremity
was the emotionally well-poised, sensitive and highly intelligent person, who
" in the mutable haps and sudden chances of fickle fortune is not lightly
dismyd nor brought to fear," as a 17th century writer expresses it; at the other
the rather dull person with almost no insight into his own life; it also included
some who, while not having psycho-neurotic symptoms, give the impression
of not being emotionally well-adjusted, although there is no evidence to justify
the impression: it is not unlikely that some at least of these will prove to be
psychotics later.

" 1 " was used for those who had only one symptom and that of such a
nature as to affect their lives but little. In adolescents it was sometimes difficult
to determine whether a symptom would develop or for practical purposes
disappear, for example, adolescent shyness may be merely inexperience of life,
or may be symptomatic of some serious instability.

If a subject had definite symptoms he was marked 3, 3, 4 or 5, according
to the severity. Obviously, such a classification can have only approximate
value.
68 MENTAL WELFARE
Showing the Number in Each Group Expressed as a Percentage
of the Total Number
Firm No. o i 2 3 4 & 5
A 191 43.5 26.7 10.5 15.2 4.2
B 69 60.9 16.0 14.5 8.7 0
C 72 50.0 23.6 16.7 8.3 1.4
D 187 52.4 19.7 11.2 9.6 7.0

In the following table3 a selection is given from the various groups studied
merely to show the relative proportions of workers (in these groups mainly
clerical workers) with and without nervous symptoms. The range for those
with no discoverable symptoms is from about 43% to 61%. All of these
organisations had a medical examination for entrants. While it is likely
that those whose nervous symptoms have been assessed at no more than 2
will carry on quite well, particularly if their work is of such a nature as not
to " touch up " their particular symptom, the others are very likely to break
down, and they constitute a by no means negligible number in each group.
Now the question arises as to whether these symptoms really matter in
practical life, i.e., do these emotional mal-adjustments make adjustments to
the ordinary economic environment difficult?

Obviously, it is extremely difficult to get evidence; still, while it cannot
be claimed that proof was forthcoming, yet there is some data to show the
general trend.

In some of the groups it was found possible to have the subjects assessed
for efficiency. The estimation of efficiency is not easy, for except in a few
highly specialised occupations there is no objective criterion that can be
regularly applied. Usually efficiency demands an ability to maintain a certain
standard of work, and to adjust without friction to other people. In practice,
a fairly wide margin of variability is tolerated.

Where the work was of such a nature as to permit of the assessment,
subjects were graded A, B or C for efficiency, A being the most efficient and
C the least.

It was found that in each group a higher percentage of those without
nervous symptoms were graded A for efficiency and a higher percentage of
nervous subjects were graded C. It must not, however, be argued from this
that therefore each nervous person is likely to be inefficient. All that can
be said is that a group composed exclusively of people without nervous
symptoms will, other things being equal, be more efficient than one composed
of nervous people.

Possibly some of this inefficiency is related to the problem of working
with other people. In a small factory, where everyone is well known to
everyone else, and where one person's behaviour was known to, and could
*The full details will be found in " The nervous temperament," Industrial Health
Research Board, Report No. 61.

affect the others, descriptions of all the subjects, from the point of view of
ability to get on with others, were obtained. They were classified into three
groups, i.e., those who were recognised as difficult to get on with, those who
were easy, and a third about which, in the opinion of the assessor, some doubt
existed: these latter were almost all young workers, and although they were
not exactly easy, yet it was difficult to be sure about them.

Out of 180 subjects, 106 were described as " easy," and of these, about
57% werc frce from nervous symptoms, about 27% had slight symptoms,
and 16% more serious.

Fifty-six were " difficult," and of these about 31% had no symptoms,
23% slight, and 46% serious symptoms. There does seem to be a tendency
for the difficulty in social adjustment to be related to the presence of nervous
symptoms.

Not only do workers have to adjust to the conditions of their actual work
and to the people around them, but also to the material environment, e.g.,
lighting, heating, ventilation, noise. It is well known that there are certain
people in every organisation who seem to be either extremely sensitive or
unduly aware of conditions that are to the rest neutral. In the case of one
environmental condition, namely noise, it was possible to study the relation
between nervousness as estimated by the presence of symptoms and susceptibility
to noise. Each subject was asked in the course of the ordinary investigation
how he or she worked in a noise. The answers could be classified roughly
into three categories: ?

(1) Those indicating indifference to unavoidable noise.
(2) Those indicating slight dislike.
(3) Those indicating serious susceptibility so that physical symptoms or
mental distress were set up.

In a group of 49 girls there were 17 with no nervous symptoms: of
these, 12 (i.e., nearly 71%) were able to adjust to noise; 13 had slight symptoms
and of these 4 (i.e., about 31%) were able to adjust; 19 had severer symptoms
and of these, only 1 could so adjust.

A group of 156 men gave a similar result. Of 51 who were free from
symptoms, 42 ( = 82%) were unaffected by noise; of 79 with severe symptoms,
only 33 (=42%) were unaffected.

Now, if the nervous person is under greater stress than the not-nervous
person, it might be expected that this would be reflected in sickness absenteeism.
Where it was possible to compare the sickness absenteeism over a considerable
period of time it appeared that the nervous person did tend to be absent more
for all kinds of disease, although the nervous breakdown type predominated.
This does not mean, however, that all nervous people will break down.
In all the groups tested there were a number of people with severe symptoms
who had reached late middle age without any break-down. It must be remembered that a nervous symptom is the expression of a relationship between
a person and his environment. Let us assume that we have two typists of
equal intelligence and equal typing ability, equal physical health, and each

with a fear of observation. Let one work in a room alone, and the other work
with others and a supervisor watching. The first typist, being able to work
unwatched, will rarely have her particular symptom " touched up," and that
in itself is an advantage.

But when people with this fear are watched, they are liable to make
mistakes, so the second typist will have, in addition to the acute mental discomfort due to her fear, the effect of this expressed in mistakes and also the
consequences of these mistakes. The full weight of the latter will depend
not on the symptom but on the condition of the work. The practical consequences to the two typists will be very different and the second is more likely
to break down than the first. Some environments, particularly those characterised by rigidity of organisation and arbitrary personal criteria of efficiency,
are difficult for nervous people. The type of mind can be the same, but if its
anxieties receive little stimulation in the ordinary daily routine, there is less
likelihood of a breakdown.

From the point of view of health and successful work, the diagnosis and
treatment of the nervous person is important. Just as there are some people
who are physically unfitted for certain occupations, and are therefore kept
out, and some who are too intelligent and other too unintelligent for some
work, so there are people temperamentally unsuited for the conditions of
specialised work, and these should be diverted into occupations suitable for
them.

Experimental Work in the Teaching of Retarded Children
------------------------------------------------------
In our next issue, we propose to begin a series of Notes on modem educational
developments in work affecting retarded children.

To make this section of value, we ask the co-operation of our readers, specially
of those who are teachers or in touch with schools or educational administration.
Many experiments of great interest are being made by individual teachers
in Special 'Schools and in classes for Dull and Backward Children; new methods
are being tried in many places for dealing with the whole educational problem of
the retarded child, and experience of the uttfiost value is continually being gamed
in many different directions.

The difficulty is, however, to keep track of all this pioneer work, much of
which is carried on in isolation by modest people who hesitate to tell of their
adventurings, and we therefore appeal to our readers to send us news of any
experiments known to them which should be recorded in this new section of the
magazine.

Ed. Mental Welfare.
