Mentality and the Criminal Law
===============================

:Author: O. C. M. Davis, M.D., D.Sc., and JK.
VVilshire. John Wright and Sons, Ltd.?
Bristol. Simpkin Marshall, Ltd. London,
1935. Price 5/-.

This book aims at presenting in a concise
manner the salient points connected with the
law in this country regarding the commission
of crimes by mentally disordered persons, so
that students and practitioners of law may
obtain useful information thereon with an
economy of time.

A preliminary chapter discusses briefly the
meaning of the words " disease " and " mind.'
There follow short chapters on insanity, metis
rea and intent, drunkenness, irresistible in1'
pulse, insanity from the legal point of view, the
significance of the McNaghten Rule, and advocacy in cases involving mental disabilityThe more important statutory enactments
relating to mental states are conveniently set
out in an appendix. There is also a short
bibliography and a list of cases to which
reference has been made.

In the section dealing with the methods ^
investigating mental states no mention is made
of the importance of ascertaining as precisely
as possible the circumstances associated with
criminal conduct, and of the necessity
balance facts in relation thereto which indicate
insanity against those which indicate sanity. J
is essential for the medical witness to do thig
as opposing counsel will examine him upon these
matters, and unless he has full information con'
cerning the events relating to the crime is liable
to have his evidence rebutted.

The authors favour the definition of mens
enunciated by Cave J. in Chisholm v. Doultona blameworthy condition of mind which is some'
times negligence, sometimes malice and some'
times guilty knowledge. The section on intent15
set out clearly and succinctly, but the differen^
between intention and motive is not discussed'
That there is a difference has been accepted
lawyers, medical men, and psychologists, an
the psychiatrist is concerned more with th
motive for a crime than the intention of th
criminal. The reviewer has suggested elsewhefe
that, from the medical point of view, intent[?'[
in the Criminal Courts refers to the objects
effect which the law-breaker contrives to pr?^
duce on others by his act, and that motive
to the subjective effect with its accompany11^
emotion which he desires to produce up0
himself,

Reference is made to the recommendation of
foe Committee on Insanity and Crime over which
Lord Atkin presided in 1922, that it should be
recognised that a person charged criminally with
an offence was not responsible for his act when
was committed under an impulse which he
vvas by mental disease deprived of the power
resist. The authors refer also to the fact that
ten of twelve High Court Judges to whom the
fecommendation was submitted advised against
hs acceptance. The House of Lords, however,
did not reject the recommendation until they
had heard the views of some of their eminent
legal colleagues, including the Lord Chief
Justice, who introduced to the House the view?
?f the twelve Judges.

Attention is called to the fact that most of
the condemned prisoners who have been subsequently reprieved on the grounds of insanity
have been insane from the medical rather than
'r?m the legal point of view. It should be
reniembered that the Secretary of State acts
upon the findings of the medical enquiry which
he orders under Section 2 (4) of The Criminal
Lunatics Act, 1884, and that Lord Atkin's
Committee reported:

"We wish to emphasise that the statutory enquiry is intended to investigate the prisoner's
sanity or insanity, i.e., his condition from a
medical point of view, and it is our opinion that
this enquiry should still be held under the siibsection and we have no change in the procedure
to recommend. No doubt in some cases the
investigation and the exercise of the discretion
involve a review and a reversal of the express
finding of the jury. So far from this being
objectionable we think it essential that it should
form part of the duty of the Home Secretary,
lust as it is in exercising the prerogative of
mercy to which this power is closely akin."
It would be interesting to know the facts which
led the authors to conclude that a prisoner was
^uffering from temporary insanity when he was
t?und at the first trial to be unfit to plead, in
j^Pite of the fact that when brought up later for
J^al authoritative medical evidence was given
hat he had feigned insanity on the first occasion
and _ this was not challenged by the original
Medical witnesses.

The book is brought up to date, and the
^uthors are to be congratulated upon achieving
j^eir purpose and the clear manner in which
.^ey have presented a considerable amount of
formation in a small compass.
W. Norwood East.
