Personality Maladjustments and Mental Hygiene
==============================================

:Author: J. E. Wallace Wallin, Ph.D.
McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Limited.
18/-.

Because it would be easy to do this book less
than justice it is a difficult one to appraise.
It; is described as " A Text-book for Psychologists, Educators, Councillors, and Mental
Hygiene Workers," but such claims are, in this
case, unjustifiable. Of a text-book the student
has a right to expect some manual upon which
he may rely for a systematic and comprehensive
treatment of the subject which he wishes to
study, or an arranged and authoritative enquirewithin to which he may refer as need arises.
Dr. Wallin's book does not satisfy these requirements. For one thing, it does not deal with the
subject of mental hygiene systematically; for
another, if one wished to refer to some particular
aspect of the subject, as for example child
guidance work, legal procedure in relation to
psychiatry, or existing provisions for dealing
with cases of psychosis, it would be difficult to
know where to look. The defect derives mainly
from faults in selection and presentation of
material.

What the book does comprise is a series of
explanatory and descriptive comments relating
to various aspects of mental hygiene, psychiatry,
psychopathoiogy, psychotherapy, and miscellaneous kindred matters. In so far as it is the
product of an individual outlook, and to some
extent also of personal experience, it is valuable.
In this sense it is a remarkable book; remarkable
not only for the matter it contains, and the
manner in which this is treated, but also for
what it tells us of Dr. Wallin himself and his
approach to the subject of mental hygiene and
the associated aspects of psychology. The disadvantage of this method is that instead of being
dealt with from one angle consistently, the
author's different points of view are apt to influence the presentation so that Dr. Wallin is
speaking to us now as educationist, now as
propagandist, here as preacher, there as journalist, too often subjective, too rarely objective.
There is no doubt that he has had to deal
effectively with the problem of numbers, a
question with which, together with the associated
difficulty of time absorption, psychiatrist,
psychotherapist, and social worker are seriously
concerned. His experience has made for
breadth of outlook, perhaps at the expense of
depth of penetration, but he shows himself to
have a shrewd working knowledge of mental
mechanisms.

In many sections of his book the author has
devoted considerable attention to the matter oi
treatment. Methods of treatment and their
rationale are described in detail, even those of
analysis, though in accounts of the latter the
point of treatment being itself a living-through;
a part of experience, and a process of mental
growth within, and on the part of, the personality itself, is not well brought out. It is disconcerting, in view of Dr. Wailin's wide knowledge
of psychological methods, to find him advocating and exemplifying the more positive,
exhortative, and affirmationist types of treatment, most valuable though they are in certain
indications, at the expense of the more fundamental and thorough-going approaches?the
symptomatic in preference to the radical. 1?
this connection the slogan, the cliche and the
platitude are of all too common occurrence.
Some confusion exists, too, as to terminology'
the manner of presentation sometimes lapsing
into a mixed jargon of psychological terms on
the one hand, and of popular catch-words and
ill-defined phrases on the other. This method Is
apt to give the impression that the subject Is
being " written up " rather than simply written
upon. The caption type of summary which
heads the case-histories are examples of this:?

" REGRESSIVE, INFANTILE TRAITS AND FAILURE
TO GROW UP. POSSIBLY DUE TO EARLY SPOIL'
ING AND DESIRE FOR INFANTILE COMFORT; 1??
INDOLENT TO OVERCOME REGRESSIVE TRAllSJ
RESORT TO RATIONALISATION AND PROCRASTlN'
ATION; DIFFICULTY IN GETTING STARTED ANP
IN OUTGROWING CARELESS, SELF-SATISFlEP'
TOMBOY TYPE OF LIFE/ VALUE OF THIS SELF'
ANALYSIS TO RESPONDENT."
" EARLY REALISATION THAT THE SCHOLAR lS
HELD IN CONTEMPT AND THE LOUT LIONISE^'
AND AN ATTEMPT TO COMPENSATE BY BEING Tl#
WORST KID IN SCHOOL, WHICH PROVED UNSUCCESSFUL BECAUSE OF THE UNNATURALNESS
OF THE ROLE ASSUMED."

Generalisations, assumptions, and affirmation
are common in these pages, and the long string5
of substantives, of which that beginning at the
foot of page 41 is a good example, and whic11
are apt to recur, make irksome reading. 0ne
could have wished, too, for a greater meastf^
of that humour which comes from sensibility 0
insight and a nice discrimination.

In his preface, the author refers to the amount
?f repetition in the book, and what he says will
Perhaps not be gainsaid; unfortunately, it has
been a contributory factor in making the book
to? long. Valuable space has also been sacrificed
numerous profuse case-histories which,
enough interesting to read in small quantities,
lose much of their value here owing to lack of
classification and order.

Despite all these criticisms it must be freely
granted that it is an entertaining book. It contains much solid material in the form of facts
and figures, and this is set forth in a readable
and in even an amusing, if humourless,
banner. Subjects such as psychopathology and
Psychiatry are described and explained in the
Rarest and simplest way; the very dogmatism
statement is at times helpful and makes for
Cogency.

Nevertheless, the book does not fulfil the
Promise of its preface. It tries to be many things
ends in being . . . nothing very definite.
j1 he exasperating impression with which one is
?ft is that much of the best of Dr. Wallin's
^nowledge and experience has been obscured
Jroni the reader by factors largely avoidable,
^his is particularly unfortunate in view of the
act that this type of book is apt to have a
y?gue among the less discriminating and be
reely quoted as an authority; while the more
iscerning will be unable to escape the feeling
^at a would-be scientific psychology is here
e}rig exploited to no very good purpose.
, There is included an excellent and compressive list of books which would be of great
assistance to any student of mental hygiene.
The Appendix: Suggestions for Overcoming
fage Fright. is an ill-chosen addition to what
^ould have been an important and authoritative
Work.

S. Barton Hall.
