News of the Voluntary Associations, 1935-36
============================================

The following items of special interest are taken from Annual Reports
of Voluntary Associations for Mental Welfare, which have reached us during
the last few weeks; the record is necessarily a brief one bat it will serve to give
some idea of the diverse, and varied activities which are carried on.

Bath
----
This Association continues to specialise in the work of Statutory Supervision,
After-Care of children who have left the Special School, and the Occupation Centre.
It records with regret the closing of the Boys' Centre, but hopes that it may
be possible to re-open it again later.

Buckinghamshire
--------------
A new Division with Slough as its centre has recently been instituted owing
to the growth of the Association's work, making five divisions in all.

Darlington
-----------
A Mental Treatment Clinic has recently been opened under the direction of the
Medical Superintendent of the Durham County Mental Hospital (Dr Wilson) in
the work of which the co-operation of the Association has been sought. The
Secretary attends the Clinic's weekly session as Social Worker.

The Occupation Centre has benefited greatly by the help of the Darlington
Training College for teachers. Students come once a week, primarily to help with
games, etc., and their service is much appreciated.

Close co-operation has also been maintained with Toe. H and its League of
Women Helpers, in the running of two Clubs, one for M.D. boys, the other for
M.D. girls.

It is reported that the Secretary of the Association now acts as official Probation
Officer for all mental defectives in the Borough. The experiment has proved an
unqualified success and is believed to be the first of its kind.

Derby
-----
A Harvest Festival, was held in September at the Association's Occupation
Centre conducted by Mrs. Benson, Organiser of Centres, Staffordshire. The children
brought gifts and, in addition, fruit and flowers were sent by the Parks Superintendent
and the Borough Mental Hospital.

The produce, with scrap books and woolly toys made by the children, was
given to the Children's Ward of the City Hospital.

Devon
-----
During 1935, the Association made a beginning in boarding out patients from
the Devon Mental Hospital under Section 55 of the Lunacy Act, 1890. Between
June and December eight homes were found for eight female patients. Other work
done for the Hospital has included attendances at the Out-Patient Clinic in Exeter
and social work arising therefrom.

There were 118 defectives under Guardianship during the year for which the
Association was responsible, 43 of them being out-county cases.
The Report alludes to the need for an increase in staff in order to develop
the Boarding Out and Guardianship branches of the work, and is able to add a
note that in March, 1936, the County Council increased their grant by ?445.

Hastings
--------
This Association confines itself to the provision of " supervision, occupation,
instruction, recreation and other interests " for defectives in the area, either living
in their own homes or as patients at the Municipal Hospital.

The Occupation Centre which is the Association's main activity caters in the
morning chiefly for younger defectives and in the afternoon chiefly for those from the
Municipal Hospital who are brought to and fro daily.

The Report comments on the value of the Centre's percussion band which
gives great joy to those taking part in it. By kind permission of the Education
Committee, the pupils use the Halton School Playing Field on two mornings weekly
for cricket and other games, and on one afternoon weekly during the summer, games
are played in the grounds of the Municipal Hospital.

Ipswich
-------
The Association continues to carry out social work in connection with the
Psychologic Clinic at the East Suffolk and Ipswich Hospital under Dr Percy
Banbury, and to provide after-care and help in obtaining employment for patients
discharged from the Mental Hospital.

Gratitude is expressed to the Ipswich Branch of Toe. H, who, assisted by
the League of Women Helpers, is responsible for an Evening Club for M.D. Lads.
A Social Afternoon for young women has been held in the Toe. H Hall once a month,
which has been much appreciated.

In addition to the Occupation Centre for imbecile children, a Basketry Class
has been held on the office premises during the year on four mornings a week
attended by twelve youths, and a Sewing Class for girls has met twice a week.

Kent
-----
The Association has now five full-time and three half-time Occupation Centres
in the area, and one voluntary Occupation Class.

There were 108 cases on the books of the Association, under Guardianship
or on License from Institutions, during the year.

Eight children attending the Special School at Tonbridge are under the care
of the Association's Boarding Out Committee.

In addition to feeble-minded children supervised for the Kent Education
Committee, 14 uncertified cases were referred to the Association by the Committee,
for investigation into special difficulties connected with school backwardness or
home conditions. Psychological examination has been arranged where necessary,
and the Association feels that this is an encouraging development of its work.

Lancashire, North
------------------
The Secretary attends, as social worker, at the two Mental Treatment Clinics
in the area?one at the Royal Lancaster Infirmary, and the other at the North
Lonsdale Hospital, Barrow-in-Furness.

Lancashire, South-East
----------------------
The centralised Occupation Centre, absorbing four smaller Centres in the
Manchester area, held at Welfare House, caters for low-grade children and older
higher-grade girls and boys. The girls are trained in cooking and housework and
laundry, and several have, as a result, obtained employment as domestic servants
or ward maids and are doing well. The boys do creditable work in the garden of
the Centre and the kitchen garden has yielded good results.

The Association continues to be responsible for the social work connected
with the four Mental Treatment Clinics in the area, and one Clinic is held at the
Association's offices weekly, under the direction of the Medical Superintendent of
the Prestwich Mental Hospital.

The Report calls attention to the desirability of developing Guardianship in
the aiea and of ceasing to limit its use to defectives living with their parents.

Southampton
-----------
The Secretary continues to attend the Psychological Clinic once a week and
daring the year under review, visited 184 patients referred to her for this purpose.

Staffordshire
-------------
This Association is now responsible for eight Occupation Centres, and the
number is shortly to be increased to ten. The Centre in Lichfield has recently
acquired premises of its own assigned to it by the County Council, consisting of
part of the former Girl's Industrial School, with spacious rooms and a large garden^
The children are drawn from a wide area.

Suffolk
--------
There were on 31st March, 1936, 22 women patients boarded out by the
Association from the Mental Hospital. Thirteen patients have now been living with
the same family for over two years, and gratitude is expressed to the Guardians
who have helped to contribute to the success of the scheme.

The Secretary acts as Investigation Officer for the East and West Suffolk County
Councils in determining the financial circumstances of all Voluntary and Temporary
Rate-Aided patients admitted to the Mental Hospital.

A good output of saleable work continues to be made by defectives in the area
receiving Home Training, but there is considerable difficulty in disposing of such
work, and the Association appeals for help in this direction.

Sussex, East
------------
To arouse interest in the training of defectives, the girls from the Hermitage
Training Home, Fairwarp in March, 1936, gave a performance in Lewes, of
" Hiawatha," which won great commendation, as well as a useful collection in iid
of the Association.

The difficulty of work in this area is increased by the absence of any local
institutional provision for M.D. children, as parents are reluctant to send them
as far away as Bath and Bristol.

The Association has found homes in Eastbourne for ten feeble-minded children
boarded out by the Education Committee so that they may attend the Special
School.

The Training of Low Grade Defectives
------------------------------------
The Staffordshire Mental Welfare Association is arranging to hold a week's
course in Stafford from Monday, 5th October to Friday, 9th October, 1936. The
Course will deal with methods of teaching defectives, with special reference to lowgrade cases and will include demonstrations, lectures and classes in musical and
rhythmic training and singing.

Applications should be sent to the Secretary of the Staffordshire Mental Welfare
Association, Barclays Bank Chambers, 15, Market Square, Stafford, not later than
August 31st. The Fee for the Course is ?1 Is. Od.
