Text Book of Psychiatry
========================

Henderson and
uilnespie. 4tn Edition, 1936. Uxlord Medico
P ublications. 18/-.

This excellent text-book is already well known
to psychiatrists and students and has, within the
space of ten years, reached its fourth edition-
It has grown in scope but still strives to pre-
serve its aim of keeping within the limits of a
text-book suitable for general practitioners and
of stimulating their interest in the subject of
mental disorders.

In looking over the pages of the new edition
one appreciates anew the clear-cut arrangement
of the chapters, the big lines upon which the
book has been planned and the clever exposition
throughout of the biological viewpoint ox
psychiatry. The book strives to keep through'
out a lively human interest in individual patients
and puts the various types of mental disorder
before the reader in case form. Though this is
no novelty and has been done in even the earliest
text-books on the subjects, still the cases are
presented in such coloquial language and modern
form that the types become arresting and will
doubtless remain long in the memory.

The maniac-depressive chapter is particularly
well done, also that on paranoia and here, as
in other types, the writers describe the earlier
phases and demonstrate to the student their
gradual development, pointing out that mental
disorders do not show themselves suddenly but
give due warning. This teaching should lead
to an early recognition of symptoms by the
general practitioner, so that treatment can be
Undertaken in good time. Too many generations
of students have carried away from their lectures
on psychiatry only ideas of the well-developed
typical and chronic cases, the end-products of
the malady. This has given them an outlook
of hopelessness upon the treatment of mental
disorders and they have therefore lost interest
in the subject; they should on the contrary, after
reading this book, look upon mental disorder as
a most hopeful malady and one requiring their
skill and sympathy.

There is a good chapter upon neurosis and
psychoneurosis and also upon the psychiatry of
childhood, which in these early days of Child
Guidance Clinics will be found most useful to
the student. The usual subjects that complete
text-books are also to be found in this one, such
etiology, methods of examination, legal
matters, and so on.

If one could level a criticism it would be that
a chapter might have been added upon labora-
tory methods and research that have been done
Within the past 25 years or so, for only a few
Words about this are scattered through the book.
Also it seems hardly necessary to include a
chapter on War neurosis which differs not at
all from the ordinary neurosis except in its cause
?f the terrible and prolonged strain of war.
Isabel Emslie Hutton, M.D.
