Training Courses for Teachers, 1936
====================================

MENTAL WELFARE 19

The following training courses organised by the C.A.M.W. for teachers
of retarded children will be held from May to September, 1936.
t. A Nine Weeds' Course, which will be held in London from May 21st to
July 23rd.
2. Two Board of Education Short Courses, each of three weeks in length.
Elementary Course, in Leicester from August 25th to September 15th.
Advanced Course, in London from July 6th to 25th.
The dates given are provisional, but particulars of these Courses will be
circularised early in February, when they may also be obtained on application
to The Secretary, C.A.M.W., 24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.i.
Course for Medical Practitioners
This Course, arranged by the University Extension and Tutorial Classes
Council in co-operation with the C.A.M.W., will be held at the University of
London, South Kensington, from April 20th to May 2nd.
C.A.W.M. Holiday Homes
The two holiday homes at Bognor and Rhyl, to which the C.A.M.W.
has in the past arranged for holiday parties of defectives, have met with such
success that the Association has embarked on a third venture, at Flint House,
Seaford, Sussex, a seaside house admirably adapted for the purpose. This
house will be open all the year round and parties of men and boys, as well
as of women and girls, can be received. It is hoped that it will thus meet a
real need as hitherto no holiday home for defective men and boys has been
available in the south of England. Applications for vacancies should be made
as soon as possible to the Secretary, C.A.M.W., 24, Buckingham Palace Road,
S.W.i, stating which home is required: ?
Franklin House, Bognor, Sussex?
Open May to October. Accommodation for 28 women and girls.
Fee: ?1 per week.
Bod Donwen, Rhyl, N. Wales?
All the year round from March 1st, 1936. Accommodation for 33,
both sexes in separate parties. Fee: ?1 per week.
Flint House, Seaford, Sussex?
All the year round. Accommodation for 36, both sexes in separate
parties. Fee: ?1 Is. 6d. per week.
At each home there is accommodation in separate rooms for visiting staff.
Staff fees: 26/6 per week for women, 31/6 per week for men.
20 MENTAL WELFARE
Mental Welfare Library
The Library has, during the last few weeks, been enriched by the gift
of a number of books and pamphlets belonging to the late Dr. F. C. Shrubsall,
presented by Mrs. Shrubsall in token of her husband's long-continued interest
in and regard for the work of the Association.
The books have been very gratefully received and constitute a valuable
addition to the Library's stock. A catalogue of them has been supplied to
subscribers, a copy of which will gladly be sent by the Librarian to anyone
who is interested.
The Mental Health Course (London School of Economics)
In the present issue of Mental Welfare, scholarships are again offered
by the London School of Economics for the year's Course in Mental Health.
It has not always been recognised that this Course is arranged with a
view to supplying the knowledge and experience needed by those who work
with mental defectives as well as by those who intend to become social workers
in Mental Hospitals and Child Guidance Clinics. It is, in fact, designed,
as its name implies, to give training in every aspect of Mental Health, and this
involves lectures, demonstrations and visits in connection with mental
deficiency, and, for those whose choice of work lies in this direction, special
case work and administrative experience organised by the Central Association
for Mental Welfare.
The training is a specialised one, and is only considered suitable for
those who have already qualified for general social work and have had
practical experience.
The Course opens in September and lasts for ten months. The expense,
including fees and travelling, does not amount to more than about ^36.
Those who are dependent on a scholarship should apply before May 1st, 1936,
and others may apply until the end of June. In both cases early applications
add to convenience in the organisation of the Course.
Child Guidance Council
An interesting development in the work of the Child Guidance Council
is the organisation of a Three Day Course for Workers in Homes and Institu
tions for Children, which is to be held in London from February 25th to 27th.
" The aim of the Course "?to quote from the Syllabus "?" is to give
practical help in the application of modern psychological knowledge to prob-
lems likely to be met with by those having the care of children in Institutions,"
and it is intended for senior members of Home or Institution staffs.
Full particulars of the Course can be obtained from the Organiser, Child
Guidance Council, Woburn Llouse, Upper Woburn Place, London, W.C.i,
MENTAL WELFARE 21
Child Guidance Clinics and the Board of Education
The subject of Child Guidance Clinics is dealt with at some length in the
Annual Report of the Chief Medical Officer of the Board of Education (Dr.
Arthur McNalty) for the year 1934.
In paying a tribute to the pioneer work done by the East London Clinic
started in 1926 and the London Child Guidance Clinic started in 1929, the
Board urge the necessity for putting Clinics on a satisfactory financial basis,
so that their position may be consolidated and their number (at present only
between 15 and 20 for the whole country) may be increased.
For the first time, during the year under review the Board officially
recognised expenditure on child guidance by allowing expenditure on the
Clinic established by the Birmingham Education Committee to rank for grant
as part of the provision for the school medical service, subject to the proviso
that such recognition should be subject to review in the light of further in-
spection. The principle has also been established that Local Education
Authorities may contribute to Voluntary Child Guidance Clinics for services
rendered to children who have been referred by school medical officers.
In outlining some tentative suggestions with regard to the staffing and
general organisation of Clinics, the Chief Medical Officer expresses his view
that it is important to dissociate a Child Guidance Clinic in the public mind
from either mental defect or mental disorder, and that therefore care should
be taken in choosing premises which should be unconnected with a mental
deficiency institution or mental hospital. Further, if the psychiatrist should
be one of the local mental hospital's staff, this fact should not appear in Clinic
reports or other publications, and if the Social Worker is only employed part-
time he considers it preferable she " should have no connection with mental
health visiting or mental deficiency in her other employment."* These safe-
guards he advocates in order to ensure that parents are not deterred in sending
their children to the Clinic for examination.
The Report refers to the large number of dull or backward children whose
problems are really educational who are sent by teachers to newly opened
Clinics and for whom Clinic staffs can do little beyond recommending in-
dividual teaching in school by enlightened methods. " It is only," Dr. McNalty
says, " when educational retardation appears to be the cause of nervous or
behaviour problems that it is part of the clinic's work to arrange for special
remedial teaching, which may be given by the educational psychologist, who
should know school standards and conditions, by students helpers, or best of
all, in an experimental school such as that existing in Leicester."
Diploma in Child Health
The English Conjoint Board of the Royal College of Surgeons and the
Royal College of Physicians, has recently instituted a post-graduate Diploma
*There is, of course, another side to this question taken by those who are seeking to establish
some system of co-ordinating the various Mental Health services.-?Ed.
22 MENTAL WELFARE
in Child Health, the subjects for which are as follows: ?
(a) The anatomy, physiology and pathology of childhood, (b) The
development of the child, physical and mental, including speech, with its
disorders; physical education in childhood, (c) The hygiene and dietetics
of infancy and childhood, (d) Affections of the new-born, (e) Disease in
infancy and childhood, medical and surgical, (f) The therapeutics of
infancy and childhood, including remedial treatment., physical and mental,
(g) Legislation and public administration in regard to the care of children,
including the methods of infant welfare centres and of the school medical
service.
Candidates for the examination must produce evidence of experience in
a children's hospital, or in the children's department of a general hospital.
The Diploma is intended for medical men and women taking up child welfare
work under various authorities, as well as for general practitioners wishing
to make a special study of the child as a whole.
Ireland
A Special School for feeble-minded children has been recently opened in
Belfast by the Ulster Ministry of Education. At the moment considerable
difficulty is being experienced by the Belfast Education Committee in obtaining
the consent of the parents to their children's admission but the Ministry are
undeterred by this difficulty, which they anticipated, and are confident that
once the advantages offered by the school are fully known, they will be appre-
ciated and used to the full.
At a luncheon given at St. Augustine's Colony for mentally defective
boys, Co. Dublin?under the management of the Community of St. John of
God?it was announced that the Minister for Local Government and Public
Health in the Irish Free State hoped to introduce legislation for dealing with
mental deficiency on an adequate scale. He had stated, however, that the
matter would be facilitated if public opinion were first roused.
A Great Experiment
A new development in the treatment of mental illness is about to take
place at Milton Abbey, Hants, which has been acquired by the Rev. John
Maillard?well-known for his activities in spiritual healing?as a Home for
mental patients.
The Home will be under medical supervision but its work will be directed
and animated by a faith in the possibility of spiritual healing and?to quote
from an address given by the Bishop of Salisbury: ?
" It is possible that Milton Abbey may be the scene of a great experiment
?perhaps the greatest experiment hitherto attempted within our Church?
in this field."
It is an experiment which will be watched with sympathy and interest
by all who are concerned with the welfare of mental sufferers.
MENTAL WELFARE
23
Dementia Praecox in the United States
The American National Committee for Mental Hygiene have instituted
a " nation-wide campaign against dementia praecox," which is described as
" the most devastating of all mental ills, whose victims fill more hospital beds
than those of all other forms of mental disease combined."
In a News Bulletin issued by the National Committee for Mental Hygiene,
the urgency of the problem is pointed out. The recovery rate for dementia
praecox patients in New York State in 1933 was only 2.2 per 100 admissions,
as compared with 42.9 per 100 admissions of manic-depressive psychoses.
Of the 3,125 re-admissions to the State hospitals during the same year, 37.2 per
cent, were cases of dementia praecox. Moreover, the disease is one of youth,
two-thirds of the cases occurring between the ages of 15 and 30 years.
The campaign?financed by a fund of 40,000 dollars provided by the
Scottish Rite Masons, Northern Jurisdiction?is to be directed by a special
committee of seven leading American psychiatrists, who have selected 13
main problems for research which will be carried on by 17 investigators
working in 10 cities and 7 States.
The enterprise is described as representing " the most comprehensive
and far-reaching attempt yet undertaken to deal with the problem in a
fundamental way."
Occupational Therapy Centre
An interesting experiment has just been launched in London to bring the
benefits of Occupation Therapy to sufferers from mental or physical illness
living in their own homes or being treated in nursing homes.
Patients can either come to the Centre for lessons, or can be visited in their
homes, and the subjects taught include r Weaving, Dyeing, Spinning, Rug
Tapestry, Book-binding, Toy-making, Basketry, Leatherwork, Lettering, Clay
Modelling, Design, Pottery Painting, Textile Printing, Embroidery, Stool-
making, and Glove-making. Instruction in Elocution can also be arranged.
Patients of both sexes and all ages are provided for.
The Centre is under the direction of Miss E. Angela Rivett and Miss
Muriel I. Tarrant, both of whom have had experience in Occupational Therapy
at the Maudsley Hospital.
Its address is: 187a, Tottenham Court Road, W.i, where all enquiries
should be made.
Speech Training
The Chief Medical Officer of the Board of Education in his 1934 Report*
devotes an interesting chapter to " Stammering and other Speech Defects," in
which appreciative reference is made to the work of the C.A.M.W.'s Travelling
Speech Therapist.
*" The Health of the School Child," 1934. H.M. Stationery Office. 2/6.
