Child Psychiatry
=================

Book Reviews

By Leo Kanner, M.D.,
Asst. Prof, of Psychiatry, The John Hopkins
University, Baltimore. Balliere, Tindall and
Cox. 27/-.
This is the first complete text book on Child
Psj'chiatry we have read. As Dr. Parkes, a
children's physician, says in his introduction
" no other book is quite like it." The book is
obviously based upon an extensive experience,
and the wealth of case illustrations is a most
commendable feature. Unfortunately, while the
author is to be congratulated that his book is
not overburdened with theory, one feels that
this feature is bought at the expense of super-
ficiality in approach and explanation.
It would be as well, however, to describe the
book before making any further comment.
The book ia large, but not uncomfortably so.
There are 43 chapters, and in all over 500 pages,
not including two prefaces, one by Dr. Adolf
Meyer, and the other by Dr. Parkes already
mentioned. The contents are logically arranged
in two parts. The first part is divided into three
sections on the Basic Principles, Examination
and Diagnosis, and the Principles and Aims of
Treatment. The second part deals with par-
ticular difficulties, and is also divided into three
sections. These are personality difficulties form-
ing essential features or sequels of physical ill-
ness, personality difficulties expressing them-
selves in the form of involuntary part-
dysfunctions and personality difficulties ex-
pressing themselves clearly as whole-dysfunctions
of the individual. There are many useful
references throughout.
There are three tendencies throughout the
book which we would single out for discussion-
The book might be described as an apotheosis
of common sense, a feature to which Dr. Parkes
gives praise in his introduction, and probably
related to this is the author's very evident aver-
sion to psycho-analysis which he does not under-
stand, and a tendency to over value the use cf
classification and descriptive names, which is
implicit throughout the work. This may be in
the psychiatric tradition, but we have long ag?
recognised it as a smoke screen behind which to
conceal a lack of deeper insight.
Psychiatrists often find psycho-analytic inter-
pretations monotonous, and others think the
same about those relying upon common sense.
That, however, is not the question. It is rather
whether we are going to include in our con-
ception of behaviour the existence of mind as a
dynamic principle, and if in so doing, we are
deepening our knowledge and insight.
To take an example from the book. In the
chapter on the environmental factor (page 93)
under the heading of the parent child relation-
ship, we find the following summary of disturb-
ances which is later amplified.
MENTAL WELFARE 91
Parental over-solicitude, over-indulgence, and over-
Protection.
Parental indifference and neglect.
Parental hostility and rejection.
Excessive parental ambitions for the child.
Loading excessive responsibilities on the child.
There is no hint that each, any, or all, of these
conditions can be considered as the result of
Anxiety and guilt in the parent, and no curiosity
as to the origin of this except in external con-
ditions. Yet it is only when we understand the
Anxiety and guilt factor on the part of the parent
that we can deal with it effectively, so that it
does not require to be displaced, or covered up,
as when someone else accepts the authority for
their actions, or is constantly reassuring. To
take a simple illustration, one often comes across
the case of a mother whose attentions to the
child are dominated by a fear that it will be
abnormal. In these cases one can often demon-
strate the origin of the fear in guilt associated
^ith masturbation.
The evident aversion to, and misunderstand-
lng of, psycho-analysis, is to be found in many
places.
On page 7, the author says: " Thus, the
teachings of infantile sexuality and the Oedipus
complex are not derived from the study of
children, but wilfully bestowed upon them a
Priori." On page 75 he discusses the Freudian
view of infantile sexuality, but completely
hisses the point?one is tempted to say wilfully
^-by applying the blind eye to the telescope.
Nowadays it should not need to be stated that
Jt is not the mere hedonistic connection between
certain infantile activities and adult sexuality
^hich is responsible for the conception, but the
tact that mature sexuality is actually identified
^ith these earlier forms and suffers from con-
victs arising in them. The same misunderstand-
lng is found on page 399 when he is discussing
Masturbation. He says " a less prejudiced view
^'ill hesitate to draw analogies between the mas-
turbation of later years, aiming definitely at
?rgasm, or, at least, at erection, and the playful
^differentiated handling of parts of the body
by the infant."
It is interesting to note in passing, that sex-
uality only appears in the book as a problem
and there is no indication that it can ever be
^ normal phenomena.
Positive evidence of the superficiality in ap-
proach is to be found in the description of the
cases and the place given to treatment. The
cases tend to be of a lurid and obvious kind,
giving one no idea of the subtleity of
behaviour, but this may be in the interests of
clarity, and more important is the diffuseness of
the diagnostic instrument.
Thus in the case of Bernard H. which is
described on page 94, and again on page 115,
the parental neurosis is first described in terms
of parental snobbishness and misapplied social
standards, but later the child is said to be suffer-
ing from " an obese, untruthful, moody, self-
righteous mother.'' Docs this really tell us any-
thing about the inner workings of that mind?
Although the book is large, only 20 pages
are devoted to treatment generally, although the
treatment of particular difficulties is discussed in
the appropriate places. In chapter 13, we find
acute sensible hints on how to avoid elementary
errors of approach, but it is disappointing to
find in the succeeding chapter on Work with the
Child that this can be summed up as the ex-
planation of the treatment plan, the dispelling
of incorrect ideas as to the source of the
symptoms, and a warning against surprise and
deception methods. The meagreness of the
chapter would be the only criticism but for the
usual non-understanding reference to trans-
ference as used in psycho-analytic treatment.
In the next chapter on Work with the Family
there is again the same rationalistic explanation.
There is a vague reference on page 127 to the
provision of guidance by trained and untrained
people if the parent's state or level is unsatis-
factory. But how?
It may be thought that these criticisms are
rather unnecessary, but they are important when
we come to treatment. In Chapter 17 which is
devoted to particular therapeutic aids, we find
that the use of a Star Chart is favoured in the
treatment of enuresis, temper tantrums, and
food fads, and this is to be kept secretly by
the parent if the child is untruthful. What more
certain re-inforcement of the sense of guilt can
be imagined? Then with regard to the larger
issue of mental hygiene, surely this will depend
upon the accuracy of our knowledge. On page
399 and ff. sexual difficulties are related to
domestic unhappiness, but why children should
react in this way is by no means clear.
In conclusion one can return to some of the
valuable contributions in the book, noting
especially the insistence on the necessity of
treating the patient rather than the condition
the qualities of the psychological approach, and
the type of diagnosis.
W. Paterson Brown, M.B., Ch.B.
