Honorary Secretary, Q Camps Committee
=======================================

:Author: Marjorie E. Franklin M.B., B.S., D.P.M.

This experiment in the training for citizenship of young men between
the ages of 17?25 exhibiting behaviour difficulties is already known to readers
of " Me?ital Waif are " as a project.

It made a start last May when the staff, joined 10 days later by a few
members, pitched tents 45 miles from London in a 26^/ acre clover held by a
stream, well supplied with fresh, spring water.
Arrangement of Site.

There is now a nucleus of 9 members (there are several more in correspondence, some of whom will probably have joined by the time this is in print)
and 6 staff, viz., 3 men who are appointed as a permanent staff, the wife of the
Camp Chief, who gives her secretarial and other services in an honorary capacity, and 2 student helpers, who are receiving practical experience as a training
for social work. Included in the community are also 3 dogs, 2 kittens and a
goat.

The campers have lived under canvas during the summer and are building wooden huts for their winter sleeping quarters. When the plans are completed there will be five huts, arranged in a semi-circle, each containing ten
bunks. A building to be used as a craft house and day room is already completed as is one of the bunk houses and the foundation of another. Quarters
9b mental welfare

for the senior staff are planned but cannot be completed this year, and a temporary building for use for this purpose and as a schoolroom, will be erected,
which will have other uses afterwards. The two junior staff (student helpers)
share the members' quarters.

The wooden buildings are of simple, pleasing design and have been approved by the local authority. Flower gardens will abut the huts and there is
a pleasant view of undulating country, trees and fields. The quiet beauty of
the country-side adds to the therapeutic value. The acquisition of the land,
discovered by our Hon. Solicitor after months of searching, was one of the more
exciting episodes in the history of the time of preparation.

Part of the land is already under cultivation for vegetables, and this will
be increased, part will be used for livestock, including goats, chickens (some
of the best kinds have been promised) and possibly pigs. About five acres are
set aside to be prepared in the near future as cricket and football fields and it
is hoped to dig a small bathing pool. A part will be let off this year to a neighbour for cultivation.

Admission.
-----------
The group have already achieved something of a community spirit and
we are ready to admit more members, the numbers gradually rising to about
50, though it may be well to mention that we have our full complement of
staff for some time to come, with the possible exception of one student helper.
The age for admission of members is from 17?25 and the camp is intended for young men who have shown by their behaviour that they are
socially inadequate and yet are of an intelligence not below normal.
The men apply on their own initiative or through their parents or friends,
or are recommended by magistrates and probation officers or by social organisations. ? They remain voluntarily, and indeed the power of dismissal which is
vested in the camp chief (as well as the committee) is considered so great a
penalty that he has undertaken to consult representatives of the members before
exercising it.

The formalities are simple. Enquiries are sent in the first place to the
honorary secretary of Q Camps Committee addressed either to the office (31,
Alfred Place, Tottenham Court Road, W.C.i, where a room is generously given
rent free) or, preferably to her private address, 81, Wimpole Street, W.i. She
sends a stencilled letter asking for as full an account of the case as possible; a list
of the kit that it is advised to bring (renewal of working clothing is a responsibility of the camp); and an application form to be filled up by the man himself
which gives some personal details, although a personal interview is necessary
as well. Alternative forms for payment are also sent, to be filled in either by
the member, if he is paying for himself, or by the person responsible for payment?e.g., parents, friend or some social organisation. The Public Assistance
Authorities have helped in several instances.

The full charge is ?2 a week and when parents can possibly manage it
they are expected to pay this amount. The minimum that must be paid in
rcspcct of a member is 15/- a week. All live under the same conditions regardless of what is paid in on their behalf, and receive 2/- a week' pocket money.
The selection of members requires considerable care and discrimination.

Some are recommended by the courts, others have not been before a court but
are lads about whom their parents feel some anxiety as to whether they have
not gone wrong, or who do not seem to fit in or hold jobs. The applicant is
judged according to the likelihood of improvement in the camp, with due regard to the welfare of the group as a whole and the members already there.
Every man before coming is interviewed by a medical psychologist and is
recommended either by Dr Denis Carroll or by Dr Norman Glaister, members of Q Camps Committee, who keep in touch with the progress of the members and advise the staff on difficulties that arise. Applicants also have a
general medical examination and, in the majority of cases, psychological tests.
Men physically unable to participate in heavy manual work can be admitted
provided their limitations are known and they are suitable for general open air
life and are free from infection. Mental defectives are not suitable.
For the medical and psychological examination of applicants, for their
diagnosis and, when required, treatment, the excellent facilities afforded by the
Institute for the Scientific Treatment of Delinquency have been generously
placed at our disposal. Without this close co-operation the work would lose
much of its effectiveness.

Principles of Treatment.
------------------------
The methods employed are educational in the widest sense, and the camp
aims to fulfil a function which might be described as that of an adult school for
social adjustment and community living.

The intention is to combine the advantages of group life with those of
close consideration of individual needs.

It is too soon to draw conclusions, but in considering the internal history
of the camp during the first 4 months certain factors seem sufficiently prominent to be used as headings in trying to classify impressions.
(a) The beneficial effect of close contact with nature under primitive conditions. Hard, plain living in the open air has a strong appeal for many
young lads when it takes the form of a pioneering adventure, shared by
staff and members together and is not imposed as a discipline.
(b) The development of a corporate, community life on simple lines,
centralised at the camp about which the men feel a shared possession
and a sense of growth .

(c) The encouragement of personal responsibility and the minimising of
external compulsion and punishment.
(d) The cultural and recreational side.
(e) The tolerance by members as well as staff of individual variation within
the group and the efforts made to develop specific talents and assets in
individuals.
(/) Psychiatric Co-operation.
Achievements.
Some of these headings need no further comment but an outline of some
of the things so far accomplished under each may be of interest.

(a) Camp Routine.
-----------------
The routine of camp life, which takes up a good deal of time when members are few, is shared by all the campers. Everyone takes his turn at cooking
and orderly duty and thus has a share of responsibility.

In considering what has been achieved beyond this, it must be remembered that the numbers at first were few and that the first tents were
pitched in an uncultivated field, that many of the members were new to the
particular activity, besides being unused to concentrated strenuous work, performed for its intrinsic interest and usefulness and without the stimulus of
financial gain or fear of penalties. It must be mentioned also that the shortage
of funds has hindered the purchase of material for building and other purposes.
The plans for developing the site in the near future (later developments "when
we are opulent " are more elaborate) have been described. A large permanent
day room has already been erected and a temporary office (most of the secretarial work of the organisation is done from the camp) and a temporary store
room. The first sleeping hut is near completion and a second is being built,
and a goat shed for 8 goats is well advanced. An excellent goat, which supplies
much of the milk of the community, was a very welcome gift and we have
been promised another. A shallow well, lined with cement, has been constructed and a considerable area has been dug and planted with vegetables, which
are now being harvested; one member has made a flower garden. The simple
furniture of the camp, such as chairs, tables, book shelves, and a carpenter's
bench are home made. The members repair their own shoes. In their spare
time they have added to their amenities by making personal furniture, including bunks, bedside tables, etc.

The value of this needs no emphasis. It involves coming to grips with
reality and learning by experience the value of everyday things.

(b) Community Life.
-------------------
I have described the community life as simple. This is correct in the
sense that it is not elaborate or complicated and is easily grasped. It is not, however, of a primitive character and herein lies, I believe, much of its value for
the stabilising of mature citizens in a democratic country.

The most primitive form of government is a dictatorship, consisting of
an absolute leader with followers whose chief civic virtue is obedience. This is
exemplified in some of the regressive manifestations of the post-war period in
certain countries, and the gangster societies which have developed so powerfully
in North America.

(c) Internal Organisation.
--------------------------
The internal organisation of the first Q Camp is on the basis of comradeship in which all have some responsibility and can contribute. The general
control of the organisation, its finances, appointment of staff, the principles on
which it is run and so on are vested in the Q Camps Committee who have the
controlling voice. For the first weeks after starting, the order of the day and
internal arrangements were laid down by the staff, though from the first
matters were discussed at informal camp councils. Staff meetings were held
from the beginning. Soon the members arranged to meet together with their
own chairman and secretary to discuss problems concerning the daily life and
conduct of the community and to bring suggestions to the general camp council. A constitution on these lines has now been drawn up. The staff and members meetings are held separately once a week, usually at the same time. The
Camp Council comprises all the campers (members and staff). It is obliged
to meet at least once a month and at present is meeting once a week as a committee, the numbers not being large enough to delegate its functions to a subcommittee. Its officers are elected every 3 months, at first by a simple majority.
For re-election a 75 per cent, majority is required at first and subsequently a
unanimous vote. It is interesting to note that the officers elected at the first
ballot to fill the posts of President and Secretary are members, and the elected
Vice-President and Treasurer are staff. The president has an ordinary and also
a casting vote. Various sub-committees may be formed and will be needed as
membership increases. It is part of the constitution that elected representatives
of the council will be consulted by the Camp Chief (Mr. David Wills) on important matters concerning which he has the final decision, including the much
discussed question of dismissal.

The Camp Chief has the power to veto any decision of the council, but
his veto may be appealed against to the Q Camps Committee.

There is, therefore, a definite measure of self-government and of discussions tending to direct consideration on to questions of social behaviour as well
as to give an appreciation of responsibility. This is already having an effect.
Discussions on behaviour and discipline show a desire to understand and help
each other rather than to penalise. There is a growing sense of comradeship and
a feeling that the camp belongs to the campers and is not just a place to which
they have been sent.

Something should be said of the neighbourhood. To avoid misconceptions, visits from the merely curious, and for other reasons, the locality is not
named. " Q " is not used in the postal address and I would ask those who
know where it is not to reveal this. One clue, however, I will give. I think it
must be the most friendly spot in England ! No small measure of any success
we achieve will be due to the good will and large-heartedness of the people
living near the camp. The kindness shown to the probably rather perplexing
first settlers expanded into real helpfulness and sympathy as they gradually discovered how many had been up against difficulties and were seeking to rebuild
their lives. A group of senior school boys came several times to help in the
work. The campers have made valuable friends whom they can visit and also
have the satisfaction of acting as hosts in their turn.

(d) The Cultural and Recreational Side.
---------------------------------------
It is intended to prepare part of the land as a playing field for cricket and
football in the near future, and possibly to make a swimming pool. Some
games are played already and a hike is organised every three weeks. Wireless
and gramophone are popular as are camp-fire songs and there is quite a good
and growing library. ' Arrangements are being made for folk dancing and for
the production of a play.

(e) Individualism.
------------------
The development of individual talents and aptitudes and success in understanding each man, is as important as group life if the most is to be made of
the very varied human material that comes to the camp. All need friendship
and help, and this the staff try to give by personal contact. Difficulties are discussed, records kept and every case is talked over with members of the selection
and treatment committee. Efforts are made to meet special needs. Two men
are having music lessons in the village, one is studying for matriculation, and
another is working under expert supervision to overcome a special educational
retardation. The psychological treatment will be referred to below.

(f) Psychological Aspects.
---------------------------
It is unnecessary to revive the outworn controversy as to whether " crime "
is a " disease." A true understanding of the mechanisms of character formation depends on knowledge of the unconscious instinctual life and early
development. This is true whether the character be harmonious and effective
or inharmonious and mal-adapted to circumstances. Behaviour depends on the
interaction between environment and character. This is more complicated
than it sounds. The simplest item in an environment is perceived differently,
stirs different emotions and thought processes, phantasies and memories, according to the life experiences of each individual as well as according to the
moods and states of tension of the moment. No standard environment, suitable to everyone, can be prescribed, though one can try to provide an environment adaptable to a wide number of needs. Fear, hostility and aggression play
a large part in anti-social acts. One can do something to diminish these (even
without affecting their unconscious roots) by establishing an atmosphere of
friendliness and security.

It is becoming increasingly evident that many law-breakers require intensive psychotherapeutic treatment. In the author's opinion there are cases for
which psycho-analysis offers the only remedy.
Neither psycho-analysis nor other formal psycho-therapy is given at the
camp. A small minority pay visits?not more often than once a week?to a
medical psychologist. One has left the camp with the advice to transfer to the
Institute for the Scientific Treatment of Delinquency for more frequent treatment over a period before returning.

Whether psychotherapy is desirable for every case of mal-adjustment or
only in the more pronounced is a matter of opinion. In practice only the latter
course can be adopted. Hence there is room for a carefully considered educational environment with sympathetic psychological understanding. The
most suitable men for the Camp are those of substantially normal make-up
who have gone wrong through unsuitable environment or lack of adequate
outlet.

Reactions within the group illustrate many psychological phenomena
some acquaintance with which helps an appreciation of what is going on. For
example: displacement, projection, transference, the adjustment of the claims
of reality and phantasy, the anomalous behaviour of feelings of guilt and the
desire for punishment, self-display, intolerance of frustration, anxiety and the
efforts to allay it, attempts to compensate for feelings of inferiority, the impulse
to reconstruct in the present experiences of the past. These are some of the
motives which may be observed to actuate behaviour.

Effects.
-------
The therapeutic instruments are difficult to assess. They may depend
partly on a side-tracking of anti-social impulses and their utilisation for the
good of the community, for example the satisfaction in useful directions of the
impulse for self aggrandisement before an audience. Beneficial results are also
obtained by strengthening positive ties to the group and the substitution of
constructive, creative and restitutive activity for destruction. On the educative
side efforts are made to compensate for feelings of inferiority by discovering
and developing useful assets and talents. One member remarked that as he
was not subject to repressive control from without he had to control himself,
and a measure of increased self-reliance may be anticipated.

If improvement is to be more than superficial and transient, the stay must
not be too short. It is found that while some improvement often occurs during
the first weeks this may be followed by a period of reaction when irregularities
and instability are apt to become manifest. The improvement which follows
this phase appears more fundamental and likely to last.

Borstal training lasts three years. We have stated that a stay in Q Camps
will be from a few months to about two years and that we expected the latter
to be the optimum in most cases. Experience will show if this is', correct, but
we would regret a hopeful case leaving before the improvement is firm enough
to withstand the trials of ordinary life.

Future Prospects.
-----------------
When we consider the alternatives before most of the lads that come to
the camp?the probable renewed acquaintance with penal methods, or at best
frequent change of job and dependency?and when we see their energy and
keenness we are encouraged to feel that this is pioneer work of value.
It continuance depends on public support. The expenses are kept as low
as is consistent with efficiency and health. They are in fact considerably less
than was estimated. We have had, however, to purchase land and material,
the men must be properly fed and there are other heavy expenses entailed incidental to starting and maintaining the work. Moreover, though a good deal
of the work is voluntary, some salaries must be paid.

After four months we must state frankly that we are faced with the fact
that unless we are substantially helped over the first year, and very quickly
helped, there is a possibility of having to abandon a scheme which has so much
of promise. There is an overdraft at the bank which must be paid off. Large
sums seldom come in the early stages. But if every reader of this paper who
feels some small stirring of interest or even of curiosity to see what will come
out of the scheme, will send one guinea just as a gesture of defiance to pessimism the corner will be turned !
