Origins of Love and Hate
=========================

:Author: Ian D.
^ultie, M.D. Kegan Paul. 10/6.
^ Perhaps it is the role of British Psychology
q temper the theoretical conclusions of some
ei)tral European psychiatrists with the element
o common sense. In this book, Dr. Suttie sets
^ut to introduce this element (the lack of which
p s shocked many lay readers) into some of
reud's more important assertions. He then
a^es the necessary readjustments, restateerits, additions and curtailments in the light
of what he considers to be the normal familiar
facts of human nature. To his results he invites the attention of a public wider than his
own profession. There is a preface by Dr.
Hadfield and an index of topics.

Dr. Suttie proceeds to show with vigour and
clarity?always first setting out, in brief,
Freud's position?exactly at what point he
disagrees and why. His main contention is to
be deduced from the proposition that Freud,
as a man, had " a certain mental bias which
induced him to avert unhesitatingly that society
is an artifact of force rather than a spontaneous
expression of human nature . . . maintained
onljr by the dominance of the ' leader ' over
guilty and frightened ' followers', just as social
behaviour in the individual is (in his eyes) the
outcome of repression by fear." This bias leads
Freud to exaggerate the importance of the
Oedipus Complex.

Dr. Suttie begins by placing the mother in
the central position Freud had given the father.
His description of the unfolding of the infant
consciousness will probably be acceptable to
most people (professional or unprofessional)
who have had to deal with small children. He
claims that the infant's first feeling is one of
harmonious give-and-take with the mother.
This feeling is the mainspring of his future social
life. The Oedipus factor is only one of a
number of factors?-(Cain-jealousy, Cinderellajealousy, etc.)?which come to give the growing
child's consciousness a bias in a particular
direction.

Dr. Suttie maintains that love and not fear is
the dominant note in a man's life; and this love
is primarily " tender " rather than sensual. It
is possible to deduce a theory of hate from that
of love, for hate arises only when love meets
with some obstruction or when, for objective
and subjective reasons, it cannot remove that
obstruction.

Freud sees in man a self-interested, explosive
creature, entirely separated from his neighbours
by fear; only drawn into a community with
them by a common sense of guilt. Hatred
comes from the " Id " and it has no relation to
will, intention or social purpose. For Dr.
Suttie, man is innately " social " and desires to
establish a relationship of give-and-take with
his fellows. Mental disease is due to some flaw
in such relationships ("a disturbed social rapport ") or in the power to establish them;
sexuality may not be involved,

Dr. Suttie gives a reclassification of mental
diseases in the light of his theory. " The role
of psychotherapy appears to be the restoration
of the patient to full membership of society, to
a feeling-interest integration with other minds,
a rapport in which the patient can express himself in the confidence of evoking agreeable
response " (p. 213). The crux of the matter
is that self-expression is not merely " evacuation " or " detensioning," as Freud had it; but
it is " complete only when a response has been
evoked and appreciated " (p. 213). Consequently the relationship between patient and
physician should be a " love interest relationship," formed with the intention of severance.
As the physician is but a paid adviser and
human, the impediments to such a difficult
relationship are severe. His ideal attitude is
" like that of Christ . . . serene without being
aloof, sympathetic without being disturbed;
exactly what the child desires in the parent."

In a chapter entitled " Religion: is it a
Disease or a Cure? " Dr. Suttie states that
modern psychology is rediscovering truths surmised by Christian philosophers centuries back.
He finds Christianity a commendable attempt
to integrate the ethical attitudes and other advantages of matriarchal and patriarchal cults.
The attack on Freud is renewed in the two
final chapters; Freud is alleged to be innately
incapable of understanding love and this incapacity is said to account for his insistence on
the sexual derivation of tenderness. Dr. Suttie
does not deny " that love must be expressed
somehow through bodily means and of these
the most definite, easily described and intrinsically interesting is sex." The association,
however, does not prove that sex is the sole
root of love. And so Dr. Suttie shows that
in analysing " culture," " expression " and
" sexual union " Freud is in practice driven
to take up a position incompatible with his
philosophy. He remains, malgre lui, a greater
therapist than philosopher. All is neatly
summed up in the last few pages labelled
" conclusions."

The reader must be left to judge whether Dr.
Suttie has succeeded in tempering Freud's
psychology with common sense; since Freud
holds that the application of common sense is
not the best way to arrive at psychological
truths, the difference of opinion between these
experts may be wider than the reader is led to
suppose.
P.B.
