News and Notes
================

MENTAL WELFARE

Board of Control

The King, on the recommendation of the Lord Chancellor, has approved
the appointment of Mr. Cyril F. Penton, M.A., Barrister-at-Law, as a Senior
Commissioner of the Board of Control, in the place of Mr. S. J. Fraser Macleod,
K.C., who has retired from the Service.

Mr. Macleod, who became King's Counsel in 1905, practised on the
Western Circuit until 1908, when he was appointed to be a Lunacy Commissioner. On the passing of the Mental Deficiency Act in 1913, he became
one of the Legal Commissioners of the Board of Control; when the Board was
further re-organised under the Mental Treatment Act, 1930, Mr. Mcleod was
appointed to be a Senior Commissioner and legal Member of the Board.
Mr. Penton, who now becomes a Senior Commissioner and legal Member
of the Board, was educated at Eton and Trinity College, Cambridge, and was
called to the Bar by the Inner Temple in 1912. He has been a Commissioner
on the staff of the Board since 1931.

Ascertainment and Notification of M.D. Children
------------------------------------------------
A Memorandum (No. 151) has recently been issued by the Board of Education on the Ascertainment and Notification of M.D. Children, in which the
following points are stressed : ?

(1) Imbecile children should not be left in the elementary schools, but should
be notified as early as possible, even in areas in which the M.D. Act is not
being fully administered.

In doubtful cases a final decision should be made at the age of 11, and
no imbecile child over this age should be left un-notified.

(2) As children leaving Special Schools can now be notified for Supervision,
and such Supervision is needed by the majority of feeble-minded children,
Education Authorities are urged to make the fullest use of their powers in
this direction.

(3) The needs of feeble-minded children between 14 and 16 not in Special
Schools, should be met by an arrangement for voluntary After-Care between
the Local Education Authority and the Mental Deficiency Authority. This
After-Care may be carried out in various ways, but its purpose should be
" to provide voluntary supervision until the child reaches the age of 16,
and of maintaining informal contact with the Mental Deficiency
Committee."

(4) In the event of active trouble befalling a child between 14 and 16, a Local
Education Authority is free to notify the child as a "Special Circumstances"
case under Article 3 of the Mental Deficiency (Notification of Children)
Regulations.

Graded Scheme of Educative Needlework

With the kind co-operation of the Royal Eastern Counties Institution,
Colchester, the C.A.M.W. has prepared a graded scheme of educative needlework adapted to the needs of defectives.

Sets consist of five canvas samplers worked in colour stitches designed
to illustrate the successive stages of the scheme, with three embroidery needles,
three tapestry needles and two rug needles, accompanied by full and detailed
instructions for teaching, and a catalogue of prices of materials used.
The cost of a set is 10/-, and orders can now be received by the C.A.M.W.,
24, Buckingham Palace Road, London, S.W.i. As each set takes some time
to make, orders will be dealt with in rotation.

M.D. Prize Winners
A Competition open to Guide Companies in Institutes and Special Schools
was inaugurated last October, consisting of:?(1) Keeping a Company Log
Book; (2) Making a " Noah's Ark " from nuts, cotton reels, matches, pipecleaners, wire and paint; (3) Devising a method for teaching a Recruit the
distinguishing Badges of the Commissioners and Secretaries of the Guide
Movement.

We have pleasure in recording that the Second Prize for this competition
was won by the 4th Edmonton Company attached to the Edmonton Occupation Centre, who turned out a most diverting array of animals for their Ark.
Tied with them was the 96th Nottingham Company attached to the Basford
(Section 37) Institution.

The First Prize was won by the 10th Streatham Company attached to
the South Side (L.C.C.) Institution, who tied with the 4th Godalming Company
attached to the Meath Home for Epileptics. The nth Colchester Company,
from the Royal Eastern Counties Institution, won the Third Prize.

At the Hospitals,Nursing, Midwifery and Public Health Exhibition held
in May at the University of London, South Kensington, there was a section
on Occupation Therapy, to which many Hospitals and Institutions contributed.
It is encouraging to Mental Welfare workers to know that for specimens
of handwork submitted by the C.A.M.W., from Middlesex Occupation Centres
and from defectives who are receiving Home Teaching, five First Class
Certificates were awarded.

Congratulations to all these prize-winners and to those who trained them!
West Midlands Joint Board for the Care of Mental Defectives
This newly-constituted Joint Board consists of 21 members appointed
by the Councils of Wolverhampton, Worcestershire County, Smethwick,
Dudley, Burton-upon-Trent and Worcester City.

The purpose of the Board is to establish a Joint Institution for defectives
in its area and it is anticipated that plans will shortly be developed to that end.

Middlesex Colony for Mental Defectives
--------------------------------------
With the formal opening, in May, of the Middlesex County Council's
M.D. Colony at Shenley, by the Minister of Health, the scheme for the Colony
was completed except for 200 beds for children which have yet to be provided.
The total accommodation will then be for 1,154 patients.

The Colony is built on the villa system, and can provide for the men
patients ample agricultural employment, as the buildings are surrounded by
farm lands. The women are occupied in the kitchen, laundry and workrooms,
and there is ample provision for recreation, both indoors and out.

New Institutional Schemes
-------------------------
The Nottinghamshire County Council has recently adopted a scheme for
the provision of a Colony for Mental Defectives at Balderton, for 540 patients.
The Bucks, Oxon and Reading Joint Board for the Mentally Defective
have in hand plans for increasing the accommodation at Borocourt by four
villas, to accommodate another 224 patients.

Considerable attention has been given during the year by the Wiltshire
M.D. Committee to the question of providing additional institutional accommodation, and a scheme for increasing the accommodation at the Pewsey
Colony by another 200 beds has been adopted. This includes provision for
100 children, for whom hitherto the Colony has been unable to cater.

Wiltshire Mental Deficiency Committee
-------------------------------------
The Wiltshire Mental Deficiency Acts Committee has issued an interesting 14-page Annual Report of its work during 1935.

An examination of many of the inmates of the County Public Assistance
Institutions has revealed the fact that 66 were certifiable under the M.D. Acts.
In addition, it was found that amongst the patients in these Institutions certified
under the Lunacy Acts, 60 were mental defectives. It is proposed to deal,
under the Mental Deficiency Acts, with a few individuals in the first group
during the year, but the majority are old and quite contented to remain where
they are.

It is interesting to note that of the 76 cases under Guardianship, 54 were
placed under the Guardianship of their parents or other relatives. Difficulty
continues to be experienced in finding suitable people willing to undertake
the Guardianship of defective children.

The Medical Officer refers to the greatly increased number of school
children for whom information was sought by the police for the use of the
Magistrates?a total during the year of 74. This was supplied from the school
medical records in the majority of cases, but in four instances, special mental
examinations had to be arranged. It is thought that the large increase is probably due to the Children Act Regulations which require the Local Education
Authority to supply the Court with information as to the mental and physical
condition of juvenile delinquents, in all except trivial cases brought before them.

Mental Deficiency in Scotland
------------------------------
The 22nd Annual Report of the General Board of Control for Scotland
for the year 1935,* contains an interesting section on the Boarding-Out system,
as used for both mental patients and mental defectives.

Dr Chapman (at the time of the Report, Deputy Commissioner), writes:
I am firmly convinced of the benefits to be derived from the
boarding-out system, not only to the patients, but to the general community. It provides useful employment, interest, and a home life for the
patient, widens the outlook of those who come in contact with him, and
helps to remove that all-too-prevalent opinion of the general public that
the only place for the mentally afflicted is the Asylum."

Of the 4,414 registered mental defectives in the country, there were, on
ist January, 1936, 2,974 Certified Institutions, and 1,440 in private dwellings,
of whom 493 were boarded out with " Guardians," other than parents or
relatives.

Some progress is reported to have been made in the provision of institutional accommodation, but it is still very limited and vacancies are infrequent.
The Report contains an interesting section on Methods of Treatment of
the Insane, with a general description of Mental Hospital life as it is in
Scotland to-day.

An Irish Survey of Mental Defectives
------------------------------------
The Irish Free State Government is about to make a survey of mental
defectives in the country and has appointed Dr Louis S. Clifford, formerly
Assistant Medical Officer at the Central Criminal Asylum, Dundrum, to
conduct the work.

There is, in Ireland, no Mental Deficiency Act, and the care of defectives
has hitherto been left to private charity. The pioneer work of St. Augustine's
Colony, Blackrock, under the auspices of the Brothers of St. John of God, has
of late been attracting much attention, and has aroused public interest in the
training of defectives; no doubt one outcome of the Survey will be a move to
open further Colonies of the kind as a national undertaking.

Lankhills Special School, Winchester
-----------------------------------
In order to assist Hampshire teachers in dealing with retarded children
in their schools, Short Courses have been instituted at the Lankhills Residential
Special School, under the auspices of the County Education Committee.
Each Course will last a fortnight, and not more than four teachers at a
time will be taken.

The Courses will consist of tutorial work conducted by the Head Master
Mr. J. Duncan, lecture-demonstrations, periods of observation, and attendance
at model lessons, and opportunities will be given for practical teaching
experience.

This is the first experiment of its kind, and its progress will be watched by
educationalists with sympathetic interest.
*Obtainable from : H.M. Stationery 'Office, Adastral House, Kingsway, W.C.2. Price 1/3.

A Health Hostel
----------------
For sufferers from mental or nervous instability in need of an ordered,
harmonious environment whilst receiving treatment at an Out-Patient Clinic,
there has just been opened in Sydenham, London, a " Health Hostel," under
the management of Miss E. M. Hankin, whose little book " Doors of Hope,"
was reviewed a few months ago in these pages.

The house which has been acquired for the purpose is conveniently near
trams and trains and yet is beautifully situated 300 feet above sea level in a
lovely and secluded garden. There are 12 large airy bedrooms, some of which
will contain three beds, and 25 people can be taken. The minimum fee will
be two guineas a week, and the Hostel is intended primarily for middle-class
patients of limited means.

Occupation Therapy will be provided and every effort will be made to
keep the patients interested and happy and bring them healing in mind and
body. The Hostel is not a Nursing Home and there will be nothing in the
nature of hospital regime, but those in charge of it are experienced in dealing
with the mentally unstable, and a local medical practitioner has offered his
co-operation.

This is a venture of faith which can only succeed if the necessary financial
support is forthcoming, and donations will be gratefully received by Miss E. M.
Hankin, 153, Sydenham Hill, London, S.E.23, who will also gladly answer
enquiries or show the Hostel to interested visitors.

General Hospital Provision for Psychiatric In-Patients
The plans for the re-building of St. George's Hospital (London) include
the provision of a psychiatric in-patient department of some 60 beds for men,
women and children, to be filled mainly from patients attending psychiatric
department for out-patients.

The Lancet, in commenting on this development, draws attention to its
value from the point of view of medical education. Through such innovations
in general hospital provision:

" the student will be enabled to see, as at present he cannot in hospital
practice, how large a part in determining the inefficiency of human beings
is played by influences that cannot be classified under any of the recognised
organic diseases. The young doctor beginning private practice is generally
more puzzled than by any other experience by the fact that many of his
patients are suffering from no definite complaint in the cure of which he
has been trained. Many of these people are in the early stages of what
may become definite neuroses or even psychoses. Others perhaps could
be put into no definite category of nervous disease, but are none the less
in need of expert help. A department such as that outlined for St.
George's should do much to teach the future practitioner to give it to this
large group of patients."

Up to the present time, only two or three of the General Hospitals in
London have been able to make any provision at all for the in-patient treatment
of psychiatric cases, and the total number of hospital beds, as far as General
Hospitals are concerned, available for Londoners suffering from this type
of illness, is so small that it barely touches the fringe of the problem.

Institute of Medical Psychology
-------------------------------
In the Report of the Institute of Medical Psychology for 1935, there is a
map showing the location of the site on which the Institute hopes in the near
future to build a central hospital and educational centre, for which, owing to
the ever-increasing demands made on its services, there is urgent need. The
plans include the provision of 80 beds for in-patients needing treatment, equipment for laboratory investigation and research, adequate lecture rooms, facilities
for occupational therapy, and an increased number of consulting rooms.
The new Institute will be in Store Street, Bloomsbury, not far from the
present premises, and close to Tottenham Court Road. The first visible nucleus
of it will be the In-Patient Hostel, which has to move from Endsleigh Street
in T937
The steady increase in the educational activities of the Institute during
1935 led to the creation of a new post?that of Director of Studies?occupied
by Dr J. A. Hadfield. The University of London now recognises the Institute
as a centre where candidates for the Diploma in Psychological Medicine can
obtain their practical experience.

Institute of Child Psychology
------------------------------
The Institute of Child Psychology (26, Warwick Avenue, London, W.9)
have embarked on a new venture in the publication of a News Bulletin, which
will appear six times a year, price 3d. per copy, or 1/9 per annum.
Mental Welfare workers are invited to apply to the Institute for free
specimen copies of the first number, which gives information about the work
of the Institute and outlines future plans for the Bulletin.

The next number will contain articles on Juvenile Delinquency, by Mrs.
Corbett Ashby and Dr Margaret Lowenfeld, Co-Director of the Institute.
The Mental Treatment Act in the West Riding

The Clerk of the West Riding of Yorkshire Mental Hospitals Board has
supplied us with some interesting information as to the administration of the
Mental Treatment in that area.

The Board now has Mental Treatment Clinics conducted by its medical
staff, held at general hospitals in Wakefield, Leeds, Doncaster (2), Rotherham,
Sheffield (2), Bradford and Huddersfield, which were attended during 1935
by over 2,000 patients, and negotiations are in hand for the establishment of
additional clinics in other large centres.

In the Mental Hospitals, rapid strides are being made in the number of
patients admitted without certification; thus, e.g., in 1935, 34% of the
admissions to Wakefield Mental Hospital, and 28% of the admissions to the
Wadsley Mental Hospital, were voluntary.

The Board are fully alive to the value of Social Work in connection with
anv adequate Mental Treatment scheme and have established a " Welfare
Centre " for the purpose. At present there is only one Social Worker whose
time is spent chiefly in Mental After-Care, but plans are in hand for an
extensive development of this service.

Mental Treatment Clinics
------------------------
In answer to a question asked in the House during April, Mr. Shakespeare,
for the Minister of Health, stated that there were now 143 out-patient clinics
associated with public mental hospitals, as far as the latest available information indicated, and that the Board of Control was shortly issuing to local
authorities a questionnaire on the subject.

A Study of Nocturnal Enuresis
----------------------------
During 1934, the London Child Guidance Council undertook a research
into Nocturnal Enuresis in Children, by means of material obtained from
1,705 case records of six Child Guidance Clinics in the London area. The Research was conducted under the direction of a Committee consisting of Drs.
Mildred Crea, R. D. Gillespie, Emmanlel Miller and Wm. Moodie.
The following facts and deductions emerged from the enquiry : ?
(1) Almost one out of every five children referred to the Clinics suffered
from enuresis.

(2) Enuresis is not an entity in itself, but a symptom belonging to
several conditions and brought about by varying mechanisms.
(3) Amongst the enuretics studies, there was a smaller percentage of
mental defectives than amongst! the non-enuretics.

(4) There are two main types of enuretics?the slow and lethargic, and
the restless and anxious.
(5) Constitutional and psychological factors appear to predominate in
producing the condition.

(6) Enuretics show their peak at 8 to 10 years, and then decrease.
The Report of the enquiry was first published in the Archives of Disease
in Childhood, Vol. 10, No. 57, June, 1935.

Two New Pamphlets on Mental Deficiency Work
-------------------------------------------
A useful 16-page pamphlet entitled Some Notes on Mental Deficiency
Practice has been written by Dr Samuel E. Gill, Medical Director of The
Guardianship Society, Brighton.

The publication of the pamphlet 
-------------------------------
has resulted from the discovery by
Dr Gill of the difficulty found by medical men who attend patients for the
Guardianship Society, in assessing mental capacity for the purposes of making
Special Reports and Certificates under the M.D. Acts. With this particular
need in view, Dr Gill therefore compiled these valuable notes on the nature
of Mental Deficiency, and the type of questions and simple testing which
best reveal mental capacity.

The pamphlet, price 1 /-, can be obtained from the Guardianship Society,
8, Grand Parade, Brighton, and we warmly commend it as a useful guide to
put into the hands of students and voluntary workers visiting defectives.
The C.A.M.W. has recently issued a small pamphlet on Defectives and
the Mental Deficiency Acts, giving the main features of the Acts and their
administration. Copies can be obtained from the C.A.M.W., 24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.i, price 2d. each, post free, or lod. a dozen.

Research into Human Heredity

We are asked to make the following announcement'.?
The British National Human Heredity Committee was formed in 1932
for the collection of data and the investigation of human pedigrees, as a branch
of the International Human Heredity Committee, founded by the International
Federation of Eugenic Organisations. It has now been enlarged as a Council
and secured accommodation at 115, Gower Street, London, W.C.I; and in
collaboration with the Galton Laboratory, aims at setting up a Clearing House
for material on Human Genetics. The Council consists of a number of
geneticists and leading medical men, with Professor Ruggles Gates as Chairman, Sir Laurence Halsey as Treasurer, Dr Fraser Roberts as Honorary
Scientific Secretary, and Mrs. C. B. S. Hodson as Honorary General Secretary.
The direction of the work is to be in the hands of a small Executive Committee.
The Council would be grateful to receive all available material from institutions and individuals, furnishing well authenticated data on the transmission
of human traits, whatever these may be. Family histories or pedigrees, twin
studies and statistical researches are mainly contemplated. As research workers
and others who send in material may in some cases wish to retain the sole
right of publication or copyright, those who so desire are asked to accompany
their material with a statement to that effect.

Reprints of published work would also be most acceptable. Many authors,
when publishing material, may also have collected a number of pedigrees
which they have been unable to reproduce in detail. It is the object of the
Council that such records, by being included in the Clearing House, should not
be lost. Those wishing a copy of the standard International Pedigree Symbols
may obtain one from the office.

Material should be accompanied by all available details in regard to source,
diagnostic symptoms, and the name and address of the person or persons who
vouch for accuracy. All such details will be regarded as strictly confidential.
The other objects contemplated in this enterprise, namely, facilities for
study, replies to enquiries, and information service, cannot be initiated for
some time. Announcement of these activities will be made later.

National Union of Townswomen's Guilds
------------------------------------
At this year's Annual Conference of the National Union of Townswomen's
Guilds, the following Resolution on Mentally Defective Children was
passed: ?
" That Guilds should be asked to study the Board of Education
Reports, 1932, 1933, 1934, and the London County Council Reports,
1931, 1932, 1933, from which it appears there is a steady closure of
Schools, especially those for mentally defective children, with a view to
ascertaining if proper provision is being made for children suffering from
various defects.

Guilds should be asked to consider whether a change of law would
be desirable, on the lines of the recommendations of the Mental Deficiency
Committee, which would ensure mentally defective children being sent to
the appropriate schools without being certified as mentally deficient,
threby being relieved of the stigma that may now attach to such pupils
through life."

9o MENTAL WELFARE
Dr Hamblin Smith
The death of Dr Hamblin Smith last April has deprived the C.A.M.W.
of yet another of its friends.

To quote from the obituary notice published by The Lancet, " he made
such use of his opportunity for studying both mental defect and mental disorder,
that scarcely a case of either passed through the Birmingham courts without
being recognised by him," and as Medical Officer of Birmingham Prison and
author of " The Psychology of the Criminal," he was widely known and
respected amongst mental welfare workers.

After his retirement from the prison medical service, he continued to
lecture at Birmingham University and Bethlem Hospital on the psychology of
the criminal, and he was Hon. Physician to the Education Clinic at Oxford,
where he lived during the last three years of his life.
