Medical Aspects of Crime
=========================

Book Reviews.

:Author: W. Norwood
East, M.S., F.R.C.P. With a Foreword by
the Rt. Hon. Sir John Simon. J. & A.
Churchill, Ltd. 18/-.

The writer of this volume of studies on
criminology has had the advantage of a life
time of experience as prison doctor and Prison
Commissioner. Few people know the criminal
as he does, and few can bring a better knowledge of psychology and a better balanced judgment to bear on him. The phrase, " common
sense " is so much abused that it has become
almost meaningless, but common sense is the
governing factor in Dr East's outlook. Alert to
detect and to make due allowances for abnormal
physical or mental features in the delinquent, he
refuses to be cajoled into an admission that
crime is in itself a symptom of abnormal mentality. The criminals lie knows are, for the most
part, singularly like ordinary men and are governed by similar instincts.

Dr East does not consider that prison is useless as a deterrent, for he has not in his experience found it so. He does not believe that even
if the criminal is mentally abnormal, he should
necessarily entirely escape punishment nor that
his interest should be exalted above those of the
community. " Crime," he reminds us, " is essentially a social problem and not altogether a
medical one. To ensure permanent advantage
from medical methods of attack, the approval of
legal, medical and public opinion is necessary."
He points out the complete impracticability of
handing over criminals to psychologists to detain or discharge as they please, and he is aware
of the very real risk of discrediting the role of
psychology if too much is claimed for it.
'' A great dis-service to future -progress may
result unless zeal is combined with prudence
and sound judgment. We must accept the
fact that we may learn much about the psychological factors associated with criminal
conduct and yet fail to help the criminal."
This cautious attitude makes the large share
which Dr East would claim for the psychiatrist
in criminology all the more striking.
" Any person charged with murder, attempted murder, grievous bodily harm, attempted suicide, arson, sex offence, or any
other if the circumstances of the crime present
peculiar features, should be placed under observation and mentally examined before trial.
Also, those who have a known insane
heredity or who have previously suffered
from mental or nervous disorder. A psychological investigation is usually desirable in
the case of adolescents, whatever the nature
of the offence may be."

Dr East gives an admirable analysis of the
many types of instability and incomplete mental
development found among young offenders. He
points out the great difficulty of making a certain diagnosis during the adolescent period and
considers that " many cases of this nature can
only be determined by the efflux of time." The
great army of minor psychotics, '' constitutional
psychic inferiors," psycho-neurotics, and to
some extent the feeble-mindel, contribute more
than their share to the prison population, but
the author evidently finds it easier to describe
them than to suggest a satisfactory method of
dealing with them.

In view of the great importance which Dr.
East attaches to a full and accurate history in
arriving at a diagnosis and prognosis in mentally
abnormal offenders, it might be thought that
trained psychiatric social workers would be invaluable as members of a remand prison staff.
The importance of the medical reports made to
the Courts might justify urging the experiment
on a probably reluctant Treasury.

Readers will be glad to have available the
paper on " Attempted Suicide," originally
printed in 1913 and still a classic on the subject.

The side lights on social conditions are interesting; one is reminded that though unemployment was less common thirty years ago, the consequences were much more terrible. The tragic
role played by alcohol will seem incredible to a
post war generation. Social students will find
valuable material in the long series of papers
on the medical administration of prisons. It is
indeed a history of the slow and painful growth
of prison reform which contains a mine of information not easily accessible elsewhere. The
cynic might point out that some of the worse
abominations of the prisons of the past were
introduced from the best humanitarian motives.
Yet the trend has been, and still is, to the more
decent treatment of the criminal and the steady
diminution of crime. The writer is firm in his
conviction that for the attainment of these ends,
psychological medicine is playing a supremely
important part. 
