Post-War Reform in Mental Nursing
==================================

By Staff Nurse TOM CATHERALL (late of Chester County Mental Hospital)
Winner of the "Lord" Memorial Essay Prize, 1942
anv Hfe are-menta^ hospitals in which it is hard to find
of .e Patients. In other hospitals there are hundreds
.Patients obviously suffering from continued inactivity.
Ho own hospital, I have seen such patients with
eo- hope of improvement ; but from the changes
HevCtCC* t'lere by Occupational Therapy alone, I would
hu h ^esPair even the worst case. I have seen
idreds of patients made into human beings. This is
Th reason f?r taking up the subject of Occupational
of JraPy as a post-war necessity. Without this method
ho atment' numhers of patients would be left without
As the possibilities of Occupational Therapy
for?me more widely known, I believe it will be imperative
every Authority to remedy a very grave defect,
any reforms might be suggested in the sphere of
an npa^ nursin8? hut, judging by the results of this widely
ppiicabie form of treatment, it seems that the universal
f0 ePtance of the principles of Occupational Therapy
Urgen1611^ Pat*ents *s t t^1e Sreatest value and
change in atmosphere and conditions in hospitals
reve[e .Occupational Therapy has been adopted is a
hav6 Where it has been applied, its possibilities
e become apparent; this work of Occupational
re e^aPi'> along with the accepted application of the
lif - S medical research, has completely changed the
the f1 ?.ental hospitals. Here is a means of preventing
'Utility and pitiable waste of lives. It is always a
eventive against chronic dementia when all admissions
fr e the benefit of Occupational Therapy in some form
the date of their admission.
. when admitted to hospital a mental patient is out of
. gnment with normal life; his outlook is distorted;
he ma^ without initiative and have no interest, or
hv may the capacity to attend to his personal
ygiene. Patients suffering from melancholia may have
0rbid delusions which produce a feeling of unworthiness
with the consequent loss of confidence. Schizophrenics
escape from reality and live in a world of fantasy.
Occupational Therapy alleviates the suffering of many
types of mental patients by helping to readjust or alter
the above characteristic outlooks and to re-educate those
with faulty habits; it arouses the desire to achieve,
restores confidence and balance and brings back patients
to reality. Before this treatment was introduced a
patient's life was monotonous?day after day was passed
in inactivity, broken only by the routine of meals and
walks in the airing courts?a changeless round in which
there was no hope of arousing the apathetic patient, and
no outlet for the energies of the excited, other than that
afforded by perpetual quarrels or their well-known
destructive habits. True, a small number of suitable
patients worked on farms or in the gardens, but of those
remaining the irritable were aggravated by being closely
confined, and there was no stimulus for the indifferent.
Where Occupational Therapy has been introduced and
organized, conditions are different. The patient is
employed and is given a specific occupation which is
within his capacity?something which will interest him,
divert his attention from himself and become absorbing.
The results are encouraging.
At present Occupational Therapy in mental nursing
is only in its infancy; it has not been developed as it
might be. It must be fully practised and its principles
accepted. How can this be achieved ?
One of the most important factors is the environment.
To obtain the greatest benefit the patient must be housed
in congenial surroundings. There should be ample
space with large, airy wards, good lighting, pleasing
decorations and furniture; and no overcrowding.
The building should be well situated, with a pleasant
outlook from the windows, the gardens adjoining well
planned with rockeries and lawns, and the patients
there should be encouraged to take an interest in their
30 MENTAL HEALTH
cultivation and to participate in games. Above all,
the retaining fence should be inconspicuous so as to
avoid the feeling of frustration. Such surroundings
would do much to dispel the " shut-in " feeling, lessen
resentment, create an atmosphere of responsibility and
restore the confidence of the patient.
Occupational Therapy must begin at the first possible
moment; idleness is devastating to mind and body. In
the wards there should be facilities for patients to per-
form the normal routine of hygiene, and each should
have his own towel, toothbrush, etc., and be encouraged
to take an interest in his personal appearance. Toilet
utensils should be labelled and kept where all patients,
whether confined to bed or otherwise, have access to
them, and a daily routine should be carried out under
supervision. This is the nurse's duty and should be
conscientiously and daily performed until the patient
learns the habit. One of the aims of Occupational
Therapy is to bring the patient suffering from mental
disorder back to the normal way of life, and it is impor-
tant to create the desire for, and sometimes to re-educate
in, these small but important duties.
Having established the routine of personal hygiene
and pride in personal appearance, specific occupations
can be prescribed for the patient. A knowledge of the
past history, physical capacity and the usual intelligence
of the patient is a help in the choice of a suitable
occupation. The medical officer in charge of the
case, the occupational therapist and the nurse can
assist here.
There are two groups of patients to be considered:
those who are expected to recover quickly, and those
whose illness will be long. Acute cases can be given a
definite course of treatment by graded occupations, and
others can be drafted into the utility services of the
hospital and thus become useful members and, most
important, be prevented from deteriorating.
For regressed patients there must be a time-table of
habit-training and a daily routine. This habit-training
would be a saving for many of the hospital services?
e.g. in clothing, laundry, furniture and, above all, in staff".
In this matter the best will never be forthcoming while
wards are very large. A ward of fifty patients is suitable.
From an economic point of view it would be impossible
to do away with the existing mental hospitals, which have
too large wards and are prison-like in appearance. But
it is possible in the future to build hospitals on the villa
system, with thought for appearance, practicability and
the type of patient to be treated. Let there be no
suggestion of the prison ! Means of restraint must be
inconspicuous and the aspect of the buildings should
give a feeling of freedom. Space must be provided for
the convenient administration of Occupational Therapy.
Hospitals must be suitably equipped, and the training of
mental nurses should include a course in Occupational
Therapy.
Great care ought to be exercised in the selection of
staff; it is very important that they should be of suitable
character. The ideal nurse is well educated, of absolute
integrity and has enthusiasm for the vocation, a sym-
pathetic personality, and with ability to instruct. On
entering the hospital service the nurse should receive
at least three months' instruction in an annexe apart
from the hospital before having any responsibility f?r
patients. The course should include lectures ?n
anatomy, physiology, psychology, an outline of mental
disease and a knowledge of the various treatments f?r
mental disorders. An introduction to the treatment by
occupation should he given and the nurses encourage"
to study crafts, country dancing, exercises, etc. Nurses
should be acquainted with the various departments, the
different types of patient and the treatments being given-
All should be obliged to take the qualifying examination
in mental nursing, and those in charge of wards should
obtain the General Nursing Certificate in addition to the
Certificate in Mental Nursing and a qualification 'n
Occupational Therapy. Nurses who fail to take the
examinations, or who are not up to the standard, should
become auxiliaries and do the domestic work of the
wards, but should never have charge of patients. This
scheme should result in a very high standard of treatment,
and a corresponding benefit to the patients and the
profession as a whole.
Occupational Therapy, in conjunction with other
treatment for mental illness, is a means by which the
patient, if not cured, may be trained to make the best oj
his limited capabilities and enabled to live his highest
life. Regressed patients must be re-educated and have
habit training; apathetic and depressed patients must
be stimulated and made to regain confidence; excited
patients must be stabilized. By the proper application
of Occupational Therapy, all these classes can be enabled
to contribute in some measure to the community and
to themselves.
Occupational Therapy has been developed abroad-
America led the way after the last war and recognized
the value of prescribed occupation; Germany and
Holland also developed the treatment. It is only in the
last twenty years that Occupational Therapy has been
practised to any great extent in Great Britain. This
form of treatment is now recognized by Govern-
ment Departments and is included in rehabilitation
schemes.
Therefore, in the post-war reconstruction it would be
well to include a reform which needs so little expenditure
and where so many natural facilities are available-
" Work is nature's physician." Scientifically applied
work and play can heal and alleviate the suffering of the
mentally sick. It is our duty as a Christian country to
include any reform that will make for a happier
community.
My reason for emphasizing Occupational Therapy f?r
the treatment of patients in mental hospitals in any
reconstructional methods to be adopted after the war, Is
that it is the only method I have seen that embraces all
classes of patients, and also that hinders dementia in a
great number of patients. I believe it will becorne
imperative for every Authority to use to the limit of its
capacity methods that have proved their worth. The
alternative, I believe, is mental death for very many
patients and the loss by Authorities of an economical
approach to the treatment of their patients.
