Child Guidance, the Clinic and the School
==========================================

:Author: W. J. T. KIMBER, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.M.
j.1 his paper outlines the need for the development
pr0ri8ht deling or the right spirit, but before
titi Ceeding with its subject, I would explain its
P'ac*ng ^e "Clinic" before the

the 1 " ^as ^een done deliberately to indicate
sin 2r?u.nd from which the problem is approached,
do e .^is is my only justification for entering the
as .?f education. Apart from this, I write but
a scribe without authority.

He If experience is based on the work of the
Qi . 0rdshire Psychiatric and Child Guidance
agn ' which began in a small way nearly ten years
Pre anc* to which not far short of 500 children of
J wSCh?01 or school age were referred last year.
jn as dissatisfied with the task of acting merely
Ca a first aid capacity relegated to picking up
has es, anc* t^s' I trust healthy, dissatisfaction
SlJ encouraged me to put forward here some
hafesti?ns not only as to where things appear to
as t6 ?one wrong but also, with less certainty,
j0 how they might be put right.

aCc trust, therefore, that the proposals will be
tk: epted, considered and judged in the light of
nis explanation.

^?nie Problems needing Consideration
the\x/ecent stuc*y undertaken by a committee of
^vith en s Group on Public Welfare associated
py/1. the National Council of Social Service, and
con under the title of " Our Towns throws
Slderable light on our immediate problems.
More and more ", the Report states, " it is
j_?''ne in upon us that the educational services get
?ld of the child too late. An onslaught must be
made on poverty by means of family allowances
and minimum wages, and the children with
unsatisfactory homes must be helped by letting
them live day by day in a different environment;
they must have nursery schools from the age of
two years. We cannot afford not to have the
nursery school; it is the only agency capable of
cutting the slum mind off at the root, and
building the whole child while yet there is time."
" The five-year-old enters school already
suffering from all the complaints which the
school doctors and nurses will spend their time
in combating during his school life. The under-
fives have been found lousier than any other
group; evacuation showed that children under five
were already set in bad habits of every kind." (1)
The Importance of Right Feeling
If the aim of education is to ensure "right
living it must be recognized that " right living "
comprises more than learning. The child must
be educated as regards its body towards " positive
health " (hygiene), as regards its mind into right
thinking (intellect), and as regards the spirit into
right feeling. The development of right feeling
or the right spirit is certainly not the least important
but probably receives the least attention. The
technique of its development is certainly the least
well understood.

I shall approach the question from the point of
view of the problem which the child presents to the
community in its school life, in the hope that?
looked at from this point of view?the main
outline of the problem may be clearly apprehended.
The small child is, then, an individual endowed
with certain intellectual capacities, and the school
system sets out to deal with these in a more or less
adequate way. Certain abnormalities of intellec-
tual endowment call for modified handling, if full
benefit is to be secured for the child, but more
important, far more important in the early years,
is the emotional make-up of the child.

All human relationships are profoundly affected
by feeling. The child's relationship to other
individuals, to mother, father and the family, and
the development of a good relationship with school
friends and teachers and later with workmates,
colleagues and society at large, is in great part
influenced by his capacity for right feeling.
Not unfittingly, right feeling has been referred to
as the Divine Spark, since it is through this talent
that generous impulses and our higher aspirations
develop, while without it the merely intellectually
educated acquire but a selfish " safety first"
attitude to life's challenge. We must realize that
only through the development of right feeling can a
child learn to " love " his brother whom he hath
seen and, if we are sincere in our protestations, we
shall ensure that he is given real opportunities for
taking this first step, for only after this will it be
possible to give an appropriate answer to the
further question, " How can he love God whom he
hath not seen ? "

Both the gifted and the dull child will respond to
similar lines of treatment in developing right
feeling, whereas a definitely modified curriculum
will be needed for the latter, if we are to ensure his
acquiring the habits of right thinking.

Development of Right Feeling

It is not my intention here to survey the physical
health of the schoolchild nor the home conditions
and other factors embraced in the term " environ-
ment though a full educational scheme cannot
neglect these important factors.

It is essential, however, to consider these and
also the school " atmosphere " and environment,
in so far as they affect the emotional development
of the child, since the development of right feeling
is of at least as great, if not of greater, importance
than that of intellectual ability. Complaints have
been made recently that, judging by the conduct of
the young in too many instances, the schools have
instructed but have failed to turn out useful
citizens, in spite of the fact that in many cases the
intellectual capacity of the individual was normal
or even superior. This is expressed tersely in the
saying that the schools are occupied with the
teaching of " learning rather than living ".

Conduct we recognize is the resultant of three
ultimate mental factors?cognition, affection or
feeling attitude, and conation. Cognition includes
the intellectual attributes of mind (including
apprehension and judgment), affection the emo-
tional attitude (including probably interest), while
conation covers the processes of volition and
activity conditioned by the other two.
The question is: Does our educational system
concern itself equally with the affective aspects ol
the child's development as with the cognitive 1
Honesty will, I think, compel us to answer "no "
and yet " modern psychology regards feeling as
the dynamic factor determining behaviour (2)
This factor of affect or feeling which is s?
important, is a very evasive entity, partly perhaps
because it functions to a great extent at unconscioLlS
levels. It is interesting to remember that it vvafS
not separately recognized till the time of Kanj'
cognition and conation alone holding the fieW"
Though we pay lip-service to it to-day and acadern1'
cally its position is established, in the practical
field of education it is far from receiving the
attention it deserves, and while arrays of intelligence
tests exist there is no comparable system
determining the affective capacity or developmen
of the individual. Not only is this so, but in sonie
quarters so much importance is attached to the
Intelligence Quotient that the lack of means t0
estimate the affective capacity or to determine an
emotional quotient is barely recognized, so that a
real danger exists of the Intelligence Quotient being
regarded as the equivalent of mental capacity.
This is really a disastrous state of affairs, since
right knowing is of little value without righ
feeling?in fact a high degree of intelligence
associated with ill-developed or perverted feeling'
attitude almost ensures its possessor becoming a
social problem in some way or other as is shown
by the appearance in the courts and clinics 0
individuals in childhood or adolescence with
Intelligence Quotients well above the average-
The Teacher and the Parent

The school rightly is primarily concerned with
the child's intellectual and cultural development'
while the growth of right feeling must have its
foundations laid in the home, but a proper partner'
ship is essential for the adequate progress of the
child.

" The aim of the school ", writes Mr. W. B.
Little, " should be to get the fullest co-operation
between the school and the parents in all matters
affecting the welfare of the children. It has
been found that the best method of dealing with
apathetic or prejudiced parents is to interview
them privately, and to have a quiet talk about
the needs of the children. If the parents will not
come to the school, then it is worth going to visit
them. At heart, in spite of their prejudices, the
great majority of people desire happiness for
their children.'''' (3)

It seems possible that many teachers would regard
the problem of home visiting, in addition to the
calls now made on them, a further burden that they
should not be asked to bear. It is in fact a tasK
where not only tact but a somewhat specialize^
technique is required, which in most cases is only
acquired by an individual after a course of training
and some practical work under supervision-
i Moreover, when difficulties have arisen, as they
f often will, between the school and the parents-
I the descent of the headmaster on the home Wi*
' probably help little, whereas an intermediary hj
; the form of a trained social worker might accomplish
much.

In some instances, a move in this direction has
ready been made by the appointment of School
tendance Officers as " School Welfare and
a ^?dance Officers but something more than
change in name is required, and the duty of
osecuting in cases of non-attendance cannot in
^ork106 associated satisfactory welfare
be f6 teachers would not be absolved?could not
in' tk are to occuPy the position they should
trial!- estimation parents and pupils?from
king close and understanding relations with
w rents, but much difficult and time-consuming
tra COuld be done for them by adequately
as 'ned social workers, who would also be of great
^tance in the formation and successful running
parent Teacher Associations.

he psychological justification for the employ-
f0rnt. the methods I have indicated as a basis
\Vj}, ^development of right feeling is undisputed.
par "fight feeling" engendered between child,
VVeifnt and teacher, the foundations have been
ri and truly laid for the fuller development of
the linking and of healthy living, for hygiene of
irM^H-Son' ? sch??i (society) and of the home,
imn n? all the domestic virtues (a field of great
but ?rtance which I must mention in this connection
b . ?n which I cannot enlarge). From such
t081 nnings may be more surely built up that desire
ofn[V-e ^hieh is the foundation of the teachings
^hristian citizenship.

. e within the educational system there is
?reat "
*iciVe
Her,
child
be ? vwmiuucs iu uc a. prooiem cannot properly
0*ded as other than a medical (psychiatric)
js jL0nsibiIity. The question of how far the conduct
ernJl6 result of emotional, intellectual nhvci^ai ?r
?xaxa vxiv vuuvuixunai OJ'ilClll LI1CIC IS
hav -ScoPe ^or the educational psychologist?as I
e lndicated below?and an extensive field exists
chilHC meciical (psychiatric) aid is not needed, the
l Q who continues to be a problem cannot properly
reearri^^ ? ?< ....
xjv/ v? xUl U1V 'wUllUUVL
en^e result of emotional, intellectual, physical or
rear?-nrnenta' factors is a very complex one
(not'nn?' some cases at least, extensive medical
0n'y psychiatric) investigation if a correct
^osis is to be made.

a n, j.Child Guidance Clinic must therefore remain
the Ca* responsibility, although it is true that at
ther^r?Sent time many children who are referred
inst e' they had been correctly handled in the first
WoJ^e with the help of an educational psychologist,
d never have required clinic treatment.

The Nursery Years

paJ~APerience has shown that in too many instances,
a(T nt.s in the home unaided are not capable of
8uid child in the first five years that care,
sck a^ce and training which is so vital for its future
in h career- Children too often become " set
Scu habits General provision of Nursery
latit? h *S- indicated and it is to be hoped that
dev i 6 given to individual authorities to
?bs ?P them on their own lives, subject to the
beferVance certain standards of efficiency,
?re any degree of uniformity is demanded.

The Sub-Normal Group

For the intellectually sub-normal children who
are, however, above the feeble-minded group in
ability, special classes in the ordinary schools are
desirable. These " dull " children constitute approx-
imately 10 per cent, of the whole. Teachers with
special training are required for their education, and
a special type of curriculum is needed in which
concrete materials are employed as far as is practic-
able. Individual attention should be available as
required, and therefore the numbers in special classes
must be small. The children in these classes should,
however, participate quite freely in the normal
school recreative and social activities.

Special Day Schools for the educable mentally
defective (feeble-minded) children are desirable.
These constitute only about 2 per cent, of the
school population. By attendance at schools
rather than boarding at residential special schools,
the influence of the home, which is so important
for the feeble-minded child, is secured. Modern
transport facilities should enable a day special school
suitably located, to provide for the needs of a wide
area. The mother of the feeble-minded child is
probably right when she refuses to let him go to a
residential school, for in spite of arguments to the
effect that this will provide suitable education?
which it may, from the intellectual standpoint?the
child will miss the chances of full emotional develop-
ment, the inculcation of right feeling, which a good
home life should give.

The much larger and more important problem of
the education of the dull and backward child
urgently requires further consideration, for delay in
recognizing and treating such disabilities often
causes the child to experience considerable emotional
distress. Frequently the disability of such children
is recognized by their teachers, and often in a large
class attempts are made to give them some special
help, but among children of their own age group
they get left behind in class in spite of all such efforts.
This is almost inevitable, since it has been shown
that for the most part these children haye great
difficulty in grasping abstract ideas and relationships
and their verbal ability is usually very restricted.
If attempts are persisted in to teach them on
normal lines with the standard equipment, these
children will become more and more deeply dis-
couraged. Failure will be heaped on failure and
dull hopelessness, evasion or active aggressiveness
will characterize their conduct, according to
individual make-up and experience.

Far too often it is not till this stage is reached that
the child is referred to the Child Guidance Clinic
when a psychological test shows that his Intelligence
Quotient is such that he has the mental capacity
of a child several years younger, e.g. a mental age
of 1\ years in a child of 10 years. His actual
scholastic attainment level may be even lower than
this. By this time not only has the defect itself
to be dealt with by remedial coaching in individual
sessions in order to make up some of the lost time,
but often emotional disturbance is so marked that
a prolonged period of treatment on psychological
lines is required in the clinic by play therapy, group
play or individual psychotherapy.

Without unfairness it may be said that such an
advanced state of affairs should not be allowed to
develop. There are two measures which might
be taken and which would, I think, prevent it.
First, arrangements for such children to be examined
in the schools and at an early age by an educational
psychologist. Second, the wider establishment of
Special Classes, to which I have already referred,
where the dull children (10 per cent.) can receive
education suitable to their needs.

The Educational Psychologist

The services of an educational psychologist should
be available in the schools. The appointment
should probably be on a sessional or part time basis
in order that the individual may not become
narrowly specialized purely on school problems.
Short of arrangements for a systematic estimate of
the intelligence of every child entering school, his
(or her) duties would be to assess the intelligence
of any child who was not making satisfactory
progress, to indicate the reasons and the remedy.
Where there appeared to be a purely educational
problem, this would be explained to the teacher
concerned and suggestions for handling the case
given. In some cases, this might mean the temporary
transfer of a child to a special class.

In cases where the cause was not clear or the
problem was one in which possibly emotional and
physical factors were involved, the child would be
referred directly to the Child Guidance Clinic.
While purely educational problems, including a
number of special reading disabilities, could be
dealt with adequately by these means in the school
and there is no need to call in the aid of the specialized
services of the Child Guidance Clinic, it should be
recognized that the Clinic is essentially a medical
service of a highly specialized kind and it can no
more form a subsidiary part of the educational
service or the school medical service than, for
example, can the services providing for the treatment
of tuberculosis or orthopaedic conditions. There
should, however, be no hesitation in referring
children early for treatment for thereby the time
required is shortened and a successful result is
much more probable.

The Value of Play

The part that play occupies in the development of
young children is emphasized by Dr Susan Isaacs
in regard to Nursery School education. She also
emphasizes the value of play in helping them to
solve three of their greatest difficulties. Play is a
factor in overcoming much of the feeling of insecurity
responsible for both fears and temper tantrums; it
enables the child to compensate for feelings of being
unloved and not wanted and with increasing
dexterity to lose the fear of its own destructive
impulses which are often very disturbing. Finally' f
through play, the child achieves a feeling of create6
power and ability to control its environment.
All these considerations are of practical imp?r'
tance also in devising a curriculum suitable for the
dull child. . - |

While in various directions the value of specia
educational methods for the less talented children
followed by careful placement in suitable occupy*
tions on leaving school had been fully proved 111
pre-war years, it was the Army Medical ServlC?
under enlightened psychological guidance whic"
seized the opportunity the war offered of deffl0!1'
strating on a large scale how great a return 1
community service the dullard can give if he 1
properly instructed, considerately handled and give.
an adequate idea as to his value as an individual
and of his responsibilities in consequence of
position. Much can be learnt from this very
successful experiment. . ?

For the dull children a much more practice,
scheme of work is required. Such a scheme sh?11'
not be developed in isolation, thus ostracizing u1,
pupils who should take a share in the general sch??, I
activities as far as possible. An education^ I
psychologist would be of considerable help 1 j
dealing with and advising on a number of individua_
special problems which are bound to arise 1
connection with such a scheme.

Too often under present conditions many childre
continue in the schools till finally a long-suffer^
teacher's patience is exhausted or some overt
of rebellion on the part of a pupil who, owing \
his handicaps, has been continually frustrated, f?rC^
authority to take some more definite action. ? \
then is the child referred to the Child Guida?c
Clinic or possibly the Juvenile Court. By this tifl1^
a reputation for consistent misconduct and matted
tion is established, and the child so often fee*
without friends and without hope. A well-esta17'
lished emotional disturbance, hard to eradicate'
has been grafted on to what was at one time possu^ j
a fairly simple educational disability. Many hour
must be spent in treating such a child at the Cliu1 \
if a successful result is to be achieved, whereas ha
the services of an educational psychologist bee
made use of in the school at the beginning, ^ ,
might all have been avoided.

Vocational Guidance

From the point of view of the medical psychology
who sees not only children, but adolescents, iu ,
Clinic, there is one further aspect of education tn j
seems important, the " placement of
leavers This, I am aware, has not been di
regarded. Mr. W. Thompson, Director of Educate
for Sunderland, writes:
" This is one of the most important factors
that educationists must face in their consideration
of a future system and not least in its bearings on
delinquency

And again:
" Too long have we been placing ' square pegs
into round holes ' and endeavouring to round them
off. The effect has been a lack of interest on
the part of the ' pegs ', wasted or misguided
energies?or rather leaving surplus energies
for less worthy objects?and eventually a drift
into ' blind alley ' occupations, and squandered
abilities(4).

pere again the trained psychologist can help,
ostered by the National Institute of Industrial
sychology over a period of years, vocational tests
"ave been developed by psychologists, and while
^uch of what has been done is not yet published
and is not generally available, even with our present
nowledge something can be done?if not to fit
child for the most appropriate job, at least to
avise against gross misfits.

" is reported of the late Sir Truby King that he
??k to his child welfare work because " too late "
was written all over his duties in a mental hospital.
I must claim indulgence on similar grounds, and
should like to emphasize the point that the psycholo-
gist?be he medical, educational or industrial?can
help the educationist by advice, by suggestions and
sometimes by criticism. What I have here set out
is an attempt to help on these lines, and I make no
greater claim than that.

References
------------

(1) Our Towns, p. 104. Oxford University Press.
(2) An Introduction to Psychological Medicine. Gordon
Harris and Rees. Oxford Medical Publications.
(3) Co-operation: Children?Teachers?Parents. W. B.
Little. Health Education Journal, January, 1943.
(4) Some Aspects of Juvenile Delinquency. A paper
presented to the North-East Federation of Educa-
tion Committees. W. Thompson.
