Guide for the Family
=====================

Reviews
slcTn"neSi?' u ^ 
Edith M.
x i-j" wim me collaboration of Samuel W. Hamilton,
Th Commonwealth Fund, N.Y. 1942. $1-00.
tion"ls smaU book, suitably adapted to English condi-
hei ' and perhaps also to English temperament, should
coum0 enlighten and reassure many people in this
^ent 1 W^? " ^ave ^een initiated into the service of
patients by experiencePaul Winterton's
Mending Minds seems to offer the nearest English
parallel, but is written for a wider public and does not
attempt in the same way to get beneath the skin of the
anxious and bewildered relative,or to address him so
intimately and directly.
Written primarily for the family of those mentally
disordered persons who have to be admitted for a
shorter or longer period to a mental hospital, the present
36 MENTAL HEALTH
work takes up its theme at the point where " mental
illness strikes " and tries to show what part the relative
can play before, during and after hospitalization.
English readers will be astonished to find how admis-
sion procedure varies from state to state, ranging from
the absence of all judicial intervention at one end of the
scale to trial by jury as the unavoidable gateway to a
mental hospital at the other. Remote as these things
seem from present conditions in this country, the author's
general attitude is not irrelevant to the English situation.
She makes it clear that the individual patient's welfare
is best served by a realistic acceptance of the existing
legal procedure, combined with an expectation that
those persons who are responsible for carrying out the
law are on the whole humane and will co-operate
with the relative in tempering the procedure to the
patient to the limits of legality. Energy, which might
have been dissipated in fruitless indignation or in futile
attempts to circumvent the law may then be applied to
the wider cause of reform, so that the angry relative
becomes a valuable apostle of mental hygiene.
Acceptance of the authority and faith in the skill and
integrity of the doctor at every stage of mental illness is
urged throughout the book. This undoubtedly needs
to be stressed, but the English reader may wonder
whether it is not reiterated rather too often. The
author's justification must be sought' in the preface,
where she describes the Americans as " a nation of self
diagnosers and self dosers " who " do not sufficiently
respect our doctors
The author is not herself engaged in the service which
she describes, but has come to know something of the
mental hospital from the inside, has consulted many
people engaged in this work in various professional
capacities and has had the collaboration throughout
of Dr. Samuel W. Hamilton, Mental Hospital Adviser,
U.S. Public Health Service, who has supplied the
"Foreword". "Probably", he writes, "the way
she says things is easier to understand than the way
doctors would say them," and one might add that only
a psychiatrist of rare imagination and sensibility could
discard the protection of custom and of scientific interest
and face with the relative what the catastrophe of mental
illness means when it enters one's own home. The lay
author deserves both praise and gratitude for what her
book achieves in this difficult imaginative task.
Its appeal is rightly to the reason ; because it is so it
cannot take the place of?though it can most usefully
supplement?the personal support which must be
given to the relative by psychiatrist, psychiatric social
worker and others of the hospital personnel. The
general line taken is that of orthodox mental hygiene.
" Once you have accepted the essentially simple fact
that you are dealing with someone who is sick, you will
be no more or less unhappy than you would be if your
home were disrupted by tuberculosis or appendicitis
or pneumonia." No doubt it is useful to stress this,
as a counterweight to the shame, secretiveness, bewilder-
ment and moral judgment which still attend a case of
mental illness. Nevertheless, one may be heretical
enough to question whether, in the realm of feeling and
experience, mental illness does of its very nature give
rise to distresses, alienations and questionings of a
peculiar quality and depth. N.G.
