The Modern Mental Hospital How the Mental Nurse can play a part in Educating Public Opinion
============================================================================================

MENTAL HEALTH

By J. H. GIDDINS, Staff Nurse, Whittingham County Mental Hospital, Lanes
Winner of the "Lord" Memorial Essay Prize, 1941
What is it like in a Mental Hospital ? Most
Mental Nurses have had this question put to them
at one time or another.
This query is often accompanied by a scrutiny
as though one were a creature from another world.
A further barrage of questions usually follows, and,
in a very short time, one realizes how utterly wrong
is the conception of the general public in regard
to the modern Mental Hospital. Then is the time
to realize also that a golden opportunity has been
presented for the pleasant disillusionment of a
" citizen in error ".
To be really effective in this task, it is well worth
the trouble of giving a brief, but clear, description
of the antiquated and bygone system in which the
impressions of so many people have their origin.
To the majority of people, a Mental Hospital is a
closed book, and just as a closed book with nothing
but the title visible leaves much to the imagination,
so the name Mental Hospital, or " Asylum "?
as it is still termed by many?has a stimulating
effect on the imagination of thousands of
people.
Unfortunately little or no actual knowledge of
the inside of these institutions accompanies the
imagination, and the result is too often decidedly
uncomplimentary. Visions are conjured up of
dark and uncanny strong rooms, or of dim and
depressing corridors, inhabitated by " story book
madmen An alternative impression is one of a
community of genial idiots, who use wheelbarrows
the wrong side up, or perform similar ridiculous
antics. Yet another erroneous idea, held by many,
is that once a patient is admitted to a Mental
Hospital, he is permanently lost to the outside
world, to news and affairs outside the institute,
even lost to his relations and friends. In short,
the impression has been created that a Mental
Hospital is little more than a prison, to which are
taken?and kept?persons who are " not fit "
to be left at large. This impression has not been
born in the past few months or the past few years ;
its origin is far back in what were known as " the
good old days ", when sanitation was primitive
or completely absent, and when children, little
more than babies, worked from dawn to dusk
in unhealthy factories and workshops, without
the protection of public health services, child welfare
inspectors, or even an adequate governmental law
to safeguard them.
In keeping with the regrettable system of that area,
persons who were mentally sick were catalogued
under the general heading of " Lunatics and as
such were removed to a " Lunatic Asylum "?a
very different institution from the Mental Hospita'
of to-day. In many cases the unfortunate suffers1"
was incarcerated for the good of society at large-
whilst his own interests?such as treatment to bring
about recovery, or the protection of his outside
interests and affairs, were a very minor consideration-
Added to this injustice was the unwarranted stigma
which was allowed to be woven about both the
afflicted and his relations, until the " inmates
they could hardly be termed patients?came to be
looked upon as some strange type of criminal-
This insult naturally reflected upon their relatives,
causing incalculable misery. Such was the atmos-
phere and environmentin which was born the present-
day conception of many people, in regard to the
Mental Hospital, and though time has pruned this
" poisonous tree of false knowledge " its roots
still cling to the soil in which it was planted.
The modern mental nurse, realizing all this, can.
and should, take advantage of every opportunity
to break down this unsavoury and misleading
traditional barrier ; and being in daily contact
with the patients undergoing treatment, and know-
ing intimately the routine, the just discipline, social
activities and the general conditions within the
modern Mental Hospital, the task is by no means
difficult and opportunities are many.
Therefore, when the question is put to them?'
" what is it like in a Mental Hospital ? " the query
should not be evaded?as it so often is?giving
the uninitiated the impression that it must be eithe'
decidedly unpleasant, or that there is something
to conceal. Any sign of concealment will immedi-
ately give rise to suspicion. In the modern Mental
Hospital there is nothing which need be hidden
from the public, and the only points upon which
silence must be strict and absolute, are in regard
to names and personalities.
Tell your interrogator of the Mental Hospita'
as you know it to be, frankly and truthfully-
Describe to him the recreation rooms, their spacious-
ness and modern ventilation, central heating and
general air of comfort. Tell of the ample amuse-
ments provided for the patients?wireless, billiards,
chessmen, chequers and cards,?and of the help and
encouragement given to any patient who has the
desire for a hobby. .
Explain to them the meaning of Occupational
Therapy?its value in re-establishing confidence and
self-respect in patients who, through the stress and
worry of life, have come to look upon themselves
as useless and unwanted. Talk of the work which
physically fit patients are encouraged to do, and ot
the rewards and privileges which can be earned
MENTAL HEALTH
stem\ Give them an insight, as to the under-
anding and unobtrusive observation which is kept
/-all .t'lese activities, and of the team spirit
nich exists between Medical Officers, nurses and
Patients. Describe the dormitories, with their
P ished floors and spotless bed linen; the airing
urts with their lawns and flower beds; the sick
I 0rns with their air of restful quietness, where the
ss fortunate are nursed with sympathy and
Patience.
Side rooms are well worth mentioning, as many
^?Ple have a very distorted and unpleasant idea
to their uses. Stress the fact that these rooms
a ? not cells of punishment, but rooms wherein
a torrnented and excited brain can find the peace
n , solitude for which it craves. Explain the strict
an .re'at^n8 to the use of side rooms, whereby
y risk of abuse in their employment is entirely
ruminated.
c_^e^ also of the way in which patients are en-
a ^ra?ed to keep in touch with relatives and friends,
d how, when a patient feels forgotten through
Offfn?e visitors or correspondence, the Medical
ann Cr vv'" 8et 'n touch with the relatives concerned
^ u tactfully remind them of their duty. A few
g(?r^s J? regard to the visiting of patients do not
?. .amiss. Describe the friendly manner in which
sitors are received by the staff, and the pleasant
siting rooms where the patient and his visitors
ann S'1 ant* talk over their most intimate, private
a family affairs secure in the knowledge that
on .ing which may be overheard by the nurse
a ^siting room duty will be treated in as strict
confidence as though it had never been mentioned,
trase the impression that mental sickness carries
out ^ a s^8ma' as tt did in the old days, and point
t that illness of the brain, like any bodily com-
aint, comes uninvited and unwanted. Above all,
ake it absolutely clear that the aim of the Mental
ospital is not to detain patients for the good of
Cle.ty at large, but to effect a cure wherever
Possible and to return the patient back to his people
ar>d his normal life.
a Explain how all the methods of modern medicine
ann met^cal science are employed to this end,
o tell them of the pleasure you and your fellow
share when a patient on discharge comes
j,. thank you for your kindness and help during his
t ness. If any doubt appears to remain in regard
the treatment of patients, describe briefly the
.ystem whereby every patient is sure of justice,
every way, commencing with the regular atten-
ance of the Medical Officer and so on to the visiting
^rdians, and the clergy of all denominations,
the annual visit of the Crown Commissioners.
% now you will have enlightened your com-
panion considerably concerning mental hospitals,
inf w^en one person is enlightened, many are?for
formation spreads indefinitely.
th ally, enquire if he would care to go through
e hospital and there see for himself the hospital
s you have described it to him. A nurse can
otain permission for this, particularly when he
explains the reason for his request. Another
t way in which the nurse can greatly assist in breaking
t down some of the common illusions regarding
I mental hospitals, is by inviting their friends and
relatives to the sports, pantomimes and similar
; social functions, to which the public are admitted.
Here they will see the patients at recreation, and
the keenness and zest for the games, coupled with
the standard of physical fitness which they can see
for themselves, will assuredly score many points
for the conditions within the modern mental
hospital. Let them see the good fellowship and
the clean competitive spirit at an inter-ward cricket
or football match. It is at such functions as these
that the public will learn that the majority of mental
patients are likeable people with personalities of
their own, and not just a community of simpletons
or raving madmen.
A visit to a Christmas pantomime will in itself
prove that one great trait of the patients is loyalty.
This shows itself unmistakably in the enthusiastic
applause given to the patients' own particular
nurses, and it is given quite regardless of the
standard of talent which the performers happen to
display.
Tell them also of the manner in which religious
worship receives its full share of consideration in
the mental hospital to-day, of the facilities granted
for this, free from all bigotry or creed prejudice,
and of the way in which patients are encouraged
to continue in their own form of worship, during
their sojourn in the hospital ; and so, piece by
piece, the old conception of the mental hospital,
and the conditions within, are destroyed, and in
their place is born the true knowledge that they are
hospitals indeed, as necessary and worthy of respect
as any general hospital or infirmary.
Here in these institutions is nursed the saddest
of all human ailments?mental illness?treated and
nursed with a sympathy and understanding, which
the patients could not hope to find in the outside
world. Here certain abnormalities of behaviour
are naturally expected, and are consequently
never made the occasions for mockery or insult.
The sole aim of the hospital staff is to bring about
recovery wherever humanly possible and to eliminate
suffering in all cases.
The voluntary system, whereby a person who feels
he can no longer stand the mental stress of life
can of his own free will enter the hospital, proves
beyond a doubt that apart from the medical treat-
ment to be had, there is also sanctuary and comfort,
and protection from an outside world which cannot
understand the doubts and fears of the mentally
afflicted. The quiet regular routine, together with
an abundance of rest and fresh air, good food and
regular exercise, all of which are to be found in the
modern mental hospital, are in many cases the key
to complete recovery.
In conclusion, a nurse should always keep in
mind that his own personal conduct and behaviour
goes far in creating an impression, favourable or
otherwise, to the layman. The nurse, therefore,
10 MENTAL HEALTH
cannot be too careful about his personal appearance.
Cleanliness and tidiness are essential and this rule
is by no means exclusive to duty hours. Temper-
ance and kindliness are also essential qualities.
It is only natural that a nurse who is untidy, boorish,
or intemperate, will, in addition to creating a bad
impression of himself, create also a decidely bad
impression of his hospital, and the conditions
therein. Every nurse should, no matter what
rank he may hold, look upon himself as an ufl*
official representative of the modern mental hospital
and carry himself accordingly.
If this duty alone is carried out, much good vv"
have been accomplished in the cause of mental
hospitals and the first dent will have been made
in the armour of the false impressionist.
