News and Notes
===============

Courses for Medical Officers
-----------------------------

Week-end Course. During the week-end of March 13th,
a Conference on Problems connected with Retarded and
Difficult Children was arranged by the C.A.M.W. for
School Medical Officers working in London and the
Home Counties.

Lectures were given by Dr. Frank Bodman (Deputy
Director of the Bristol Child Guidance Clinic), Miss
L. G. Fildes (Administrative Officer of the Child Guid-
ance Training Unit, Oxford), and Miss Ruth Thomas
(Educational Psychologist, C.A.M.W.), and there was,
in addition, a Case Conference by Members of the
Bristol Child Guidance Clinic team.

The students testified enthusiastically to the help they
had received from the Course and asked whether it
would be possible to follow it up by holding discussion
groups from time to time?a question which has been
referred for consideration by the appropriate Com-
mittee of the Provisional National Council for Mental
Health.

Course on Mental Deficiency. The 24th annual course
on Mental Deficiency, arranged in co-operation with the
University of London Extension and Tutorial Classes
Council, was held at the London School of Hygiene
from May 10th to 21st.

Fifty-eight medical officers from all parts of the
country attended, and in addition to lectures, instruction
was given in mental testing under the direction of Miss
L. G. Fildes, made possible, as in former years, through
the facilities generously provided by the Acton and
Willesden Education Authorities.

The Provisional Council has now taken over responsi-
bility for this as for other courses previously run by the
C.A.M.W.

Courses for Teachers and Work of Educational
Psychologists

London. During the week-end of February 6th, a
Refresher Course was held in London for teachers who
had previously attended one of the Ten Weeks' Courses
which before the war were organized annually by the
Central Association for Mental Welfare, or one or more
of the Short Courses organized by the Association for
the Board of Education.

The subject under discussion was, " How and Why
Children Differ from One Another " and the lectures
were given by the C.A.M.W.'s Educational Psycho-
logists (Miss Ruth Thomas and Miss Norah Gibbs)
and by Dr. Alan Maberly, Medical Director of the
Child Guidance Council.

The 37 teachers who attended were enthusiastic about
the help received, and the fact that they came from all
parts of the country bore testimony to their eagerness
for courses of the kind and to the need they felt f?r
conferring together.

Cambridgeshire. A series of lectures on Methods of
Teaching Backward Children is being given in eight ?
centres during the present term by a C.A.M.W-
Educational Psychologist, to teachers employed
the Cambridgeshire Education Authority, with special
reference to the needs of rural teachers. This is one ot
the activities taken over from the C.A.M.W. for which
the Provisional National Council for Mental Health
will be responsible.

Hertfordshire. An Educational Psychologist (MisS
Gibbs) was recently loaned to the Hertfordshire Educa-
tion Authority for a month's service in the schools to
investigate and advise upon the problem of backwardness.
Shropshire. During the winter term, 1943, one of the
C.A.M.W.'s Educational Psychologists (Miss Gibbs)?
carried out an interesting piece of work arising out of
some preliminary experimental activities in the county
in the previous summer. In two periods of a fortnight
each, individual visits were paid to selected schools t?
advise on the teaching of backward children and the
treatment of individual differences in learning a/1"
behaviour. Altogether 25 schools were visited, including
a number of village schools, many helpful discussions
about their problems and difficulties were held with
teachers, and recommendations were made to the
Education Authority as to the possibilities of a con-
structive " follow-up " of work which had abundantly
demonstrated its need and value.

As a result of this experiment, the Authority has
decided to appoint at a later date a permanent psycho-
logist on its staff, an appointment which has been
accepted by Miss Gibbs.

Wallasey. A three months' psychological survey
was made, at the request of the Wallasey Education
Authority during the winter term, 1943, by a C.A.M.W-
Educational Psychologist (Miss Proctor), for the purpose
of investigating the need for a School Psychological
Service with special reference to the problems of back-
wardness and behaviour difficulties.

It is satisfactory to be able to record that the result
of the survey was the appointment of Miss Proctor
as permanent Psychologist on the Education Authority s
staff.

West Ham. A month's preliminary enquiry is being
carried on in this area by an Educational Psychologist
(Miss Sampson) loaned to the Education Authority who
are anxious to provide evidence as to the need for the
establishment of a Child Guidance Clinic.

\tct 1 re- Regular weekly attendances at even short
,? -Vre. courses are difficult in rural areas. At the
for 10n the Wiltshire Education Authority, there-
j e' a one-day " School " was held at Trowbridge in
v. ,Va^y> and a Residential Week-end Course near
M^sham in April.

g ,n both occasions, the subject was the Education of
that h3r<^ Children and an attempt was made to show
for t warc^ness is a problem for children as well as
on '^^lers- 1? January, Miss Gibbs gave two lectures
anH ,,?he Causes of Backwardness " and on " How
(Re Children Learn to Read," and Miss Howarth
c gl?pal Representative of the Provisional National
ChMH01^ ^0r Mental Health) lectured on " The Backward
a 'Wat Home In April, to'these three lectures were
cini two ^ Dr. Bodman on " The Problem of Dis-
P ine and Obedience " and " The Needs of the Young
" Tv,?ent anc* Miss Gibbs gave a final talk on
ne Backward Child in the Ordinary Class
it v/eSe- 'ectures were enthusiastically received and
tea ,as, interesting and encouraging to note that the
eVen jr s interest in children's general development was
deeper than their concern with teaching techniques.
C Educational Psychologists on the staff of the
C0|' ,-W. are now seconded to the Provisional National
Tra- 91' for Mental Health and are responsible to its
lning and Education Committee.

^?Th ^erVice t? War Nurseries
Serv ^emand for Nursery Advisers under the Loan
gpn 1Ce scheme instituted by the Mental Health Emer-
j^atCy Committee and now transferred to the Provisional
10nal Council through the Joint Committee on
A n Service to Nurseries, is steady and unabating.
(erJ"In8 the period December 1942 to March 1943, short
Nu c ? n? were made to 12 Authorities covering 26
0f ^Ser'es in London and the Home Counties, and loans
Glo months or longer were made to Authorities in
v^hj,Uce?tershire and in the North-Eastern counties,
visit i 'n Lancashire a number of Nurseries are being
Coi ? a ^oan worker attached temporarily to the
I ncil's Regional Representative.

^ent a^^'tion' a number of lectures on Child Develop-
ment' uanc* Demonstrations on the use of Play Equip-
an^i ave been given to Nursery workers, professional
an? voluntary.

bein Va'u? salvaSe niaterial in this connection, is
Com? '.n8eniously and divertingly demonstrated by the
al\v ,ttee's staff, but it is difficult for them to have
?n band a supply large enough to meet the
grataP^' ar)d the help of readers of this journal will be
?fth ^ received. The following list gives some idea
ne type of material required:

Cotton reels. Corks. Stoppers and lids
r?m glass or plastic jars, tins, etc. Tins of all
descriptions (preferably with turned edges),
j-urtain rings. Cosmetic and shaving cream jars.
Meat skewers (wood or metal). Cigar and
cigarette boxes. Books of sample wallpapers,
materials, etc. Christmas cards, illustrated
magazines and catalogues. " Scrap " pictures.
Discarded umbrellas. Artificial flowers, scarves,
oddments for dressing up. Jewellery oddments,
beads, Christmas cracker toys, etc. Old hand-
bags.

Creels should be addressed to the Provisional National
J"?,, 24 Buckingham Palace Road, London, S.W.I,
clearly marked " Loan Service to Nurseries ".
t Mental Health Education in Rural Areas
A report of the Rural Mental Health Education
Committee, on the scheme carried out by means of an
\ award of ?250 made by the Central Council for Health
Education to the three bodies now constituting the
National Provisional Council for Mental Health, shows,
that in 1942, a total of 72 lectures on " Understanding
Ourselves and our Children " was given in the counties
of Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Devon, Gloucestershire,
Hampshire, Oxfordshire and Yorkshire. The audiences
largely consisted of members of Women's Institutes,
Women's Co-operative Guilds, Child Welfare Centres,
etc., and in the majority of areas, the whole series of four
lectures was requested and received with great
appreciation.

In order to enable the Committee to meet further
requests for the lectures, the Central Council generously
made a supplementary award of ?100 to cover an ex-
tended period.

It is hoped that lectures on similar lines may also be
given to audiences in urban areas, although for these
it will be necessary to ask a small fee, as no funds are
available.

A New Type of Youth Leaders' Course
This Course, held at Fishponds Training College,
Bristol, from April 10th to 13th, was arranged by the
Youth Committee of the Provisional National Council
for Mental Health, under the auspices of the Bristol
Youth Committee.

It was in many respects an experimental venture,
aiming at giving to Youth Leaders not direct help in
the running of Clubs, but some insight into the general
psychological needs and problems of adolescents and
their leaders. The work involved in the whole scheme
might be considered as falling into three parts?(a)
preliminary interviews, (b) the Course and (c) the
subsequent "follow-up".

Mrs. Zena Roth (Youth Organizer of the Provisional
National Council) visited Bristol Clubs, in preparation
for the Course, and interviewed some 30 Club Leaders.
The Course itself, under the general direction of Miss
Gibbs (Educational Psychologist), consisted of lectures
and discussions on psychological development given by
Dr. Bodman, Miss Howarth (Regional Representative
of the Provisional Council), and Miss Gibbs. This
"background knowledge" was followed by talks and
discussions led by persons who saw Youth in settings
other than Clubs. Thus in a session, "Youth at
Home," a mother gave her view of her growing family, a
psychiatric social worker spoke on family relationships,
and a housing estate manager on the life of Youth as
observed by her on a large estate. In the " Youth at
Work " session, the speakers were a foreman member of
the A.E.U., two personnel managers, and a member of
the Bristol branch of the Ministry of Labour.
Throughout the Course, discussion was lively and to the
point, and the members seemed anxious and able to
consider the essential question: "What are the Needs
of Adolescents ? "

A " follow-up" which has been arranged as an
essential part of the scheme, will consist of visits, after
three months, to Clubs whose Leaders attended the
Course and a general meeting of all concerned for
discussion upon it. This " follow-up " is in no sense
scientific, but it should indicate (a) what kind of help
was received by the students and (A) what further
problems and possibilities were suggested to them by the
Course.

Homes and Agricultural Hostels

Responsibility for the Hostels?together with the
C.A.M.W.'s Emergency Homes for low-grade defectives
and for its Residential Nursery at Pewsey (carried on
for the Ministry of Health, in co-operation with the
Waifs and Strays' Society to meet the needs of children
who have proved too " difficult " to be dealt with in
ordinary Nurseries), now passes to the Homes and
Hostels Committee of the Provisional National Council
for Mental Health, with the reservation that the
C.A.M.W. continues to have sole financial control.

The Committee has agreed to open a fifth Hostel for
men on Licence from Certified Institutions, at the
request of the Hampshire War Agricultural Executive
Committee who hope to acquire suitable premises near
Winchester. This will be the second Hostel in the
County. There is also a prospect of an additional
Hostel in Shropshire, and all the Agricultural Executive
Committees concerned continue to express appreciation
of the value of the work done by this group of workers.

?*' New World " Hostel for Difficult Boys
This Hostel?made possible by means of a gift from
the English Speaking Union through the kindness of a
Canadian citizen, Mrs. Sholto Smith?was opened in
January 1943 for eleven boys between the ages of 5 and 11
in need of prolonged psychiatric treatment.

Despite difficulties of staffing, common to all residential
homes at the present time, a successful beginning has been
made and the boys now in the Hostel have settled down
happily and are responding to treatment. Two excep-
tionally difficult children sent on trial only proved to be
unable to adapt to the informal regime and for their
problems other solutions have had to be found.
The Hostel has been approved by the Board of Educa-
tion for the reception of children under Section 80(1) of
the Education Act, 1921, and the majority of cases are
maintained by Local Education Authorities. It has been
visited by Inspectors both of the Board and of the Home
Office.

The children are referred for various specific difficul-
ties, the most frequent being persistent eneuresis and
soiling, and violent temper tantrums. Each child receives
treatment twice a week at Guy's Hospital Child Guidance
Clinic, and all the children attend the local Elementary
School from whose staff, helpful and willing co-operation
is received.

It has been difficult to procure for the Hostel an
adequate supply of play equipment, and gifts of toys,
games and books suitable for boys between the ages of
7 and 11, would be gratefully received by the Warden,
New World Hostel, 66 Ashburton Road, Croydon.

Child Guidance Clinics
------------------------

1942 has been a peak year for the establishment of
Clinic services and 14 new Clinics have been opened.
There are now full services for the counties of Somerset
and Berkshire, and in north Surrey, at Aylesbury,
East Grinstead, Harrow, High Wycombe and Preston,
and at the Mayday Hospital, Croydon. Partial services
are newly in operation at Chesterfield, Norwich and at
the Warneford Hospital, Leamington Spa.

The Clinics at Great Ormond Street Hospital and at
the London Hospital re-opened during the year and have
helped to relieve the pressure on the other London
Clinics.

The development of the County Clinic is being watched
with very great interest and enquiries as to the method
of setting up this type of service are being received by
the Child Guidance Council from all parts of England.
The Berkshire Clinic which was established in conjunc-
tion with the Mental Hospitals Committee of the
county, issued a report of its first six months' work,
copies of which may be obtained from the Council.

Fellowships in Psychiatry
----------------------------

Three Fellows awarded Fellowships in Psychiatry by
the Child Guidance Council began training this yeai':
Dr. Louise Devlin at the Child Guidance Training
Centre, Dr. Helen Gillespie at the Maudsley Hospita'
Clinic, and Dr. Elizabeth Whatley at the Tavistock
Clinic. Further Fellowships have been awarded 10
Dr. Elizabeth Huband and to Dr. K. Mellett, and an
advertisement for yet one more vacancy will appeaf
within the next few months.

Child Guidance Council
------------------------

The activities of the Child Guidance Council?-in
common with those of the other two constituent bodies^
have been transferred to the Provisional National
Council for Mental Health. They will be carried on
by the Child Guidance Committee and by the Inter-
Clinic Committee which, in spite of the absence of many
of the leading Child Psychiatrists, it has been possible
to re-constitute.

Adoption of Children (Regulation) Act, 1939
This Act comes into force on June 1st, 1943. In this
connection the National Council for Maternity and Child
Welfare in conjunction with the National Council f?r
the Unmarried Mother and her Child has set up a Special
Committee to keep a watching brief on its working-
Miss R. S. Addis has been appointed to represent
Mental Health interests on the Committee.

Training for Psychiatric Social Work
-------------------------------------

Sixteen students qualified for the certificate of thc
Mental Health Course in July 1942. All those who were
available for employment were immediately appointed,
but twice this number were needed for advertised
vacancies. It is, perhaps, a good sign that a lar?f(
proportion of last year's students have gone into Child
Guidance Clinic or Mental Hospital appointments which
are likely to become permament, and that those who have
entered emergency services are mostly working in areas
where they have clinical services available, or where they
are acting as assistants to more experienced psychiatry
social workers.

Twenty-five students started their training in September
1942. Thanks partly to a generous increase in the
Commonwealth Fund scholarships, this group represents
the largest number of British students which has ever,
been admitted in one year, and should in the summer ?l
1943 provide to some extent for the growing demand-
The London School of Economics has announced the
award of Commonwealth Fund scholarships for the
Session 1943-44. These scholarships are of varied
amount up to ?200, and are granted according to ind1'
vidual need. There has also been established a Loa*1
Fund from which students may borrow without interest,
making retrospective payment for a proportion of th?
costs of the training during the first three years of then
employment. Candidates must be aged at least twenty'
two, but preference will be given to those who are
between the ages of twenty-four and thirty-five. The.
must hold a Social Science Certificate, a degree or othe
educational qualifications appropriate to social wor*.
Practical training in case work is essential, and it is bette
?r most candidates to take the training after a period of
esPonsible experience as social workers.

All enquiries should be addressed to The Acting
ecretary and Registrar, The London School of
conomics. The Hostel, Peterhouse, Cambridge. Letters
nould be clearly marked " Mental Health Course ".

National Council for Mental Hygiene
------------------------------------

j. H.R.h. The Duchess of Kent. The National Council
or Mental Hygiene has great pleasure in announcing
nat H.R.h. The Duchess of Kent has graciously con-
snted to become its President in succession to the late
th Kent. Members will be happy to know that by
"'s valued association, Her Royal Highness will continue
t,e 'ate Duke's tradition of keen interest in the work of
^Council and support of its ideals.

Lord" Memorial Essay Prize Competition. The
Prize of ?3 3s. and a medal for the 1942 essay has been
yarded to Staff Nurse Tom Catherall, of County
uental Hospital, Chester, who is now serving with
H M. Forces.

^ 1 ms annual competition, which is administered by the
Clonal Council for Mental Hygiene, is open to
ch" r Catec* mental nurses> ?f the rank of staff, charge or
of'^harge, employed in Mental Hospitals. The subject
. the essay set for last year was " Which reform in
ental Nursing would you put first in Post-War Recon-
duction, and why ? " Thirty-two candidates entered
r the competition. The Selection Committee reports
t. at the essays received were of a high standard, and that
\ve ?ai?didates were agreed on certain measures which
in? 'PProve the life of both patients and staff, includ-
inf ac^'tional facilities for occupational therapy, and the
Reduction of more nurses with general training,
l he winning essay will appear in the next issue of
thE*TAL Health, and arrangements have been made for
~ ? Nursing Mirror to publish later a precis of the various
entries.

On page 8 of the current number will be found an
say by staff" Nurse J. H. Giddins, who was awarded
^Prize under this competition for 1941.

fo International Centre. The National Council
r Mental Hygiene has arranged a series of six lectures
i Post-war mental health problems at the Friends'
j^rnational Centre, London, W.C.I, which started on
19th, and will continue fortnightly on Wednesdays
all h P"m-' er)ding on July 28th. The lectures are for
in \ natiorials, social workers and others interested
Ds ^ nta' Health, and include discussion on the
st ych?l0gical effects of malnutrition and of a lowered
re& hving, the effects of living under a Nazi-type
gime, and the contribution of Youth to post-war
Construction.

8oyie'
he speakers are Dr. Alexander Baldie, Dr. Helen
Mu ^r' Brown, Dr. Crichton-Miller, Dr. Lois
Dr vi0 anc* Or. Odium, and the meetings are being
of n! .over hy Mr. Christopher B. Taylor, Chairman
the Friends' War Relief Service.

Workshop for Epileptics
-------------------------

'n thCr since the C.A.M.W.'s work for epileptics living
of th .Community began, it has been apparent that one
p their most urgent needs could only be met by the
conH1-S^?n employment under specially suitable
to ? i?ns; but only recently has it been possible to come
grips with this particular problem.

and Tr?ugh the generosity of the Committees of Chalfont
0j> r.~^'ngfield Colonies and of individual donors, a sum
f0r . is now available for the experiment and search
. suitable premises in a convenient neighbourhood is
" nS actively carried on.

Marriage of Defectives
----------------------

A Circular (No. 927), issued by the Board of Control
in February, draws attention to the increasing number
of defectives subject to Orders under the Mental Defici-
ency Acts who have recently married, or who are about
to marry, and outlines?for the benefit of Local Authori-
ties?the policy which the Board considers they should
adopt in dealing with the problem.

Whilst agreeing, in principle, that mental defectives
are generally unfit for the responsibility of marriage and
parenthood and urging that care should be taken in
selecting patients to be sent out on Licence from Institu-
tions to ensure that their surroundings are suitable and
that adequate supervision is provided, the Board never-
theless take the view that:

where a patient who has been regarded as
sufficiently stabilized for community care is found
to be married, the presumption is in favour of dis-
charge, provided always that there is ground for
holding that the couple will be able to maintain
and look after a home.

And that:
the recall of a patient to, or detention in, a certi-
fied institution after marriage, is never justified,
on the grounds of marriage alone.

It is considered that such recall, except in really urgent
cases and after the fullest possible investigation, will be
likely to bring the Mental Deficiency Acts into bad repute
with the general public and to put a serious barrier in
the way of developing mental health work in the area
concerned.

Fear has been expressed in some quarters that the
Circular may have disastrous effects in that its recom-
mendations may lead to the further propagation of
mentally defective children, who?in the post-war
period?will swell the ranks of the unemployables,
On the whole, however, the policy advocated by the
Board would seem to be a reasonable and practical one,
always provided that emphasis is laid on the necessity
for providing full and adequate information as to the
home conditions of the defectives concerned, and that
Local Authorities can be assured that such reports will
be given due consideration by the Board. On this
proviso, stress has been laid by the appropriate Com-
mittee of the Provisional National Council for Mental
Health whose resolution on the matter has been firmly
endorsed by the C.A.M.W. Council.

Elfrida Rathbone Committee
----------------------------

This Committee is a voluntary body initiated by that
devoted and indefatigible worker, Miss Elfrida Rathbone,
which for a number of years (originally under the name
of the Lilian Gregg Committee) has carried on work
for defectives in the Islington, Finsbury and Hoxton
districts of North London. It has just issued another
Annual Report containing an account of many activities,
including Clubs for ex-Special School girls and boys,
Care Committee work for a re-opened Boys' Special
School, visits to defectives in evacuated school parties,
and much individual service of various kinds given
by a Secretary who is unsparing in her befriending
of this group of handicapped children and adolescents
to whom friendship is essential for security and
happiness.

The Committee would value more voluntary help,
even if only for two or three hours a week, and offers
of such service will be gladly received by the Secretary,
Miss Beth Whetnall, Elfrida Rathbone Committee,
Ritchie School, Liverpool Road, N.l.

Aycliffe Home Office School
-----------------------------

The opening of this School with its special " Classify-
ing Centre " is an important step forward recently
taken by the Home Office through its Children's Branch,
which presages future developments of great signifi-
cance?as Dr. Hermann Mannheim points out in a recent
issue of the Approved Schools Gazette.

To the School?situated near Darlington?will be
sent, in the first instance, all boys committed from
Courts in Northumberland, Durham and Yorkshire.
In its Classifying Department, every newcomer will be
placed for a short period under skilled observation,
and it will then be decided for which School serving the
area his personality and educational attainments make
him most suitable. If it is discovered that some deep
psychological trouble is involved in the boy's problem,
arrangements will be made for psychiatric treatment
before transfer is contemplated.

A similar Classifying Centre for girls (over school age)
will shortly be opened at the Shaw School, near Warring-
ton, to serve the Northern area.

The scheme is as yet in its early experimental stage
so that no report can be made on it, but it is likely to
disclose a wealth of information which may reveal the
need for the opening of Schools of quite new types.

Association of Mental Health Workers
The Association's Annual Conference held at the
Bonnington Hotel, Southampton Row, London, during
the week-end of May 7th to 9th, was attended by 101
members from all parts of the country. Addresses
were given by Miss Evelyn Fox, on the Provisional
National Council for Mental Health; by Dr. Douglas
Turner on Developments in Institutional and Extra-
Institutional Care of Mental Defectives, and by Dr.
D. W. Winnicott on Childhood and Mental Health
Problems. An Exhibit of Play Equipment for War
Nurseries, improvised from salvage material, aroused
great interest.

Miss F. H. Tosh was re-elected Chairman of the
Association, Mrs. Lucy Beach as Vice-Chairman,
Miss St.Clair Townsend as Secretary, and Miss J. M.
Mackenzie as Joint Hon. Treasurer with Miss M. K.
Sykes (in place of Miss de Caux who was obliged to
resign).

The success of the Conference demonstrated how
great is the need felt by workers to meet together and
how encouraged they are by such meetings.

Social Welfare for Allied Nationals
Under the auspices of the British Council, Courses
in Social Welfare are given at intervals for the benefit
of members of the Allied Nations now in London,
who will, on return to their own countries, have a part
to play in social reconstruction.

The Mental Health Emergency Committee (now the
Provisional National Council) was asked to arrange for
a series of lectures on various aspects of Mental Health
work, and these are being given as we go to press, by
members of its staff assisted by Miss L. G. Fildes, Dr.
Frank Bodman and Professor Ginsberg.

As on a previous occasion, great appreciation of the
lectures has been expressed by the students, all of whom
are eager to learn of our methods of dealing with these
special problems which in an intensified form, are likely
to present themselves for solution in every war ravaged
country.
