Provisional National Council for Mental Health
===============================================

ine Provisional National Council for Mental
nat , Was formed in January, 1943. It is a
^ural development of the Mental Health Erne -
f: "cy Committee which it displaces, and atth?sa?
nflu 0Wes its existence very largely to a RePO
mp ?eversham Committee, the principal reco
ndation of which it implements.
th. [ be remembered by many of our readers
sef ? the " essential unity of the mental health
vice " was the primary conclusion underly g
r7 Feversham Report, while the Reports chief
c?rnmendation was :
That a new central voluntary body be set
UP for England and Wales, to co-ordinate tne
Activities of the voluntary mental health organ-
?zations in the country.
tL^e Report was published only a few weeks before
he declaration of War, and the Conference planned
to bring it to the notice of the public had to be
abandoned. It might, therefore, have seemed to
the casual observer at that time that the labour
(lasting over a period of three years) which had
gone to the production of the Report was wasted
effort, but without it, the formation of the Pro-
visional National Council for Mental Health
would never have taken place, for it is on the basis
of the principles enunciated in the Report that the
Council takes its stand.
In January, 1939, the Mental Health Emergency
Committee was set up to deal with mental health
problems which it was anticipated would arise
under war conditions, the threat of which was daily
increasing. Formed of representatives of the
Central Association for Mental Welfare, the Child
Guidance Council and the National Council for
Mental Hygiene (with, in addition, representatives
of the two professional bodies?the Association
of Mental Health Workers and the Association of
* A
^ BuckinVuar 8'v'"g particulars of the formation of the Council can be obtained on application to the Hon. SecretariS,
glam Palace Road, London, S. W.l.
MENTAL HEALTH
Psychiatric Social Workers), the Committee was
intended primarily to co-ordinate the essentially
wartime activities of its constituent bodies.
In this limited field, therefore, an end was
put to over-lapping and a demonstration was
made of what co-operation and joint action could
achieve.
The success of this experiment not only proved
the wisdom of the Feversham Committee's recom-
mendations, but showed that the co-operation
established by the three bodies in connection with
their war activities must be extended to their other
work as well. While complete amalgamation
during wartime was out of the question, an
Amalgamating Committee to explore possibilities
was set up in July, 1942, with the full support of
the Ministry of Health, the Board of Control and
the Board of Education. Professor J. M. Mackin-
tosh, a member of the Feversham Committee
and primarily responsible for the drafting of its
Report, was in the chair, and the outcome of this
Amalgamating Committee's deliberations was a
Scheme for establishing the fullest measure of
amalgamation possible under war conditions.
The Scheme was accepted by the constituent bodies
and in January, 1943, the National Provisional
Council for Mental Health held its first meeting.
The Scheme may be summarized as follows:
The Council consists of four representatives and
two Honorary Officers from each constituent body
(the Central Association for Mental Welfare, the
Child Guidance Council and the National Council
for Mental Hygiene) with an independent Chairman
(for this position it has been fortunate in securing
the services of Sir Otto Niemeyer), a Vice-Chairman
(Mrs. Montagu Norman) and an Hon. Treasurer
(Dr. Mackintosh). The Hon. Secretary of the
C.A.M.W. (Miss Evelyn Fox) and the Hon. Secre-
tary of the National Council for Mental Hygiene
(Dr. Doris Odium) have been appointed by their
respective bodies as Joint Hon. Secretaries of the
Council, acting in association with the Medical
Director of the Child Guidance Council (Dr. Alan
Maberly). The Council takes over the staff" of the
Mental Health Emergency Committee (which it
displaces), and the staffs of the three constituent
bodies are seconded for the Council's work.
Two points in connection with the Scheme should
be noted :
(?) That it is provisional and experimental and
intended to function in its present form only
until complete amalgamation, can take place.
(?) That pending such complete amalgamation,
each of the constituent bodies maintains its
independent existence and the Executive
Committees will meet regularly as before,
to receive quarterly reports of the Council's
activities.
, The three bodies retain control over their own
finances, and their position is safeguarded by the
Council's pledge to continue, as far as possible,
all the activities previously carried out by them,
to strengthen their work in every way and to make
no alteration in their policies or principles without
their approval.
The activities of the Council will include, as has
been noted, all those previously carried out by its
constituent bodies, and from the list which follows
it will be seen how comprehensive these will be :
I. The promotion and maintenance of normal mental
health in children and adults.
For this purpose, instruction is given to
professional groups, such as doctors, teachers,
probation officers and others on the principles
of mental health and their application in the
working problems which will be encountered
daily by such workers. Here is included the
organization of lectures and courses for Youth
Leaders and other workers in the Youth Service
on the psychology of adolescence.
A Loan Service of Educational Psychologists
is available to local authorities requiring
expert help in psychological problems arising
in schools, and for a survey of requirements
in connection with the setting up of Child
Guidance Services.
Similarly, there is a Loan Service of trained
and experienced workers to give advice on
War Nurseries, particularly in connection
with obtaining and utilizing play material
and equipment.
By the organization of lectures and con-
ferences, instruction is given to the general
public in the practice of mental health. There
are lectures under the Rural Mental Health
Education Scheme organized in villages and
essentially rural areas, and to the Forces under
the Army Education Scheme.
The promotion and carrying out of research
in specific mental health problems.
The promotion and maintenance of close
contact with mental health organizations
other countries.
II. The consideration of problems in relation to, and
provision of services for, children and adult5
suffering from nervous disability or defect-
The study and treatment of problems of
behaviour in childhood and the provision of
Child Guidance facilities.
The maintenance of a Register of Foster
Homes for Nervous, Difficult and Retarded
Children, and the provision of supervision after
placement.
This includes responsibility for an Hostel
for specially difficult children in need of
prolonged psychiatric treatment and skilled
observation.
MENTAL HEALTH
The Council is also responsible for a Resi-
dential Nursery for evacuated children who
are too difficult to be dealt with in ordinary
nurseries.
Social case work for children and adults
suffering from all types of nervous disability
and defect.
The establishment of Homes, Hostels and
Workshops for mental defectives and epileptics.
The development of community care of epilep-
t'cs, promotion of legislation on their behalf
and creation of public opinion in support of it.
At present, the Council is responsible for
nve existing Emergency Homes for mental
defectives, and four Agricultural Hostels for male
Patients on licence from certified institutions.
The maintenance of standards of training and
provision of training facilities for pro-
fessional workers dealing with mental
health problems.
This includes awards of Fellowships in
Psychiatry and Psychology tenable at Child
guidance Training Centres, and Courses for
Teachers and Medical Officers, and workers in
Rental Deficiency Institutions, Occupation
Centres, and Hostels for Difficult Children.
Treasury grant formerly made to the Mental
t ^n Emergency Committee is being transferred
inn Provisional Council to cover the expenses
re Urred in the taking over of that Committee s
n Possibilities, and the money which was gener-
fr y Placed at its disposal by H.M. the Queen
J??m the United States "Bundles for Britain
nd), will continue to be available for specific
PUrPoses.
m^if Council's administrative expenses will be
j 1 py the three constituent bodies, each contribut-
.8 in proportion to its previous liabilities, and
Wc^t Prertl^ses are being acquired so that all the
rk may be carried on under one roof.
P It should be noted that the services of the Council s
ideational Psychologists, War Nursery Advisers,
Tourers and other specialized workers will be
. liable for loan to local authorities and organiza-
ann S- ?.n Payment of the necessary fees and expenses,
, d it is hoped that the greatest use will be made oi
ese services.
th ^rou?h the amalgamation of the Libraries of the
*"ee constituent bodies, improved library facilities
' be offered by the Council, particulars of which
a ay had on application. It is hoped, also, that
, efficient Information Service may be established
y^ans of which data on any subject connected
jth mental health may be available to any worker
l ? requires it. Developments in the work will
i? recorded in the Council's journal Mental
Health.
It is obviously too soon to make any attempt to
SSess the results of the establishment of this Council,
but the mere fact of its existence may be taken as an
indication of a welcome re-orientation. In the
words of the Feversham Report:
Amalgamation means thinking in terms
of the individual to be helped, and not in terms
of the societies which have previously rendered
services.
It means, also, on the part of officers, members
and staffs of the amalgamating bodies, a readiness
to pool resources and experience acquired through
years of pioneering work, and to share fields of
activity to which, through long association, no
small degree of emotional significance has become
attached. These things are not lightly achieved,
and at the outset it is inevitable that there will be
difficulties of adjustment. But that such initial
difficulties will be overcome, can confidently be
predicted, for everyone concerned is convinced that
increased knowledge and a deepened understanding
of the nature of mental health problems, have
produced a position in which a continuance of the
old methods would have stultified further progress.
In the words of the Board of Control in its Report
for 1935 :
The special problems of child guidance, of
the treatment of borderline cases, of after-care
and preventive care, and the manifold problems,
medical, social and educational, associated
with mental deficiency, are all closely related and
to attempt to deal with them in isolation is
neither scientific nor conducive to the most
economical use of the available resources.
The Board cordially agree with Professor
Henderson, of Edinburgh, when he says (in his
report for 1935), " We must learn to talk of
mental health and its maintenance rather than
of mental disease and its cure." Until this is
generally recognized, no real progress can be
made on preventive lines, and sectional interests
will continue to compete against one another for
public support.
But internal difficulties are not the only ones that
have to be solved. The general public has con-
tributed very largely to the divisions that have
heretofore existed, by its own fears and prejudices
in the Mental Health field. One of the first objec-
tives of the .new Council must be the dispersal of
these fears by bringing about a greater understanding
of the nature of neurosis, mental defect and psychosis
and of their cause, prevention and treatment. Only
in this way will an attitude dominated by fear and
guilt give place to one of healthy, constructive
sympathy and understanding, and only in this way
will be spread a knowledge of the all-important
truth that the seeds which may ultimately produce
these various disorders are sown in childhood and
adolescence, and that a knowledge of the factors
which promote and maintain mental health during
these periods is essential for every parent, nurse
and teacher.
