Scottish Farm Colony
======================

MENTAL HEALTH 31
^
licn july 18th, 1942, Todhill Boys' Farm Home was
Inst t ? ^ the ?oai"d Control for Scotland as an
defe r IOn ^?r t^ie reception ?f high grade mentally
in f e hoys, who had received some previous training
werarrn garden work in a larger institution, and who
great considered likely after a trial under conditions of
farms ^reed?m to Prove suitable for employment on
cent?^^'" ^arm Home is situated in Ayrshire in the
l9j3reK?f a farming district. It was originally started in
bov y the late Dr. Cossar as a training farm for slum
PUrn' ant* at t'me heing taken over for its present
frr.??s,e Was occupied by a few boys under Probation
^ the Courts.

I930 e building is a modern one, having been rebuilt in
aCc blowing destruction by fire, and has ample
^ab!11?10^'011 ^or ^ hoys. It stands in 43 acres of
Thre jfnd anc* with 650 feet of glass for tomato growing.
undeC ^rses' three cows, pigs and hens are kept. It is
ASs0r- ,e management of the Scottish Labour Colony
Scot,Clation and the Department of Agriculture for
and have an over-riding supervision.

in re ? ?,n licensed by the Board of Control, the Home had
?Upe ence an exPerienced staff and a particularly good
in ^ r,I?tendent and Matron who had had long experience
proha"ng with the neglected slum boy and with boys on
boys on- It is interesting to learn that they find the
and ^0w under their care react much better to training
chartf1Ve a great deal less trouble than their previous
Previ ?a- state affairs to be accounted for by their
?ffic?US- institutional training. The local Medical
new Cr v^sits regularly and takes a keen interest in the
Lenn Venture, while the Medical Superintendent of
CaPacity <"ast'e Certified Institution acts in an advisory
se^dy farmers in the district are asking for the boys'
batCh es'fancI during harvest time and potato lifting a
It is them is sent out to the neighbouring farms.
plac ?xPected that very soon some will be ready to be
boy ?yt on farms as wage earners. At present, each
?utsicieCe'Ves P?cket money, and any money made for
rerpntf work is credited to all. Green battle dress has
Alth ^een ?htained.

in n Jl0ugh technically a Certified Institution, Todhill is
first iUa' fact a Farm Colony and Hostel. This is the
a'readarm Colony to be started in Scotland and it is
pr0c ,y Proving a great success. In order to simplify
advispKM?' consideration is at present being given to the
Institf t-1' changing its status from that of a Certified
out n ,0n to an actual Colony and Hostel for boys sent !
n licence from institutions. 1
Type of Children's Home s

by '^teresting enterprise has recently been undertaken f
a sn^ii u ddlesex Education Authority who have opened
the n . ?me for children committed to their care under I
1933 Vr?i?ns the Children and Young Persons' Act, f
avern st awaiting placement in foster-homes. The 5
through ngth of stay is six weeks although children who p
not s ? maInutrition, enuresis or some other cause are f
H0rtleUliahle f?r immediate placement, remain in the t
receiv . r tWo ?r three months. Children are also h
rem0ve 1 fwhen. owing to some emergency, immediate ii
stay tif .m a foster-home is necessary. During their t
Th fjChildren attend the local council school.
and th me is staffed by a Matron and Assistant Matron fi
nere are generally one or two carefully selected older

News and Notes

girls between 15 and 17?also "care and protection
s cases awaiting disposal?who enjoy helping with the
n younger children. To Education Authorities faced
y with the difficulty of quickly finding foster-parents, a
g Home of this type would seem to fill a much needed
0 gap.

f
1 An Isle of Wight Development

? A useful precedent has been created by the Isle of Wight
j County Council who have recently appointed a
i Psychiatric Social Worker whose salary is the joint
t responsibility of the Visiting Committee of the Mental
t Hospital, the Education Committee and the Mental
Deficiency Committee. In connection with the Mental
i Hospital, her work is chiefly concerned with the provision
! of After-Care, including the finding of suitable employ-
~ ment; in addition she makes any special enquiries needed
and obtains information about patients on admission.
For the Mental Deficiency Committee she acts as
Petitioning Officer, arranges for the placement of cases
under Guardianship and in Institutions, and undertakes
a limited amount of statutory supervision. For the
Child Guidance Clinic she provides case histories and
interviews relatives.

There is inevitably a limit to the amount of service
which can be given to each of the three Committees and
much must be left undone, but as the whole of the work
is under the direction of one medical officer who acts as
Medical Superintendent of the Mental Hospital, Medical
Adviser to the Mental Deficiency Committee, and Hon.
Medical Director of the Child Guidance Clinic, the
problem of allocating time does not present serious
difficulties.

The Island is to be congratulated on initiating an
enterprise which provides one more demonstration of
the advantages to be gained from a unified Mental Health
Service.

Bursaries for Psychological Nursing

Through the generosity of Sir Felix Cassel, a number
of bursaries are to be awarded to State Registered Nurses
desiring to study modern methods of treating and nursing
patients suffering from functional nervous disorders.
About six bursaries will be awarded each year for a
training lasting four months, three months at the Cassel
Hospital and one month's experience of social work
under the Provisional National Council for Mental
Health. Through its Social Case-Work Department,
the Council will provide facilities for gaining an insight
into the environmental conditions of the various types of
adult patients dealt with by the Hospital, and will also
show the students something of work for defectives and
for problem children.

In a letter to The Times (August 17th) Sir Farquhar
Buzzard, Chairman of the Committee which has been
formed to administer the scheme, pointed out that
Sir Felix Cassel recognized, in common with the medical
profession, how small a part the study of psychological
factors in disorders of health has hitherto played in the
training of nurses in this country, and hoped that the
holders of his bursaries might subsequently help to
interest and educate an increasing number of nurses in
this important aspect of their work.

Further particulars of the scheme may be obtained
from the Secretary, Cassel Bursaries, Ash Hall, Bucknall,.
Stoke-on-Trent.

An Experiment at a Home Office School

An interesting experiment to meet the serious problem
of furtive sex talk was recently initiated by Miss M. E
Cullen (the Provisional Council's Regional Representa-
tive in Region 2) at a small Home Office School for
Senior Girls.

The staff wisely felt that this outbreak of morbid
interchange of distorted ideas and sensational experience
indicated a need for open discussion on a number of
related questions. On Miss Cullen's suggestion, it was
decided to have a series of informal meetings on the
" Brains Trust " pattern at which the girls' anonymous
questions could be frankly answered and the moral and
social implications fully discussed.

The girls' response has been significant, revealing a
tragic amount of anxiety and disturbance in connection
with such subjects as the hope of happy marriage in spite
of having " gone wrong ", childbirth, homosexuality,
etc. The discussions brought to light much ignorance
of sex physiology, and arrangements were therefore made
for a talk and film on the subject.

It is reported that the effect of the discussions is already
marked; there has been a notable lessening of anxiety
and the furtive talk has almost completely ceased. The
experiment will be continued in the autumn.

Course for Allied Social Workers

At the request of the British Council, the Provisional
National Council is holding a Six Months' Course for
women of allied nations who, on the liberation of their
country, intend to return to work in rest camps, hostels,
children's homes, etc., and to take part in the various
schemes for rescue and reconstruction.

The first part of the Course (which began on September
20th) is being devoted to the study of Infancy and Early
Childhood: the second part will deal with the Child
from Seven to Fourteen, and the third part with1 the
Adolescent. The Tutor of the Course will be Miss Ruth
Thomas (Psychologist of the Provisional National
Council), who, with Dr. Lois Munro and other experts,
will give the lectures. Practical experience designed to
give an insight into the working out of the problems under
discussion, will be arranged for each student.

The students will visit Children's Nurseries and Child
Welfare Centres and will spend a fortnight actually
working in a Day and in a Residential Nursery; during
the second part of the Course they will visit Play Centres,
Backward Classes, Approved Schools, etc., and will
spend a fortnight in residential institutions for children
of the age-group they are studying. Work in a Youth
Club, with a week in a hostel for young people, will be
arranged during the third part of the Course, and finally
the students will visit Child Guidance Clinics and attend
Case Conferences.

Throughout the Course?which is being held at
39 Queen Anne Street?there will be practical classes in
dancing, story-telling, the making of play material, simple
handicrafts and other recreational activities.
Twenty students (18 Polish and 2 Czech) have been
enrolled for the Course.

Youth Leaders' Conference
During the week-end of September 13th to 15th, the
Provisional National Council, at the invitation of the
City of Leicester Education Authority, held a Conference
for Youth Leaders, at the School of Technology and Art,
attended by about 30 leaders of the City's Youth Clubs.
At a preliminary meeting the local conditions of the Youth
Service were fully discussed with the eight City Youth
Organizers and the Director of Education. The Course
itself, under the direction of Miss Ruth Thomas, consist
of five lecture sessions with discussions, devoted /nainI!g
to the developmental problems of young people,
function of the leader, and the practical problems 0
organization and activities within the Clubs. CoiisideV
able discussion centred around the relation of the CW
to the schemes mooted throughout the country for
further education of young people and the, as yet unj-
touched, problem of the inclusion in such schemes ?
training in personal relationships. There is already 1
Leicester, a direct liaison between employers in indus^
and the City's schemes for evening education.

conference registered a general consensus of opinion
a similar liaison on democratic lines was needed, 1
ensure a more realistic approach in Clubs and elsewhe*
to educational schemes which must concern themseW
with young people's lives as a whole. It was felt tn
such liaison, to be effective, must include committees 0
workers, both young and old, as well as of employers.

Conference on Mental Health
----------------------------

The Provisional National Council is holding a One-D^
Conference on Mental Health at the Caxton Ha1?
Westminster, S.W.I, on Friday, October 29th, 1943. {
The Conference will be opened by the Rt. Hon. Erne
Brown, M.C., M.P., Minister of Health, at 10.30 a-jj^
The morning session will be presided over by Sir Otl.
Niemeyer, G.B.E., K.C.B., Chairman of the Provision ^
Council, who will speak on "The Development afl
Extension of Voluntary Mental Health Services ?
second part of the session will be devoted to a consider
tion of the Mental Health Work of Local Authority '
with special reference to the development of Joint Schen]
for all Mental Health Services as well as for CW
Guidance, and to the place of the Residential School
the Education of Defective and Sub-Normal Childre ?
The speakers will be: Dr. Thomas Beaton, O.B-^'
Mr. E. R. Davies, Deputy Clerk, Berkshire Coun*
Council, and Mr. John Duncan, Head Master of Lan
hills Special School. -jj

At the afternoon session, Sir Farquhar Buzzard ^
take the chair. Two subjects will be dealt with: 0) JL
Effect of War Conditions on the Mental Health oi1 r
Community, and (2) The Selection and Classification
Homes and Hostels in relation to the Needs of .jj
Individual Child. At this session the speakers ^
be: Dr. Ian Skottowe and Miss Lucy L. G. Fildes, BA"
Ph.D. ft

Tickets for the Conference (6s. 6d. to include Rep0.^
5s. without Report), or 2s. 6d. for one Session only, sho^'-j'
if possible, be obtained from the Provisional Coun '
39 Queen Anne Street, W.l, in advance. Q{
The Report will be published in the next issue ^
Mental Health, which will be a special Conferen
Number.

Fellowships in Child Psychiatry

At the meeting of the Medical Sub-Committee of'.jf
Child Guidance Council held in August, five Fellowso V
in Child Psychiatry were awarded. This brings *
number of Fellows in training up to eight, with ^
addition of two who will commence training in the Is
Year. . 0f

The appropriation from the Commonwealth Funo
America and the Treasury Grant have made this ex1 ^
sion of the training programme possible, and it is ,j?(J
fortunate that so many of the candidates who apP1
for training merited fellowship awards. .
To widen training facilities, further clinics have ? c
approved by the Provisional Council and these 1
ccepting trainees, while still more clinics are to come
ei?re the Medical Sub-Committee for approval.
anH e bellows now in training are: Dr. Louise Devlin
na Dr. Elizabeth Mackworth at the Child Guidance
?"aming Centre; Dr. Helen Gillespie and Dr. Kenneth
at au at Maudsley Hospital; Dr. Elizabeth Huband
. Aberdeen. Dr. Mellett is also training at Guy's (full
rne at two clinics); Dr. Elizabeth Whatley and Dr.
? C. Scott are at the Tavistock Clinic; and Dr. Rose-
.3PL-Pfitchard at the Hertfordshire County Psychiatric
jjJChild Guidance Service.

sh t'ne ^e"ows 'iave agreed to forgo the fellow-
'P grant, indeed some are paying a fee which covers
?re,c?st of their training. To these the Council are most
ext ? as *s on*y *n way ^at any considerable
tension of training facilities can be made.
^evelopment of Voluntary Child Guidance Clinics
v is interesting to note the establishment of two
de i tary phild Guidance Services, both of which have
o VeJ?Ped in districts where there was no Child Guidance
rvice: The Liverpool Catholic Children's Protection
With^y 'lave established a clinic service in connection
tn the Notre Dame Convent. The Very Reverend
as 'lv* Rennet, Administrator of the Society, is acting
2 \7lrector of the clinic which is about to open at
^Maryland Street, the premises of the Liverpool and
strict Child Guidance Clinic which closed down in
tK~y '942. The Dorset Child Guidance Service, under
a .Presidency of Her Grace Nina Duchess of Hamilton
Qfi Brandon and the Honorary Medical Directorship
ind-J- Stephen Horsley, is sponsored by voluntary and
thafVlK Ua* enterprise in the district, though we understand
ect ui ? eY have not yet sufficient funds for the staffing and
at>hshment of a clinic.

^ental Health Lectures

o,0A series of Twelve Weekly Lectures on " The Psych-
thf.^ Frustration and Fulfilment " is being held under
ju auspices of the Provisional National Council for
5 fita.1 Health at Caxton Hall, London, S.W.I, at
' 3 P.m., on the following dates:

etober 5th, 12th, 20th and 27th. Miss Anna Freud,
on " Instinct Fulfilment and Frustration in Education''.
0vernber 3rd, 9th, 16th and 23rd. Miss E. N. Rooker
(late Principal of Dr. Barnardo's Staff Training
School) on " Practical Applications in Childhood ".
0Ve^ber 30th, December 7th, 14th and 21st, Prof. John
Macmurray (Grote Professor of the Philosophy of
Mind and Logic, London University), on " Social
Sources of Frustration and Fulfilment
leJickets for the Course, ?1 (single tickets, 3s. 6d. per
Po?U"m' as ^ar as accommodation permits, should if
Sec ke obtained in advance from the Lecture
HJflary' Provisional National Council for Mental
hh, 39 Queen Anne Street, W.l.

National Council for Mental Hygiene a
Annual Meeting of the National Council for E
Sop- Hygiene will be held at the Hall of the Medical
Thii j of London, 11 Chandos Street, London, W.l, on f(
dat r?, y' October 28th, at 3 p.m., followed by tea. The ir
rnaf ? keen fixed for the convenience of members who b;
arrn Wls^ to attend the Mental Health Conference, fc
Heby the Provisional National Council for Mental si
Will on t^le Showing day. It is hoped that members p;
re .make a special effort to be present at this annual in
e " Handicapped Children " and Post-War Reconstruction
The National Special Schools Union, which has for
n forty years sought to " promote the welfare of children
e who are handicapped mentally or physically has in
^ this Report made a valuable contribution to the body
?J of plans for post-war social and educational reform.
The subject of the Report deals with " children who
have some physical defect of crippling, heart disease,
" tuberculosis or other physical disability, which makes it
' impossible for them to receive proper benefit from
education in an ordinary school or to find suitable work;
' children who have only partial sight; those who suffer
' from epilepsy; and those children with sub-normal
; intelligence who can, nevertheless, be educated by special
! means It includes also children suffering from
temporary handicaps, such as anaemia, debility or
malnutrition.

As the key to the whole problem, the Union urges the
extension of Special School provision?day and residen-
tial?for all types of handicapped children, and it does
not regard the special class in the ordinary elementary
school as in any way an effective substitute.
Dealing with the vexed question of terminology, the
abandoning of all discriminating labels such as " mentally
defective", "physically defective", "epileptic",
" maladjusted ", is urged, in favour of the generic and
innocuous term " handicapped so that everything
possible may be done " to remove what offends or might
be thought to offend ". Certification (another stumbling
block) should, it advocates, be abolished and replaced by
" classification " so that a child instead of being
"certified" for admission to a special school shall
merely be " classified " as a child needing such provision.
It would leave the primary responsibility for classification
in the hands of the medical practitioner, but considers that
acting in conjunction with him there should be a local
educational expert, e.g. an Inspector, with a first-hand
knowledge of the schools in the area concerned.

Another reform urged is the earlier ascertainment of
all handicapped children, and that schools for children
who are physically defective should admit them at a
younger (unspecified) age than at present, though this
would probably necessitate the development of the
boarding school system and of special nursery schools.
It may be remembered that the Wood Report recom-
mended the inclusion of dull children with the feeble-
minded in one " Retarded Group ", to be educated
together, but the Union, although noting the need for
special provision in Elementary schools for the " dull ",
does not consider that such provision can take the place
of Special Schools for children whose dullness is of such
a degree that it prevents them from receiving proper
benefit in any but a carefully planned environment.
One of the most valuable contributions to the Report
deals with the needs of the epileptic child?so commonly
overlooked. The extension of residential special schools
for these children is advocated, together with the
intensification of research, the organization of social care
and the education of public opinion on the lines of the
American Branch of the International League against
Epilepsy.

On the subject of the selection and training of teachers
for Special School work, the Union's recommendations
include a suggestion that arrangements should be made
by a statutory body through selected Training Colleges
for a Course of at least three months, and that training
should not be confined to the teaching of any one
particular group of handicapped children, but should
include all types.

The Report finally draws attention to the need for
supplementing educational provision for the handicapped
child by a scheme for vocational training on leaving
school with subsequent placement in suitable employ-
ment, thus linking up this particular problem with that
presented by other " disabled " persons.

With some of the questions raised in this Report, the
Special Committee of the Central Association for Mental
Welfare, on the Education and Notification of Defective
Children (set up in 1936 and reporting in 1939), dealt
with in great detail, and a glance at the recommenda-
tions then made shows how extremely complicated are
the issues involved so far as they entail legislative changes
in both the Education Act, 1921 (Part V) and the Mental
Deficiency Acts. The present Report covers a wider
field and is concerned rather with general principles than
with detailed amendments in the law. Its approach to
the subject is essentially that of a group of practical
idealists seeking to enlist the sympathy of the public in
their work for children who are afflicted or distressed in
mind or body, and whose claims are liable to recede into
the background unless championed by those with an
intimate knowledge of the suffering and frustration
involved so long as they continue to be ignored.
The Report, which is attractively produced, may be
obtained from Mr. J. Hudson, Hon. Secretary, N.S.S.U.,
31 Hoodcote Gardens, Winchmore Hill, London, N.21,
price 6d.

It may be of interest to note that this matter is amongst
those which are to be considered by the Provisional
National Council, through the Committee which is being
set up to deal with questions arising out of the forth-
coming Education Bill.

Courses for Staffs of Hostels for Difficult Children
The fourth and fifth of the Courses for the staffs of
Hostels for Difficult Children arranged this year by the
Provisional National Council and formerly by the Mental
Health Emergency Committee, whose work it has taken
over, were held respectively at Hereford Training College
(July 15th to 23rd), and at Springfield St. Mary's, Oxford
(September 1st to 9th).

The Hereford Course was primarily intended for Hostel
workers from Civil Defence Regions 7, 8 and 9, and the
Oxford Course for those from 3, 6 and 12, but owing to
the fact that at Hereford there was accommodation for
a much larger number of students, the Ministry of
Health's Welfare Officers kindly arranged for several
Students from Region 3 to attend the Course there in
order that the total number taken might be as large as
possible. Another helpful ruling of the Ministry was
that in cases where two members of staff from the same
Hostel wished to attend, one should go to Hereford and
one to Oxford, irrespective of the particular Region to
which they belonged. The total number of students
attending the two courses was 59.

Both Courses were directed by Miss Ruth Thomas
(Educational Psychologist of the Provisional National
Council) and others who gave lectures or classes at each
of these were: Dr. Grace Calver, Miss Lucy G. Fildes,
Mrs. Goldschmeid and Miss Guy (Nursery Advisers,
Provisional National Council), and Miss Winifred
Houghton (Rhythmics). At each Course, talks were
given by a Ministry of Health Regional Welfare Officer
and by a Regional Representative of the Provisional
Council.

A greater awareness of the underlying implications of
their work was observed in the students attending these
two Courses. The centre of interest had definitely
shifted from concern with day to day Hostel management
and with specific behaviour difficulties amongst the
children, to the wider consideration of the problem of
their future adaptation and to the type of provision that
will be needed for those left parentless. That the
community should not lose the service of its Hostel
Wardens when the need for the particular form in which
it has been given during the war years is at an end, lS
becoming very clear to the organizers of these Courses,
who urge that every effort to retain such service should
be made, whatever type of provision is ultimately
arranged for war orphans permanently deprived of normal
home life.

Devon Committee for Education in Mental Health
An interesting development has taken place in Devon-
shire as a result of the pioneering activity carried on by
Miss Howarth (Regional Representative of the Provisional
National Council) supported by the Devon Voluntary
Association for Mental Welfare and its Secretary, Miss
MacMichael. ..

On May 29th, a Meeting was held at the invitation ol
the Mental Welfare Association, at the Deanery, Exeter,
by kind permission of the Dean, who took the chair-
After discussion, following on an address by Miss Ruth
Thomas (Educational Psychologist of the Provisional
National Council), it was agreed to form a Committee
for the purpose of furthering educational and preventive /
work in mental health in the County. A small Com-
mittee was thereupon elected, and at a subsequent
meeting the objects were defined as follows:
(1) To further educational work in Mental Health.
(2) To promote the study of personality in relation to
healthy social living among all ages and groups ot
the community.

(3) To ascertain the needs and opportunities in the
county for this kind of work.

(4) To meet from time to time to discuss the principle
involved in this statement of aims, and to invite
visitors to attend when desired.

Dr. Richard Eager was elected Chairman, Mr. W. E-
Philip (County Director of Education) Vice-Chairman?
Miss H. Sheehan Dare, Hon. Secretary, and Miss F. M-
Dickinson, Hon. Treasurer. A panel of lecturers is to
be formed and it is hoped that lectures may be arranged-
The Committee has applied for its recognition by the
Provisional National Council, and this has been readily
granted.

Rescuing the Spastic Child
---------------------------

There has recently been formed by parents of children
suffering from disabilities due to Little's Disease, Spastic
Paralysis and Cerebral Palsy, a Club whose object
is to arouse national interest in the provision of centres
for the treatment, education and vocational training ol
this group of handicapped children.

Too often in the past, they have been regarded as
inevitably mentally defective and untrainable, but
largely through the efforts of Dr. Earl Carlson, an
American specialist in cerebral paralysis, who vvas
himself " spastic" in childhood and who, through
dauntless courage and determination, learned to over-
come all the disabilities considered to be permanently
incapacitating?it is now beginning to be recognized that
by means of a prolonged period of skilled training, even
the most severe of the physical handicaps associated with
this condition can be overcome. The success of such
training demands intelligent co-operation on the part ot
the child. Where there is true mental defect complete
success is not possible, but it has been estimated by
thp^er'v^n exPerts> who have made an intensive study of
e subject, that in only 30 per cent, of spastic cases is
Tntal defect a factor.

n.a recent circular issued by the Parents' Club, atten-
incV|1S ca"e<^ to the need for reliable statistics as to the
as Icience of Spastic Paralysis and associated conditions,
f0 a Preliminary to the establishment of a pioneer centre
Vvi SPecialized treatment on the lines of those in America
act" ? ^ave achieved such striking results. In this
f?ity, the Club has the support of the Central Council
in he Care of Cripples who have sponsored it since its
'caption.

to tJ^u*r'es? which are welcomed, should be addressed
" r e Hon. Secretary of the Club, Mrs. W. A. Colgan,
ossamer Outwood Lane, Chipstead, Surrey.
