The Children's Magistrate and the Child Guidance Clinic
========================================================

MENTAL HEALTH

By JOHN A. F. WATSON
Chairman of the Southwark Juvenile Court and author of The Child and the Magistrate
Somewhere in the Home Office is a photograph
of two little brothers, aged eleven and thirteen.
From head to foot they are garbed in the convict
dress of the period?forage cap, tightly buttoned
tunic, long trousers, the whole defaced with broad
arrows. The background is a high stone wall, for
they were serving a sentence of hard labour in
Portsmouth prison. Their offence was damaging
a door by throwing lumps of mortar at it. The date
of the photograph was 1899.
It is not a pleasant picture. But it serves as a
grim reminder of how recently we accepted and
applied the doctrine of retributive punishment,
even in the case of erring children not yet old enough
to leave the schoolroom. It is also worth remem-
bering that it was not until ten years later?in 1909?
that Parliament took away from the courts the
power of committing boys and girls under the age
of fourteen to the common gaol.
More than forty years have passed since that
photograph was taken, and at a time when we have
good reason to deplore so many mistakes we can
at least take comfort that amongst those things in
which we have made some progress is the treatment
of the young offender. For the portrait of those
two small boys provides a striking contrast with the
injunction contained in what is, I think, unquestion-
ably the most important Section of the Children and
Young Persons Act, 1933?which Act, as some of
you may remember, was heralded at the time as the
" Children's Charter ". The whole spirit of that
Act, which should pervade the proceedings in every
court in this country which has to do with children,
is enshrined in Section 44:
"Every court in dealing with a child or young
person who is brought before it, either as being in
need of care or protection or as an offender or
otherwise, shall have regard to the welfare of the
child or young person and shall in a proper case
take steps for removing him from undesirable
surroundings, and for securing that proper
provision is made for his education and training."
I can think of no more fitting text for any address
upon the work of juvenile courts or upon the
treatment of the wayward child.
The times have changed, and with them have
changed our ideas on the treatment of the young
offender. Some people think they have changed
too fast. Others think they have not changed fast
enough. And certainly there can be few subjects
upon which there is a greater divergence of opinion
than as to what is the root cause of juvenile
delinquency, which in wartime unfortunately?
but not, I think, unnaturally?has increased ?
the neglect of the parents ? the laziness of the school
teachers ? the sensationalism of the cinema ? The
lack of religious training ? the weakness and
sentimentality of the juvenile courts ? It is just
as well, I think that all of these things should be
blamed, for in all of them there is room for improve-
ment.
Moreover, this seeking after cause is surely all
to the good, for it reflects the trend of public opinion*
or perhaps I should say of public realization, that
what in fact we have to deal with?the all-important
thing?is not the conduct of the child, but the cause
of it. No normal child is born a criminal. But
so far as the normal child is concerned I think that
to-day almost everyone would agree that his
behaviour?nay, more, his character?depends
almost entirely on his surroundings and upbringing-
What stronger proof of this could one want than
the increase in juvenile delinquency since the war
began. As you know, the papers recently have been
full of letters and articles debating what we shall do
about it. I myself have had my share of private
correspondence from people who have written to
me expressing their " horror at this hideous
menace to our country " and a great many other
things besides; letters in which I am asked to help
to persuade the Government to raise the birching
age ; even letters inviting me to travel long distances
in order to make a personal inspection of broken
windows and denuded apple trees.
1 am afraid that I have not answered all these
letters because I am not disposed to panic. This
increase in juvenile crime is serious?of course it
is serious?but I think people who talk about it
as a " hideous menace " and would have us raise
the birching age talk a great deal of nonsense. This
is no time to turn about and retrace our steps
towards Portsmouth gaol. I regard the increase in
juvenile delinquency as something which is un-
fortunate but only to be expected, for it is a by*
product of war. Exactly the same thing happened
An Address to the Magistrates of East Sussex, East Grinstead, November 19th, 1942.
MENTAL HEALTH
during the last war, and only the other day I was
reading an extract from the report of a " Committee
j Investigating the Causes for the Alarming
ncrease in Juvenile Delinquency in the Metropolis
Which was set up in 1816 immediately after the
"OlO SCI up
Napoleonic
T?twiic wars. . , .
How could it conceivably be otherwise . Jus
think of all the new factors during the present war
which have combined to put temptation in children s
Way: absent fathers on active service; mothers
Working in munition factories; the disruption o
tamilies by evacuation; bombed homes; closed
schools; the queer night life of the air raid shelter,
the very atmosphere of war conditions which tends
to develop in children the spirit of mischief which
Jhey all possess, and which is so closely related to
that spirit of adventure which is the heritage ot our
race and for which at this time we have such good
cause to be thankful. . f
. Personally I believe the greatest single cause 01
Juvenile delinquency is the disruption and breaking up
of family life. This is a recognition of the fact tnat
the two things which a child needs above all ar?
and guidance. Both should come from the chiia
?Wn parents. But I would emphasise that botn
?.Ve and guidance are needed; an excess ot love
Without wise guidance on the part of a demons ra
lTlve, but foolish parent may be wholly destructive.
1 believe the background of a happy and united
tamily iS) above au things, the most priceless endow-
ment of any boy or girl. It is surely no mere co-
incidence that the vast majority of the children wh
hnd their way into the juvenile court come trom
"roken or unhappy homes ! T
1 said " the majority As regards the others i
arh sufficiently old-fashioned to believe that the
still such a thing to befound, both in the juvenile cour
and outside it, as the ordinary common or garden
"Eighty child; the child who comes from a per-
?ectly good home, is in no sense unhappy, and w o
offence more often than not is the result
some sudden temptation or excess of animal spin .
: am also sufficiently old-fashioned to believe
!n such cases nothing is more appropriate, no
'ndeed more effective, than a little ordinary common
?r garden punishment?preferably at the han
?' the child's own parents or school teacher.
Granted, but here is the difficulty. How can
any court, without making full enquiry into a
Clrcumstances of the child before it, ?a?e up
'ts mind into which category he falls . W ?
"e is a perfectly normal child from a good
Who has unexpectedly kicked over the traces,
whether he falls into that larger category where the
offence is a symptom of conditions which mus
all costs be remedied if there is to be any hope a
aU of his growing up a decent and useful citizen .
. The answer is that without making enquiry i
^possible for the court to make any such disti -
hon. That is why in every case (unless, ot cou ,
is trivial?I am not discussing traffic onences
i?otball in the street) it is necessary to maxe a
thorough investigation into the child s bac gr
and his home surroundings. Indeed, if I was asked
to give advice to a magistrate newly appointed to the
juvenile court panel I should begin by saying this :
" Never in any case other than a trifling misdemean-
our make up your mind or commit yourself to any
decision as to treatment until you know all there is
to know?not just about the offence, but about the
offender. Your duty, laid down for you by
Parliament, is to have regard to the child's welfare.
How can you conceivably do this without knowing
anything about him ? "
In Section 35 of the Act of 1933 there is an
important proviso which lays down that in any
division the justices may direct that the investigation
shall be made by their probation officer. I believe
this point to be of the greatest possible importance,
that in every division the justices should take
advantage of this proviso, which also provides a
summary of the questions to be investigated?" the
child's home surroundings, school record, health
and character ". During the period of a remand,
or in certain circumstances before the child appears
in court at all, the probation officer prepares a
report covering all these points, thus providing a
pen-picture of the child's background. This report
is presented to the magistrates after, never before,
the child's guilt has been established. And only
when they have read the report and digested its
contents are the magistrates qualified to prescribe
treatment, including of course punishment, for
punishment is often an effective method of
treatment.
In a case where the child's surroundings are
perfectly normal, the magistrates may decide to
dismiss the charge?perhaps imposing a small fine
or, better still, ordering the offender to make
restitution. In another, where the home control
is weak, the magistrates may decide to re-enforce
the parents' supervision by placing the child on
probation. In a third case, they may think it well
to move an ill-disciplined child into lodgings or a
hostel. In a fourth, to commit him to an approved
school. . . .
Then you meet the fifth case; the case where,
despite all the pains your probation officer has
taken, you are conscious that you have not yet
got to the bottom of the trouble. Perhaps the
offence is peculiar or obviously attributable to some
sexual motive. Or perhaps the child behaves
strangely in court and appears to have what the
average layman calls a " kink ". Or he is so dull
that one is led to wonder whether he is mentally
defective. Or he is unhappy and antagonistic in
what appears outwardly to be a happy and united
home.
What then ? ? It is then that the wise and experi-
enced magistrate remembers that up till now, -
thorough as the enquiries may have been, they have
been concerned only with the external factors ; the
child's family, his home, his friends, his work and
play. Besides these there are a whole set of con-
ditions which may be described as internal and
which, often more powerfully than the external
MENTAL HEALTH
factors, govern the child's behaviour. These are
the conditions of physique, of intellect, of tempera-
ment and of the emotions. They can be gauged
neither by the school teacher nor by the probation
officer. There is only one person qualified to assess
them and that is the trained medical-psychologist,
working in the child guidance clinic.
" Child guidance clinic "?it is a simple and
descriptive title when you come to think of it and
in pleasing contrast with some of the long words
with which these psychologists tend to scare away
ordinary people like you and me. Yet I honestly
believe that the greater part of psychotherapy is
merely applied common sense; but common sense
in the hands of an expert at applying it.
Of course there are people who talk a great deal
of nonsense about psychology. I mean the cranks
who would divide us all into psychopathic groups
with weird and wonderful names. These are the
people who would have us believe that all criminals
have kinks, that punishment is out of date, and that
psychotherapy is a magic cure-all. I hold no brief
for that school of thought. At the other extreme is
the choleric old gentleman who condemns the whole
of psychology as new-fangled humbug. From the
depths of a club armchair he tells us all this pamper-
ing of naughty children makes him angry. When
he was a boy he was often naughty like most other
boys. And when that happened he was soundly
beaten, over and over and over again?as he richly
deserved. Moreover, it did him a great deal of
good. That's the way he was brought up?none
of this psychology" nonsense. . . . And having
delivered himself of this he leans back in his chair,
presumably to give us an opportunity of admiring
the glorious result. I hold no brief for him either.
But between these two extremes of thought there
is a half-way house. And those of us who have
personal experience of these things have learnt
that a child guidance clinic is neither a temple of
mysticism nor a den of black-magic. Nor is it a
place where children are hypnotised or mesmerised
or subjected to any other preternatural process.
We have also learnt that the medical-psychologist
(or, to use a more modern word, psychiatrist) is in
no sense a crank. On the contrary, that he is a fully
qualified doctor, who was trained just like all other
doctors and later specialized in the study of the mind
in much the same way as other doctors specialize
in the study of the stomach.
The full team of a properly staffed child guidance
clinic comprises at least three persons. First there is
the psychiatrist (or medical psychologist) whom I have
described. Then there is the educational psychologist,
not necessarily a doctor but a university graduate with
an honours degree in psychology and at least two
years' teaching experience, who has then undergone
a special training in a child guidance clinic. The
educational psychologist is concerned with testing
the child's mental ability, with certain forms of
remedial education, and with vocational guidance.
Thirdly, there is the psychiatric social worker, a
woman who has been specially trained and whose
work lies mainly with the family and the school-
She is responsible for making enquiries from the
sociological standpoint.
There are three ways in which a child guidance
clinic can help the court. First, it can diagnose the
mental condition of the child and tell the court in
clear and non-technical language how this con-
dition is related to his delinquency. Secondly, i1
can recommend treatment on purely sociological
lines?a change of school, special coaching, a
different kind of job, removal from home to foster-
parents or to an institution. Thirdly, in suitable
cases, it can provide psychotherapic treatment for
the problems of children and young persons.
Every child is different from other children. Every
problem differs from the last. Therefore there can
be no handing out of ready-made cures for lying or
stealing or stammering or dirty habits?whatever
may be the trouble. Every child is studied as an
individual reacting to his own peculiar environment;
which being so, not only the child must be considered
but also his history and his background. And of
course the most important feature of his back'
ground is his relationship to his own family.
Poor health results in poor control of a child's
impulses, and we all of us are familiar with the
peevishness and ill-temper which children?and
adults, too, for that matter?often exhibit when they
are out of sorts. The psychiatrist will also pay
special attention to any physical defect or deformity*
for in children these are matters to which conduct
is sometimes closely related. A stammer or a
squint which results in a child being teased at
school ; a lameness which prevents a boy taking
part in games; a facial disfigurement in a girl-'
all these things may have grave repercussions
on a child's behaviour, yet they are matters which
the child will rarely care to discuss?even in the
family circle.
So much for physical conditions in relation to
behaviour. An important part of every psychiatric
examination is the measuring of the child's intelli'
gence. This is a task usually assigned to the
educational psychologist and is achieved by a series
of verbal and performance tests designed to gauge
the level of intelligence without regard to the standard
of the child's educational attainment?which is
something quite different.
One of the first things we are told in any report
from a psychologist is the child's " intelligence
quotient", or "I.Q." This is sometimes expressed,
not as a percentage, but as " mental age ". Thus
the psychologist may tell us that although the child
before us was born fifteen years ago, his intelligence
is no greater than that of an average child of, say,
twelve. In finding the right treatment this is a very
important thing for the court to know.
Sometimes of course the child who appears to be
slow-witted is in fact not lacking in intelligence at
all. His backwardness is due rather to educational
retardation and his delinquency is often directly
the result of his failure at school in some specific
subject. Take reading for example. Sometimes a
MENTAL HEALTH
hild of normal intelligence and of average aptitude
n all other subjects simply cannot learn to read. I
,ave known many such children. His failure is
Ue perhaps to some mental hitch which needs
nravelling. But the result is a positive loathing of
?oks, arising no doubt from the fact that whenever
? attempts to read aloud in class he is laughed at.
Js loathing of books leads not unnaturally to a
atred of school. And this leads to constant
ruancy. The flnaj resu]t is that the child, un-
'sciplined, untaught, and with time on his hands,
jj? trouble. And so he is brought before the
J venile court. In wartime especially, due to the
Partial breakdown of the educational system in
e~ain areas, such cases are common.
th r remedy is not ^ birch. Once you know
t e facts surely it is only common sense to try to
ach the child to read. If you succeed you will
*his dislike for school and with that his tendency
play truant. And by so doing the chances are
t at V?u will also cure his delinquency. But who is
teach the child to read ? His school teacher
jj-0111?he has already failed and the child regards
m as an enemy. Someone must be found?some-
e insight and understanding?who will
j* ntly lead him to an interest in books and will help
111 conquer an aversion which has become deep-
Wh" ^ ^at one t"le special j?^s f?r
ten the educational psychologist in achild guidance
c,1mc is trained.
b ! ^ave emphasized how material to a child's
tiaviour are his physical condition and intelligence.
c e Psychiatrist will also have regard to a third
i n<hti?n which is just as important?if not more
^ Portant?than the first two. That is the child's
otional make-up or " temperament ". Tempera-
ent has been defined as the sum total of all those
rsonal qualities of mind which neither constitute
th r ar(r Pervaded by the intelligence. Here again in
s e child guidance clinic the psychiatrist employs
Pecial methods of assessment. He realizes, for
ample, that many so-called " problem " children
e e children who for one reason or another are
tjP^iencing emotional difficulties which manifest
emselves in an imagined sense of insecurity; an
tJje<rUrity of which the child's parents, his school
be ?' ma8istrates in the juvenile court, may
d entirely unaware. I should say that this con-
ch'^11 Particularly prevalent amongst evacuated
dren, haunted as many of them are by the secret
^~~and sometimes I am afraid not unfounded?fear
at their parents no longer love them and do not
Wa"t.them back.
or ff s?nse of insecurity, this urgent need for notice
j" affection, may occur in children whose homes, to
or me or to our most experienced probation
on uS' aPPear beyond reproach. Nothing shows
. the surface. All that is apparent to the un-
lj.ainecl eye is that Tom, who was always such a good
tie boy, has suddenly and for no accountable
, ason become a persistent little thief. No one
nows quite when the change took place and it
Ccurs to no one to connect it with the birth of a
: baby brother a year ago, or with some other family
" event which has implanted in Tom's head?probably
: quite wrongly?that he is unwanted and unloved,
i Constant punishment has no effect, for the sense
of injury has not been treated. It is there festering
all the time with deplorable consequences upon the
child's behaviour. Tom's stealing is not by way of
conscious revenge. On the contrary the motive is
probably quite unconscious, for his offences are
against all and sundry. He may not be wanted but
he will be noticed: better be prominent as a thief
than not prominent at all.
Please do not misunderstand me. I am not
suggesting that every case of childish naughtiness
is due to some deep-rooted cause of this kind. I
have already declared that for the ordinary naughty
child I believe nothing to be more salutary than a
little ordinary punishment. But, believe me, there
are quite a number of Toms, and it's important to
look out for them. So when all ordinary methods
fail, whether you are a parent, or a school teacher,
or?like myself?a magistrate, remember that you
have a child guidance clinic at hand. Don't be
put off by those who say that to send a child to a
clinic will be to increase his self-importance and
make matters worse. On the contrary, having
regard to his difficulties, a little individual attention
may be the best way of helping him to adjust.
Moreover, a similar objection might be made in the
case of many children who are required to attend
an orthopaedic clinic or any other place where
individual treatment is given; and yet the advantages
are known to outweigh the disadvantages. So send
him to the clinic for a report.
What happens there ? A quiet talk between
Tom and the doctor provides a clue. The parents
are sent for. Indeed in every case where it is
practicable they are encouraged to attend the clinic
as well. They confirm, now they come to think of
it, that it was about the time baby was born that the
trouble with Tom began. In the friendly atmosphere
of the consulting room, and to a sympathetic person
who is evidently not out to attach blame, all sorts
of things emerge; things which an anxious mother
doesn't mind confiding to this understanding
doctor, but which wild horses would not induce her
to admit to the village schoolmistress whom she
will meet again at the school prizegiving !
The parents are given advice: to adopt a different
attitude with Tom; not to harp on his past mis-
deeds; to be more lavish in their display of affection;
perhaps to entrust him with certain duties concerning
the care of the baby. And Tom himself, after a
few visits to the clinic for a heart to heart talk with
his new friend?who has such funny puzzles in her
room?is at length led to accept as trivial the happen-
ing which once loomed so large. Eventually, as the
result, he becomes once more a normal, happy and
well-behaved small boy. Such is psychiatric treat-
ment, despite its unpronouncable name. And one
is left wondering whether a child guidance clinic
might not be more aptly named " a clinic for the
wise guidance of parents
