Clifford Beers
=============== 

A great reformer has passed on. Clifford Whittingham
Beers died on July 9th, 1943, at Providence, U.S.A., but
his fine enthusiastic and farseeing spirit has left behind it
work which persists and grows. At a time when such
ideas as his were regarded as almost too progressive, and,
in some quarters indeed, as subversive and revolutionary,
he, a recovered patient, demonstrated the value of
individual study of each patient, and a more hopeful
attitude towards the whole question of insanity and its
treatment. He gained support from some of the best
men in America, both doctors and others, amongst whom
Professor William James, the psychologist and writer,
stands out.
As a man he left no stone unturned in his work. He
was encouraging, idealistic, and persuasive, and never
lost sight of his goal?the treatment of man to enable
him to reach the best that he is capable of in a well
balanced body, mind and spirit. The immense help that
his wife gave him contributed very largely to his capacity
for unremitting labour for so many years.
Clifford Beers established an international reputation
as the founder of the Mental Hygiene movement over
thirty-five years ago. He first attracted public attention
after publishing his remarkable book, " A Mind that
Found itself", which describes his experiences and the
treatment he received in hospitals while himself under-
going mental treatment. The wide interest which this
aroused won him the support of many prominent
Americans, and also of the Rockefeller Foundation, the
Commonwealth Fund and the Milbank Memorial Fund,
as a result of which he organized the Connecticut Society
for Mental Hygiene, from which emanated the National
Committee for Mental Hygiene in New York and the
many Mental Hygiene Societies throughout the United
States.
Mr. Beers was especially interested in the founding of
the National Council for Mental Hygiene in England in
1922,and attended the Association's first Annual Meeting.
Thereafter he kept in close touch with its work and
progress, and on those occasions on which he visited
Europe he never failed to spend some of his time with
the Council. During a visit to this country in 1937 he
had the honour of being received by the Council's
President, the late Duke of Kent.
Through his inspiration Mental Hygiene organizations
were established in no less than 53 countries, and close
liaison was maintained with all of these by the setting up
of an International Mental Hygiene Committee. The
first International Congress on Mental Hygiene, organized
by Mr. Beers himself, was held at Washington, D.C., in
May, 1930, and was attended by <pver 4,000 persons,
including delegates from Mental Hygiene and other social
welfare organizations from all parts of the globe.
Mr. Beers retired from active work with the movement
in 1939, and his death occurred after a long period of
ill-health.
