Observations on the Relationship between Child and Adult Neurosis
=================================================================

:Author: R. G. McINNES, M.R.C.P.E.

,A study of the relationships between neurosis in
in i S- anc* in children necessarily involves the
fusion of all those factors which go to the com-
position of thf npnrotir- r?if?tntv? Tl-io mflnonm
and in children necessarily involves the
ors which
ot - of the neurotic picture. The influence
bi ^redity, of constitution, of biochemical and
and -Sical changes arising from somatic causes,
be ^sturbance of endocrine function, must all
?nfl n *nto account as well as the psychological
that^1106 external and internal. It is obvious
^ a brief talk I cannot hope to deal with this
a^.e range of considerations; but while selecting
of rat*\er neglected aspects of the psychogenesis
not be taken as indicating disparagement of the
basic factors which I have mentioned. Indeed
it is my view that the value of the purely psycho-
genic factors can only be properly assessed when
they are seen in the setting of a wide psycho-
biological concept of the genesis of neurotic states.
Having entered this caveat I feel that I may now
proceed without fear of distortion to give you a
few impressions arising from clinical experience
regarding the relationship between child and adult
in so far as the development of neurosis is concerned.

- In-the?first~place, although one would have
to states for special mention, I want" thought that the work of Freud, on the all-important
ake it clear that this present preference should matter of the mother-child relationship, would
* Adapted from a talk given at Oxford to Psychiatric Social Service Students.
have effectively directed attention not only in
theory but in practice to the enlightened manage-
ment of the early days and weeks of the infant's
life, there is as yet remarkably little evidence that
such a development has taken place to any save
the slightest degree. In fact it seems to me that
in the management of infants and young children,
mothers, nurses, and even doctors have not yet
reached the stage where the application of sound
principles arising from analytic experience is yet
a practicable proposition.

It is often difficult to get accurate information
about infant feeding, but in those cases where it
can be traced, there is frequently a story of difficulty
in getting the infant to suck, impatient handling
by mother or nurse, a too early (and often un-
justifiable) resort to the bottle, weaning problems
and the like. Maternity nurses have a good deal
to answer for in this respect, and many doctors
just as much; but one looks forward to the time
when things will be left more to nature, when the
accoucheur and his assistants will attend to the
general psychological atmosphere of the birth room,
and interfere as little as possible in the establish-
ment of a good bond between mother and child.
With even the most enlightened and respectful
doctors and nurses, however, this emotional bond
will not be well established unless the mother
herself is in a well poised emotional state. This
in turn depends far more on what kind of person
she is than upon what she tries to do to or for the
baby. This is simply another way of saying that
her unconscious emotional atmosphere enwraps the
child in a way which influences its behaviour to a
profound extent. R. D. Fairbairn (1) emphasizes
the primary emotional needs of the child as being
the need to be loved and the need to have its
own love accepted as being good. The failure
to satisfy either of these needs leads to basic
insecurity which may later give rise to neurosis
or even more profound disorders.

The second prominent impression on looking
back collectively so to speak over the histories of
neurotic patients, is the surprising extent to which
the parents of such patients seem to have failed
either to sense or to perceive the love needs of their
children. Is this failure of insight a product of the
age of scientific materialism ? Have parents
become too mechanized preferring to think (if
they think at all) that to be loving is to be slushy
and sentimental, and that to accept love gladly
and freely from their children is to indulge a ten-
dency productive of a family of " cissies " ? The
dominance of intellect in the present age has had
as its counterpart a devaluation of the emotional
life. Yet there is nothing more devastating than
a vapid and sterile agreeableness which is simply
the denial of natural emotional responses. No
one would advocate a completely uncontrolled
display of emotion?there must be some kind of
form within which the emotional life can express
itself; but this framework should be flexible
within the widest limits of social and moral
acceptability, and the aim should be to keep i* ?
its barest minimum. (In parenthesis one of tl1
penalties of being excessively well mannered 1
that one is liable to develop emotional constipation^'
?a very prevalent social disease which leads
many unpleasant side effects. The thing
all others for which the true aristocracy are to D
envied is their ability, through long generation
of maturing tradition, to be very affectiona
without being maudlin on the one hand, and, 0
the other, to be extremely disagreeable with?u.
being offensive.) Many people have lost the kna?
of being emotionally natural, and the effect of d}1
on children is bound to make for insecurity.
the other side of the picture large families are n?
uncommon where the parents and children are ?
terms of the freest emotional relationship ; roVV
are not infrequent, but just because they occu
spontaneously they are seldom serious, and a bne
engagement clears the air ; demonstrations 0
affection are just as frequent but never forced 0
formal, and consequently never embarrassing
Such conditions favour the development of secufl i
and poise in the children, and one is often str^cn
by the sureness of touch which such people?-ofte.
quite unintellectual?display in their persona
relationships. <?

To give a complete account of the effects 0
parental influence on the laying down of has1
emotional trends in children would be impossible
but there are three further points worthy of mention^
The first I have already alluded to, namely
influence of the unconscious emotional atmospher^j
There are a great many parents who behave vve
towards their children, but whose efforts in dn
direction are brought to nothing because of deep
seated disharmony in their own minds. Qul
recently I had a mother and a small girl of f0^
brought to me. The child would not or coU. s
not sleep upstairs unless the mother came upstalf
too. On the face of it there was no obvious causey
the mother was sensible, intelligent and orders
in her attitude to the child. She was affectiona
and considerate too. The father was steads
perhaps rather unimaginative. Apart from
sleeplessness the little girl showed no other disorde _
The mother gave me an account of two of her <?vV
dreams which on analysis revealed an unconsciou
hostility to her husband, who was in fact a fat"?
figure carrying strong ambivalence for his wd'
With the emergence of this material the chn
began to sleep naturally. It is perhaps not t0
great an assumption to say that the child ^
unconsciously influenced by the true situation'
and reacted to it by anxiety at night. . .
Parents need never imagine that by behaving
well in front of the children they are therefof
shielding them from psychological harm, v
the contrary, the damage although not imrneo1'
ately visible may be all the more profound f?
being left unhealed at the time. The broken hon1
with overt marital disharmony is of course serion
for the emotional poise of the children, but w
snK f1106 unconscious hostilities may be more
title and prolonged in its effects. What is the
echanism whereby unconscious content in the
f, rents is communicated to the unconscious of
cin " The Jungians might call it " parti-
Pation mystique" ; whatever its name and
Th*6' it is very real.

1 he second point I wish to mention is perhaps
'0fe prosaic, and is consequently overlooked in
lt ? Present-day welter of analytic theory and practice.
haK-Slmply t^le Question ?f the inculcation of good
dv ? ^ thought and conduct. Life is
j^namic, but it should also have form and order.
Wo^6 already alluded to the necessity for a frame-
fra Habit is one of the components of that
halveVVOr^' anc* development of good or bad
WitV ^ays a Part in formation of the pattern
In t ^ movement of life will go on.
r luting adult neurotics it is easier to get good
With Pe?P'e who have been brought up
a sense of order, of appropriateness, of the
ness of things, and more difficult with those
a? ?Se habits of thought and conduct are shapeless
floppy.

to K fashioned training in good habits is not
-J-, be despised. It can of course be overdone.
q e day when children were obliged to read the
ei??d Book on Sunday afternoons while their
ers snored on the antimacassars need only be
oderately mourned, and yet it is not at all certain
at roaming the streets or gaping from the two-
g n"les at Hollywood close-ups is a particularly
th? . exchange. It should be borne in mind
fin ln training children there must always be that
anH Maintenance of equilibrium between freedom
th 0rder- The two are not incompatible ; indeed
jse Mo^ one understands about true order (that
re' i- inner order of the mind) the more one
c 'zes that freedom and inner order are organically
rnPlementary. This is the true inwardness of
reV ?Vo'ution of Christian democratic forms. The
anrf?U-s-way iniplies inner order of mind
anH ?P*rtt in conformity with religious experience
j lts dogmatic statement. It also paradoxically
Plies freedom?freedom from the constantly
Curring alternatives of the material world, and
freedom for the full development of the
gnest spiritual attainments of which man is
Pable. (The danger about the present trend
e ^ards social planning is that it will become an
in lr! itself. Like the inculcation of good habits
children, social planning should only be a
niponent part of the form in which human
. e\ngs can be free to develop themselves; otherwise
,.ls merely a reversion to a more immature and
^archical level of existence.)

J here comes a point in the treatment of many
eurotics when the usual reductive procedures
ave been completed, when explanation has done
J tt can, and when persuasion, encouragement
nd exhortations to correct adjustment have gone
. ar as possible. Not infrequently it is at that
Point that the basic trouble becomes appallingly
obvious. It can be put quite simply in terms of
the neurotic's question: "Why adjust at all? Is
this attempt to achieve a common standard of social
behaviour, of morality, of professional or business
ability all that there is to strive after ? Is this so-
called normality, this prosaic pattern of the ordinary
the chief end of all the labour and sweat ? " One
is bound to agree that if it were so, the effort would
scarcely be worth while.

Psychotherapy should properly have more than
one aim. It should concern itself with the removal
of symptoms either directly or by the reduction
of the conflicts from which they arise; next, with
the establishment of healthy attitudes and habits
of thought; but last and most fundamental of all
it should concern itself with giving to the patient, or
at least in assisting him to find in himself an individ-
ual category of values, essentially creative in nature
and differing from the ordinary categories of social
and moral values in the same way as meaning
differs from measurement. Behind all the enormous
amount of minor neurosis there is a background
of disorder and disintegration which can probably
only be adequately stated and fully appreciated
in philosophical or religious terms. In psycho-
logical terms one could say that the disorder
consists of the failure to establish a sufficiently
meaningful relationship with the non-material
aspects of life. The failure in fact to develop a
philosophy or a religion. (This line of thought
leads of course to many thorny problems, such as
religious education in schools, the boundaries of
the psychotherapist's functions, and many others.)
I believe that the essence of the difficulty lies not
so much in the absence of a body of religious or
philosophical belief, as in the disuse of the function
of mind which normally establishes significant
relationships with the realities which are con-
cretized in such beliefs. Most people are still
bemused by the discoveries of science, and have
ceased to wonder about that which is still un-
discovered and indeed probably undiscoverable.
The category of values has become horizontal
to the exclusion of the vertical (to use another
figure). Herein, lies one of the pitfalls of social
service work. It seems to me that social service
workers spend so much time finding out all about
people, their age, occupation, size of house,
husband's salary, family history, illnesses, etc.,
that they have no time left for finding their way
into them. And yet it is only in so far as they
do so that they are able to influence them effectively
and permanently. It is only in so far as they can
employ a similar category of values (talk the same
language) that what they do and say and the way
they look and think will become meaningful for
their patients. Lawrence Hyde (2) puts the matter
as follows : "Although detachment is of the
utmost value if you are concerned with fossils
or spiral nebulae, when it is exercised in the field
of sociology it happens to produce the unfortunate
result that it prohibits you from dealing with exactly
that type of data which, from the point of view
of understanding and controlling life, it is most
important that you should handle. It is not that
detachment in this field is undesirable, but that if
you exercise it rigorously only certain limited
aspects of the question can present themselves
to your attention. It ensures the reliability of
such conclusions as you actually reach, but implies
at the same time that they are of a comparatively
sterile nature. This circumstance should be obvious
enough. Yet the sociologists persistently fail to
recognize its significance. They talk instead as
if it is only to the detached and scientific eye that
the truth about human beings can ever be apparent."
This passage, although perhaps a slight over state-
ment of the position, brings out clearly the point
which I am trying to make.

Now it seems to me that the " other " category of
values, i.e. the non-scientific immeasurable category
is spiritual and creative in nature, and that the
religious function (which I believe to be common
to man) is the instrument by which we may be
enabled to reach a mutual and meaningful apprecia-
tion of these values. If this is true it is little wonder
that people who have never had an opportunity
to develop the religious function often find them-
selves adrift in a world of shifting, impermanent,
and shallow values, and for those of tender mind
this is an experience which readily leads to insecurity,
conflict, disorderly behaviour and neurosis. Jung
in his " Modern man in Search of a Soul" goes
so far as to say that among all his patients there
has not been one over the age of 35 whose problem
in the last resort was not that of finding a religious
outlook on life.

This digression has taken us a long way from the
question of habit formation, and yet behind it
there has been the thought that in so far as the
exercise of the religious or integrating function
may be made a habit, it is probably the most
valuable one which can be bestowed upon any
child by those in contact with it. Before leaving
this topic, I should make clear that I am using the
word religious in its literal sense. Perhaps a better
word would be " integrating" function?thai
which relates us to the wholeness of things. In
no way do I use the word religious as denoting any
particular creed or sectarian belief.

One further impression from clinical experience
deserves mention before concluding. It is thai
of the great prevalence of devaluation and differentia-
tion in neurotics. Sometimes this is a primarj
causal factor, as for example, where a child becomes
devalued and differentiated from others by loss oi
parental love, or by frank rejection. The things
which can lead to devaluation are innumerable,
complex, and sometimes very subtle ; and at the
hands of insensitive parents or teachers children
may suffer severe damage in this respect in an
imperceptible way. Later, devaluation and differ-
entiation are often secondary to the emergence
of overt neurotic symptoms and may also of course
follow any organic illness particularly if the debility
is of long standing. By the time the adult stage
of neurosis is reached there is often a fixed sens?
of inferiority, of difference from other people whictl
is extremely difficult to combat therapeutically'
especially if it has been gradually built up on an
ascending series of self convictions.
The real remedy for this lies in a greater degree
of insight among parents, teachers and all
have the care and management of children.
With regard to the future of psychiatric worK
with neurotics, one cannot get away from the feeling
that the main effort is at present misdirected. The
enormous amount of time spent on treating
neurotics does not produce an adequate result
in the social and economic sense. It is true, n
may do so in the individual sense, and this must
be kept in mind, but sooner or later we shall have
to start at the other end. Even child guidance does
not go far enough back. What is needed is ?
much greater depth of insight spread over a mucn
wider number of people. By insight I mean more
than learning by rote of what is good or bad
bringing up children. I mean the possession of a
sense of values of a creative and meaningful
kind, in addition to the scale of material values
by which we at present mostly live.

The child must come to be honoured not only
for what it can do, or can be made to do, but for
what it is. How is this kind of insight to t>e
achieved and spread in the face of superficiality'
indifference, and frank hostility ? The first requisite
is that those who are trying to spread it must have
insight themselves. "You cannot do good unless
you are good " it has been said. This means that
all doctors, clergymen, psychotherapists, teachers?
social workers and everyone whose profession
brings them into influential contact with human
beings ought ideally to be possessed of greater
insight than is common.

To some this kind of insight is a kind of gift* a
kind of flair for human beings. To most it comeSr
if it comes at all through contact with parents wh?
already possess it. Others may acquire it labori"
ously by self analysis, or by some form of psych0'
logical analysis provided that it includes the dis-
covery of a philosophy; others achieve it by way
of religion. The vast majority hardly possess
it at all.

We are really very much in the position of having
grown so far away from nature that we have to
re-learn laboriously how to be natural; on another
level it is perhaps equally true that having once
fallen from grace we have to climb towards ^
again with much sweat and travail. Work witn
neurotics, both children and adults, cannot fa1
to arouse an acute consciousness of the terrible
inadequacy of our comprehension of these problems-
I am well aware that this paper has only touched
upon one or two aspects of the neurotic problem*
The great importance of heredity, constitution-
endocrine influences, and other biophysical ?r
biochemical variations must be given due place-
There is also a vast field for the investigation of
social and economic conditions as factors in the
of^ls of neurosis. Any adequate formulation
in J . neurotic problem, either in general or in the
?yidual case must tak6 all of these into account,
p * have seemed to emphasize certain purely
jchologiad aspects of the situation to the exclu-
is n of other equally important considerations, it
^Partly because lack of space makes it impossible
, state all the arguments fully, and particularly
cjv,Ca1VLSe aspects upon which I have chosen to
the6 are those which are often ignored. None
p '^ss they ought to be tackled by orthodox
all s' who, as far as their understanding
a ?Ws> are in a position to give due weight to each
tyu eYery influence in the production of neurosis,
of neec*ed the spanning type of mind capable
c eding in poise all the elements which go to the
thi ? 0sit\on of the neurotic situation. Whether
but1S the compass of man is open to question
11 is the goal to strive after. The sectionalism
which is still so much in evidence is a hindrance
rather than a help to its achievement. The gaps
for example between psychiatry and medicine,
between medicine and religion, between orthodox
psychiatry and the analytic schools, even the gap
between one analytic school and another remain
to be bridged. Diversity there must be, but it
should be diversity related to a central unifying
principle. In a larger sense it is this central unifying
principle which is longed for and sought after all
over the world to-day.

References
-----------

(1) W. R. D. Fairbairn: A Revised Psychopathology of
. the Psychoses and Psychoneuroses. Int. Journal
Psycho-analysis, vol. xxii, pts. 3 and 4.
(2) Lawrence Hyde: The Learned Knife, p. 59. Howe,
1928.
