The Exceptional Child
======================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
By Maximilian P. E. Groszmann. New York: Charles
Scribner's Sons, 1917. Pp. xxxiii+7G4.
In the foreword Dr. Groszmann states that "the purpose of the book is to
give a perspective of the entire situation, and to suggest ways and means of
coping with the problem in its various aspects." Again he says, "It has been my
endeavor to write the book in simple language and in a style which will appeal
even to readers who have but a modicum of scientific training and vocabulary."
Both of these objects have been accomplished. The book is encyclopedic in
scope. Nearly every chapter could be expanded into a large volume, yet the
material is outlined rather than condensed to a technical statement of present
knowledge of the topic. The result is a book which gives to the general reader
a very fair view of the problems of this branch of applied psychology, and to the
student an incentive for intensive work along one or more specific lines of research.
A great aid to the second type of reader is the bibliography which, while not by
any means complete, covers twenty-seven pages.
The body of the book is divided into three parts. Part I treats of the
"Problem of the Individual Child." In eleven chapters the author presents
not the "problem" but the "problems" involved in the classification and treatment of children. The titles of the chapters show the extent of the scheme.
The educational problem in general, the problem of efficiency, different civilization levels in modern society, classification and terminology, the normal child,
potentially normal children, exceptionally bright children, psychopathic disorders and psychopathic constitutions, the feebleminded group, juvenile delinquency, sexual perversion, and prostitution are the topics touched on in this
part. Perhaps the best of these is the one on "different civilization levels,"
and the treatment of "the feebleminded group" is like it in sanity and breadth
of view.
In Part II "The Problem of Clinical Research and Diagnosis" is presented.
This has to do almost entirely with tests and measurements with their standardizations. The presentation and criticism of the Binet Scale of Intelligence
are excellent. One sentence sums up the fatal defect in the scale from the standpoint of educational diagnosis. "The Binet scale fails to reveal the quality of a
child's mind, and after all it is this quality alone which is of educational value,
and the determination of which helps us to make an educational diagnosis and
prognosis." The chapter, "Schedule of Tests" mentions and illustrates a number of well-known tests used by the author in his own work. Here he would
seem to have fallen into the error which he disavows elsewhere. Almost any
intelligent teacher can give these tests, but how? And what use are the results
292 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
after they are given? On page 275, he says, "The technic and routine should be
so simplified that intelligent and well-trained school superintendents, supervising
principals and even teachers may be found to be willing and capable of receiving
special training in conducting their local educational clinics." But, alas, these
people are not "well-trained" in the basic principles of psychology necessary
to give and understand the tests, nor are they willing to get the special training,
and the author adds "Naturally the results of their testing can be only tentative,
but it will help them to differentiate between children of different types, and to
make them desirous of referring cases to psychological and medical experts and
clinics for further advice." So it would if the ideal situation suggested by
Dr. Groszmann could be realized. If this book stimulates the demand for a real
knowledge of psychology by candidates for certificates as teachers and supervisors, it will do a great work. The danger is that the possession of the book may
be thought a sufficient equipment for diagnosing and prescribing for the exceptional child.
Part III, "The Problems of Prevention, Adjustment and Organization," is
almost a treatise on education. A chapter points out in a general way the lack
of legal provisions for exceptional children. Other chapters discuss the kindergarten, home life and home education and the provisions for exceptional children
in schools and institutions. The criticisms of these provisions are well founded
and constructive. Perhaps the best chapter is that on "The Training of
Teachers." "True teaching means preparing a child to understand the world in
terms of his own experience; placing him and his conduct in harmony with a
social body, so that he may become a constructive factor in community life and
avail himself of the opportunities for right living which are offered to him by
his fellow men." To this end the teacher should be trained to know children.
Psychology, sociology, physiology and hygiene are the basic studies. "Student
teachers should be given ample opportunity of practical experience with children". . . . "Compared with the problems of this practical child psychology
the problems of subjects and methods will seem almost insignificant."
Not the least interesting part of the book is the "Medical Symposium," a
series of twenty-five articles on special aspects of the problem by eminent
specialists. These deal with causes, effects, and treatments of various departures
from the normal anatomy, physiology and psychology of children; and should
prove very helpful to the student of child psychology.
While, as the author explicitly admits, the book is open to criticism in places,
on the whole it is very suggestive and is written from a sane, practical point of
view. The danger has been pointed out above, but that is not the fault of the
book. It is rather the weakness of teachers who are satisfied to know something
in general about children instead of being eager to know and understand the
individual child.
H. J. H.
