A Study of 100 Retarded Fourth Grade Pupils Tested by the Binet Scale
======================================================================

By William I. Lacy,
Northwestern University, Evanston, III.
In the spring of 1917, a study was made of all the slow progress
children of the fourth grade in the schools of district 75, Evanston,
Illinois, as a part of the general movement of the administration
of the Evanston schools for a complete survey and analysis of conditions looking toward a higher efficiency in the work of the schools.
The present study has to do with the results of the Binet tests given
to one hundred of these children. The Stanford Revision of the
Binet Scale was used.
The one hundred children who comprise the basis for this
study are distributed in an even, and what may be considered a
very fair manner, throughout the school system. There has.been
taken into consideration the social status of the groups used, and
as fair an intermingling and distribution obtained as possible. The
one hundred children are selected from four groups, one quarter
from each. There are, in this district of Evanston, eight schools.
Four of these schools draw almost entirely from the more favored
social stratum of the city and have a comparatively small number
of colored children. These four schools have been put into Group I.
Two schools are so situated that the school population is somewhat mixed, the children coming both from wealthy homes
and from the homes of the laboring class. There is found
a moderate percentage, though not a preponderance, of colored
children, in these two schools. They comprise Group II. The
other two groups are from two schools, in each of which the pupils
form a group by themselves. In these two schools we find the
largest number of retarded children, probably half of all the retarded
children in the fourth grade of the district. In both of them, the
bulk of the enrolment is from the less favored social stratum and
there is also a large percentage of colored children. These are
designated Group III and Group IV.
In a study of medians based upon the Intelligence Quotient
of these four groups, we find that two groups have a median Intelligence Quotient of 88, one of 90 and one of 91. This would indicate
that the study is based on a fairly uniform group of children, despite
(16)
A STUDY OF 100 RETARDED PUPILS. 17
the fact that they come from these different social conditions. In
a comparison of the distribution of the children of the various groups
according to their mental state in terms of the Intelligence Quotient,
it is found that the children from Group III are more bunched, none
of these being found in the lowest or "feebleminded" group, nor
any in the superior intelligence class, but that there is a larger number
of "border line" cases (I. Q. 71-80) than in any of the other three
groups. The other three groups have a fairly uniform distribution,
though Group IV presents none who class above normal (I. Q.
91-110).
It must be remembered that all of the children comprising
the basis of this study are what are known as "retards;" That is,
not that they are, necessarily, over age for the grade in which they
are found, but that they have, at one time or other, repeated one
or more years of their school work.
In making a comparison of the distribution of the Intelligence
Quotient of the 100 pupils, with the probability curve, or normal
intelligence distribution, we find in figure I what we would naturally
expect to find in a group of retarded children, that the curve inclines
to the left. But if we consider those having intelligence quotients
of 91 to 110 as normal (Terman's Standard), we find that the largest
per cent of the group come within that class. While almost as many
are in the lower group, which may be called the dull group, yet
it is a very significant thing that the largest per cent of these children
who have been made to repeat one or more years of their school
work, have normal intelligence. We find, further, that there are
A Comyiairiiott \nlc\\u)ev?tt Quotients o^.
too Rttftviei A-XW G-tftie VL\v'A;> u>A:Vv Normal C UT?t/
OuMft^g E.van?to?.-X);?,t 15.
FiaUBE I
Figure I
18 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
two children who have superior intelligence (I. Q. 111-120) and
one with very superior intelligence (I. Q. 128).
In figure II we find that by far the largest per cent of the
children have a mental age of nine or ten years. Figuring six as
the normal age for entrance to the first grade, nine would be the
logical age for a child starting the fourth grade. Nine and ten
are usually considered the fourth grade age; so from that standpoint, the greater number of the 100 children in the fourth grade
are in the right grade for their mental ability. But sixteen per cent
have eleven year intelligence. These, according to normal conditions, should be in the higher fifth or lower sixth grades, but here
they are in the fourth grade, all of them having been compelled to
repeat at least one year of their school work. Three per cent are
of a mental age of twelve, which would naturally put them in the
sixth or seventh grades. That is, mentally they are capable of
doing sixth or seventh grade work. One even has a mental age of
fifteen, which would normally put him in High School. Does this
not immediately raise the question as to the method of promotion
generally in use?
In order to see the problem here presented more clearly, we
have distributed children by half year mental ages (as shown in
figure III), into the grades where they would normally be at the
corresponding chronological age. We are going on the supposition
that a child with a mental age of six years is mentally capable of
doing first grade, first semester work; one of six and a half, first
grade second semester work; one of seven, second grade first semester
work, etc. A child's chronological age does not necessarily determine
his ability to do the work of any particular grade, but a normal child
Ots\ri\lvA.?ow Mental A^ts lDo\??.^avit\ ^"U*. G.vaAt Vuv?;\k.
tvDmtVo-n. - On\. *)5.
AS
3Sr
3?
vyr iHr io</r ny >*-y H)r i+fT '*1"
A/lentaL A(jCFigure II
Figure II
A STUDY OF 100 RETARDED PUPILS. 19
of the age specified is mentally capable,?that is, he is intelligent
enough, to do the work of the grades as outlined above. Every
effort should be made to place each child in the grade where the
work is of such difficulty as to fit his intelligence. Figure III shows
how widely distributed throughout the grades these 100 children,
all of whom are in the fourth grade (or possibly owing to the time
of year the tests were given, in the lower fifth grade), ought to be.
There are three in the group who are not mentally capable of doing
the work of the fourth grade, but they are being kept in the grade,
grappling with work which they are mentally unfit to do, with consequent detriment both to themselves and to the other children in the
grade, who are having to drag this weight along with them. Twentythree are capable of doing fifth grade, second semester work, but for
some reason are being kept in the fourth grade, or the early fifth.
Sixteen of the group are mentally capable of doing sixth grade work,
but they are being kept back in the fourth grade, thus wasting for
them two years of their school lives. One girl with an intelligence
quotient of 104 and a mental age of eleven years, thus belonging in
grade V, although she was just finishing fourth grade work, was
questioned regarding her work and her attitude toward it. She
Grade100 \?ctaviSei ^t\v ClYaii. flx^vAi iu <yradei
\su fAt?U\ (Xcve..
3rd (i rode It
CL
*rd. Grade ,
6
CL
itri Grade 0
a
Cf'i. Grade 0
a
7ik Grade I?
a
hL Qradc lr
a.
%L Qradc ^
CL
/Otk Qradt lr
a.
mmm:
m
EZ>
^\>avkslo*\- 75"
3*
Figure III
Figure III
20 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
enjoyed her school work, she said, but found the work she was
doing very easy, and also rather monotonous. She had changed
schools the preceding fall, having completed the work of the fourth
grade in the school from which she came. Mentally she was capable
of going right on without repeating one year's work. A boy of
twelve, with an intelligence quotient of 128, showed a mental age
of fifteen. He was still in the fourth grade, when mentally he was
actually capable of doing high school work. His teacher said
that he was inattentive in his work, stayed away from school on
the least pretext, and therefore did not keep up in his studies. When
questioned he said he "hated most of his studies," but during the
test he showed the keenest interest in solving some of the difficult
problems in the "superior adult" tests. We are inclined to believe
that the chief difficulty in the case of this boy is that the work was
not of a sufficient degree of difficulty for his intelligence. Lack of
attention and interest are bound to follow if the work is not such as
to tax the mind sufficiently to stimulate interest and attention.
As Goddard says, "this is the type of child that makes the truant
and incorrigible. He takes no interest in his work, because it is
below him, and consequently he plays truant, or gets into mischief."
This boy was failing in his studies because he was not interested in
the work, and he was not interested because the work was too easy
for him, and yet he was being kept back in the grade, which merely
aggravated the unfortunate situation.
Of the 100 children, 64 are mentally retarded, for their chronological age. If we take actual half year measurements, 79 are of
mental age lower than their chronological age. But allowing for a
difference of half a year, either way, which would make a normal
condition, there are of these 100, thirty who may be considered
normal in intelligence, yet most of whom are over age for their
grade. Six of the one hundred are above the normal intelligence
for their chronological age, but are not under age for the grade in
which they are.
Is there not something in the system of promotion to blame for
these conditions? Although we are coming more and more to the
idea of the socialization of the curriculum, and letting go our hold on
the idea of education as mere formal discipline, yet in the early
grades, the subject matter is of comparatively little importance as
compared with the development of the child's intelligence. If a
child is intelligent enough to do fifth grade work, is it not of comparatively little importance whether or not he is able to pass an
examination in the actual subject matter taught in the fourth grade?
Furthermore, having once been over the work of the fourth grade, if
A STUDY OF 100 RETARDED PUPILS. 21
he is mentally capable of doing fifth grade work, he will have no
difficulty in going on with the work in the fifth grade, although he
may have failed in an examination, or failed on daily recitations in
the fourth grade work. Besides, as it would be new work, it is probable that it would claim his attention and interest much more readily,
which means that he would probably do better work in the fifth
grade than he would do in repeating the fourth grade work. Let the
child go on as fast as his intellectual development will allow.
We believe, then, as a result of this study, that many of these
retarded children are being held back in grades, the work of which
is below that which the children are capable of doing, and that an
injustice is therefore being done to these children. From this we are
led to believe that the present system of determining whether or not
a child should be promoted is unsatisfactory, and propose that the
use of intelligence tests would be a far more scientific method of
determining fitness for promotion.
In figure I we see, also, the relation of the intelligence of the
white children to that of the colored. Referring back to figure I,
in \yhich we have separated the white children and the colored
children in per cents we find that the distribution of the whites more
nearly approximates the normal curve than does that of the whole
group, and that the colored children are markedly inferior in intelligence to the group as a whole. The .difference in the distribution of
intelligence quotients of the colored children and of the white children
is very marked. This bears out the contention of Morse (Comparison of White and Colored Children measured by the Binet Scale
of Intelligence, Pop. Sci. 84; 75-9, Ja. '14) and of Strong (White and
Colored Children measured by the Binet Simon Scale of Intelligence,
Ped. Sem. 20:485-516, D. '13) who have made comparative studies
of whites and colored with the Binet Scale. Distributing the children
in groups by their mental age, we find that the median intelligence
quotient of the white children is at every age superior to the median
intelligence quotient of the colored. This means that the mental age
and the chronological age of the white children is less widely separated
than that of the colored children.
We see, then, that on the whole, the intelligence of the colored
children is inferior to that of the whites. Therefore, where whites
and colored are together in school, either they must be grouped
together having unequal mental ages, or they must be grouped
together with unequal chronological ages. The first is educationally
unsound, the other unwise from the social point of view. In elementary schools, children will, as a rule, group themselves together
largely according to their ages. So where children of different races
22 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
are together, having different ages, we shall find not only the race
attitude tending to divide them into cliques, but also the age factor.
Where the mental age is the same for the children of the two races,
the physical age of the colored is apt to be greater and there is often
a tendency for the older ones to make it unpleasant for the younger
ones. All phases being considered, we believe there should be
separate schools for colored children.
As is to be expected, the largest per cent by far, (69%) of these
retarded children, have repeated but one year. But when we come
to a study of the relation of the amount of retardation to the intelligence of the child, we find certain unexpected facts. One would
naturally expect to find that those retarded one year were almost all
in the dull group (I.Q. 81-90) or possibly a few in the normal group
(I.Q. 91-110). We would naturally expect to find, further, that those
who have repeated two years were for the most part in the dull group
or lower; those having repeated three years in the border line (I.Q.
71-80) or feebleminded (I.Q. below 70) groups, and those having
repeated four years, all in the feebleminded group. Instead, figure
IV shows that of those repeating one year, one-seventh are in the
border line group, while three out of sixty-nine are of superior or very
superior intelligence. Among those who have repeated two years,
five out of eighteen, or 28 per cent, are of normal intelligence. More
than half of the pupils who have repeated three years are above the
border line group, while the children who have repeated four years
are all either feebleminded or very nearly so.
TABLE I. DISTRIBUTION BY INTELLIGENCE AND NUMBER OP TEARS REPEATED
OF 100 RETARDED FOURTH GRADE PUPILS. EVANSTON, DIST. 75.
Feebleminded
Border
Line
Dull
Normal
Superior
Vert
Superior
Total
4 years.
3 years.
2 years.
18
1 year.
24
33
69
Total.
18
36
39
100
The distribution in table I leads us to a consideration of the
problem of these children who have repeated three or four years and
are in the feebleminded, or possibly lower section of the border line
A STUDY OF 100 RETARDED PUPILS. 23
groups. What is to be done with such children? It is evident that
there are in the school system certain children who are being carried
on from year to year, who, from the tests given, are of such low
stages of intelligence that they are incapable of doing regular school
work. The trouble lies, perhaps, in the fact that the teachers do
not consider these children necessarily feeble minded; they are to the
teacher merely very dull. The Binet test will bring to light these
cases of feeblemindedness. All such cases should be removed to
special institutions, schools or rooms, according to local conditions,
where special provision is made to take care of them. This will be
far better not only for the children themselves, but also for the
progress of the other children with whom they are now associated.
In conclusion, we think, on the evidence from this study, that:
First: The systems of promotion generally in vogue in this
country are unfair to the child, uneconomic and unscientific; and
the use of intelligence tests for promotion should be adopted.
Second: Having white and colored children together in the
same schools is educationally and socially unwise; separate schools
for colored children should therefore be established.
Third: Feeblemindedness should be detected through the use
of intelligence tests, and children found to be feebleminded or very
nearly so, should be placed in regular institutions, schools, or rooms
equipped to take care of them.
Fourth: The Intelligence Quotient should be found for all
children, and the subject matter and methods of instruction adapted
to the intellectual capacity, rather than the chronological age.
