The Witmer Formboard and Cylinders as Tests for Children Two to Six Years of Age
=================================================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyiiiiht. 1918. by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. XII. No. 3 May 15, 1918

By Gladys G. Ide, A.M.,
University of Pennsylvania.
I. Introduction.
The Witmer formboard and cylinders have been used for several
years in the Psychological Clinic of the University of Pennsylvania
as a means for measuring the abilities of children. Since no one knew
how the ordinary child performed the test nor in how many seconds
he could do it, comparisons were always made between children of
like age who had appeared at the Clinic. In 1915, Dr. Herman H.
Young obtained formboard records from a large number of normal
children of school age in the public schools of Philadelphia, and a
similar investigation for the cylinders has recently been made by
Dr. Franklin C. Paschal. Not enough records have yet been col-
lected for the standardization of either test, but a start in that
direction has been made.
Many children of less than six years are brought to the Clinic
for examination. The use of either of these tests as testing or
teaching material is of doubtful value if no one knows what is to be
expected of normal children of from two to six years of age. The
Clinic has held consistently that the child of four years should be
able to do the formboard correctly, and the child of six years, the
cylinders, but this view came as a result of clinical experience and
not from the records of a large number of normal children. Through
a study of records of normal children of kindergarten age or younger
the present investigation aims to determine:
1. The age level of the tests;
2. Their clinical value;
3. The earliest passing age;
4. The analytic determination of the causes of failure; and
5. The value of their employment as a test of educability.
(65)
66 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Young tested 32 five-year-old children with the formboard. Of
this number 14 were boys and 18 were girls. Three boys were
successful in the first trial and the remainder in the second trial,
while 3 girls were successful in the first trial, 14 in the second and 1
in the third. Of 28 four-year-old children tested, 9 of the ten boys
required two trials for a successful performance, while the tenth
boy required three trials. Four girls succeeded in the first trial,
11 in the second, and 3 in the third trial.
These figures would seem to indicate that four and five-year-old
children are not able to do the formboard on the first trial, but in
reality the number of failures to perform it at the first attempt is
due to the limit of time which Young allowed. Since the Clinic
made no restriction in time, none was placed on either of the tests
used in this investigation.
The children chosen as subjects were from kindergartens con-
nected with the public schools of Philadelphia, or those operated in
conjunction with social centers. The American children came from
families very few of whom were professional people, but who were
well able to maintain their children. The foreign children came from
homes in the foreign quarter. Most of them were from families
financially well above the poverty line, but in a few cases the homes
were being maintained by charitable organizations. Practically all
nationalities were represented, but Americans and Jews predominate,
while Italians, Poles, Austrians, and Roumanians other than Jews,
French, Spanish, Germans, and Turks make up the completed list.
In determining a child's nationality, he was considered as being of
that nation to which his parents formerly belonged. If his parents
were born in the United States, he was considered an American.
The nationality and age of the child were taken from the
reports which the schools require of the parents. They were sup-
plemented by the teacher's knowledge. In some cases the aid of
social workers and the parish priest was sought in the attempt to
determine the ages of children, and yet it seems fairly certain that
some of the ages of the foreign children are not the true ones. Those
for the American children may be presumed correct. Foreign
parents wish their children to enter the industrial field as soon as
possible. For this reason they enter their children at the kinder-
gartens just as soon as the size of the child will enable them to swear
to an age of four years. As a result, many are entered shortly
after they have passed their third birthday. Again, many foreign-
ers pay no attention to the date of a child's birth, or remember it in
relation to some holiday, so that the birthday is unknown and is
given as is convenient.
WITMER FORMBOARD AND CYLINDERS. 67
In the present study it was noted that the birthdays of a large
number of children were given as occurring in August, September,
or January, months in which the child would be entering school.
In the Polish section of the city, the dates of birth were obtained from
the parish priest who had made a record of the date of baptism as the
date of birth. In one social center there was no record of any sort,
the dates given being those of the teacher in charge who had been
in the district when the children were born, and who gave the ages
as nearly as she could remember.
The tests used were the Witmer formboard and cylinders.
The formboard, including the raised edge on each side, is one foot
square. The surrounding edge, three-quarters of an inch wide,
fits flush with the back of the board and even with the tops of the
blocks when they are in place. At one side, a tray three and one-
quarter inches wide and half an inch deep, extends across the board.
The remaining section of the board is divided into spaces suitable
for the accommodation of eleven geometrical figures as nearly uni-
form in area as their variety of form will allow. The area is about
2.25 square inches and the thickness one-half inch. The recess in
which the block is placed is just enough larger than the block to
permit the piece to slide easily into place without danger of becoming
wedged in by a vigorous subject. The depth of each recess is one-
half that of the blocks, so that when placed the blocks extend one-
fourth inch above the surface of the board. The blocks and their
recesses are of such a size and shape that no block can be fitted into
any recess other than its own. Both board and blocks are neatly
stained, the board being light oak and the blocks walnut, while the
recesses are painted black, thus affording an effective contrast
between the board, blocks and recesses. The tray at the top of the
board is a receptacle for the blocks when removed from their
recesses. It determines definitely where the blocks are to be placed
and insures that they shall be within the reach of the subject
throughout the test. The blocks are numbered in consecutive order
from one to eleven, number one being the square, two the rectangle,
three the cross, four the ellipse, five the semicircle, six the circle,
seven the isosceles triangle, eight the star, nine the equilateral tri-
angle, ten the hexagon, and eleven the rhombus.
Each subject was tested individually. He was required to
stand during the test directly in front of the board, which was
placed on a chair or a low table with the tray farthest from him.
The board was placed so that the light fell in such a way that no
shadows obscured it. In some schools a private room was available,
and in that case no one was present in the room but the subject and
68 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
experimenter. In other schools no private room was available and
in those cases the subject was taken as far from the others as possi-
ble and screened from their view. The conditions were thus not
ideal, but the children were less disturbed emotionally when the
tests were given in the room with the others than when they were
taken into strange surroundings with the associations which are
built around a room used by the school dentist, doctor, or nurse.
The tests were continued from November to May inclusive, thus
securing all gradations of temperature and health. All the children
of a given kindergarten were tested and the records retained except
only those from colored children and from subjects with obviously
defective sight.
The blocks were left in their proper recesses until the subject
had placed himself before the board, when they were removed from
the tray in a random order by the experimenter. At the same
time the experimenter remarked, "I am going to take these blocks
out and put them up here. I want to see how quickly you can put
them back where they belong. You may use both hands and work
as fast as you can." If the subject did not seem to understand?
and many did not since they did not speak English?the experi-
menter added further, "You put them away," accompanying the
words by a gesture from the tray toward the reccesses. No child
failed to understand after the gesture.
The time?to the nearest second?required for the completion
of the test was taken, as was also an observation as to method, and
in the case of failure, the reason for failure. The watch was kept
in the hand as much out of sight of the child as possible. The experi-
menter sat behind the child and slightly to one side, so that the
board was clearly visible. This position was necessary since many
kindergarten children depend largely on the affirmative or negative
cues given by the teacher as a guide to their next act.
If the subject succeeded with the test the first time, he was not
required to repeat it, but if he failed the first time, that is, failed to
place all the blocks correctly in the spaces, not over them or leaning
on the edge, by his own efforts, the blocks were correctly placed for
him by the experimenter, no word being spoken, and then removed
in a definite order, three piles being formed in the tray. The first
pile contained blocks numbered five, ten, seven, and eight placed
directly above recess number one; the second pile, placed between
recess four and seven, included blocks numbered eleven, two, and
nine, and the third pile, consisting of blocks numbered one, six,
four, and three, was placed above recess nine. The numbering of
the blocks was always from the topmost block downward. After
WITHER FORMBOARD AND CYLINDERS. 69
the blocks had been so placed, the experimenter said, "I want to see
if you cannot put them in quicker this time." If the child failed to
place the blocks correctly on this trial, he was permitted to remove
them himself the third time, the directions given being, "This time
you may take out the blocks yourself and put them in the tray, and
then see if you can't put them in quicker." The subject removed
the blocks as he saw fit, except that he was required to place them
in the tray.
If the third trial proved a failure, the blocks not placed cor-
rectly were removed from the board, and the circle, the one most
easily placed?was handed to the child, and he was told to put it
away. If he did not succeed in placing it, he was told "Put it
there," the experimenter pointing to the correct recess. When
placed correctly the experimenter removed the block and offered it
again with the same words as before. If the block was correctly
placed a second one was offered, and so on until all the blocks had
been correctly placed. If some of the blocks had been correctly
placed in the first trials, this amount of teaching was sufficient to
insure success in a succeeding trial, where the procedure was the
same as in trial three.
If in the preceding trials, none of the blocks had been correctly
placed, then all the blocks except the circle were correctly placed
and this was offered to the child to place. No child failed to place
the circle, although in the case of two-year-old subjects the experi-
menter moved the hand toward the recess so that the child would
learn what was wanted of him, when he could not understand the
words of direction. When one block was placed correctly, two
spaces were left vacant, the blocks offered in different order, and the
number of blocks was increased until five or six would be removed
at once and all correctly replaced. Beyond this point it was unnec-
essary to go, as the children were then able to place all the blocks
by themselves.
The second test, the cylinders, consists of a single solid frame
of wood, formed of seven layers of pine, each three-eighths inch thick,
and glued together in such fashion that alternate layers of the wood
are grained at right angles. This frame is circular with a diameter
of ten and a half inches. Six layers of the wood are removed from
the center in such a way that an inner open circular space seven and
a half inches in diameter and two and one-fourth inches in depth is
formed. The outer wall varies from two and one-eighth inches at
the widest point to one and one-sixteenth inches at the narrowest
point to accommodate the different diameters of cylinders reposing
in recesses cut in this outer wall. Eighteen recesses are cut in the
70 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
wall, the deepest being two tind one-sixteenth inches, and when
that recess is placed farthest from the observer a variation of three-
sixteenths of an inch is made in each of seven recesses to the right
of the deepest one, the shallowest recess thus formed being fifteen-
sixteenths of an inch deep. The recesses to the left of the shallowest
then increase in depth in the same degree until the maximum is
again reached. The recesses are just large enough to receive easily
cylinders of the following diameters; from the same post of observa-
tion, the cylinder filling the first space observed is two and one-
sixteenth inches in diameter, its left-hand neighbor, one and eleven-
sixteenth inches, and the succeeding cylinders respectively one and
nine-sixteenths, one and five-sixteenths, one and one-sixteenth, and
fifteen-sixteenth inches in diameter. From the observed point
toward the right the same differences in diameter are noted until
that of fifteen-sixteenths of an inch has been reached, after which all
the remaining cylinders are of the same diameter, but of varying
depth. The whole is finished in oil and varnish in the natural color
of the wood.
In giving the test, the conditions and subject were the same as
in the formboard test. The cylinders were placed before the subject
with the largest cylinder at the point farthest from the child. The
cylinders were removed from their recesses by the experimenter and
placed in the center of the board. While doing this the experimenter
observed, "I am going to put these blocks in the center (middle),
and I want you to put them back where they belong. You may use
one hand or both and work just as fast as you can." In this test,
as well as with the formboard it was frequently necessary to add
the more informal, "You put them away," accompanied by a gesture
toward the recesses. The subject then tried to place the cylinders
in the correct recesses. If he was successful the first time, he was
dismissed, but if not, after the time and observations were taken as
with the formboard, the cylinders incorrectly placed were removed
and placed correctly and those not placed were placed. No word
was spoken during the process. As soon as all the cylinders were
placed, the whole procedure was repeated. If the subject succeeded
the second time, no further attempt was made, but if he did not, a
third trial was given in the same way. Teaching was not attempted
in all cases of failure. In a few instances the test was taught to a
child. When this was done, all the cylinders except two were placed.
These two were handed to the subject and he placed them. The
process was then repeated with three cylinders and then four and so
on as the child became proficient. The drill was continued until all
the cylinders of a given diameter but of varying depth had been
WITMER FORM BOARD AND CYLINDERS. 71
taught. Then those of varying diameter and the same depth were
taught and then the remainder. Two cylinders could be used at
the beginning because the children of four years had had enough
previous experience with the tests to understand the first principles
of putting the cylinder in its place. If an error was made while the
child was learning, the cylinder was removed by the experimenter
and offered again later. If the child again made an error,
the correct recess was pointed out and the child told to "Put it
there."
?1. Statistical Aspects of the Formboard?Five-year-old
Children.
The formboard was used as a test with 449 five-year-old chil-
dren. Of this number 231 were boys and 218 were girls. Table 1
shows the number of cases of failure and the percentage of failure
for the year groups. The year groups include all children within
two weeks of their fifth birthday and those within two weeks of
their sixth birthday.
Table 1.?Number Failing on both Formboard and Cylinders.
Age
Number
of
Number
Failing
1st Trial
Per Cent
Failing
1st Trial
Number
Failing
on 2 Trials
Per Cent
Failing
on 2 Trials
Number
Failing
on 3 Trials
Per Cent
Failing
on 3 Trials
FORMBOARD.
Boys.
231
154
8.2
18.8
3.9
3.2
1.7
2.6
Girls.
218
157
10.1
27.9
15
3.6
9.5
1.4
5.1
CYLINDERS.
189
140
73.9
78
41.5
62
32.9
Girls.
179
124
69.3
70
39.1
48
26.8
Nineteen or 8.2 per cent of the five-year boys failed to complete
the formboard correctly the first trial, and 22 or 10.1 per cent of the
girls. The first trial is taken as the significant trial to eliminate the
learning process which is so large a factor in the second and third
72 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
trials. But 1.7 per cent of the boys and 1.4 per cent of the girls
failed to complete the board successfully in three trials.
Seventy-nine of the boys were Americans and 82 were foreign-
born Jews; 2.5 per cent of the American boys and 13.4 per cent of
Table 2.?Comparison of Results from Americans and Jevtb of
Foreign Parentage.
Age
Number
of
Cases
Number
Failing
1st Trial
Per Cent
Failing
1st Trial
Number
Failing
on 2 Trials
Per Cent
Failing
on 2 Trials
Number
Failing
on 3 Trials
Per Cent
Failing
on 3 Trials
FORMBOARD.
American Boys.
2.5
15.5
1.3
3.4
1.3
3.4
Jewish Boys.
13.4
23.2
8.5
2.9
3.8
2.0
American Girls.
100
59
6
25.4
2
6.7
2
3.4
Jewish Girls.
14.3
30.2
3.1
11.1
1.6
6.3
CYLINDERS.
American Boys.
68
44 64.5 18 26.5 12
17.6
Jewish Boys.
58
42
72.4
28
48.3
27
46.6
American Girls.
84
54
64.3
38
45.2
22.6
Jewish Girls.
5 50 33
21 42 14 28
the Jewish boys failed the first trial as shown in table 2. Of the
girls, 100 were Americans and 63 Jews; 6 per cent of the American
girls and 14.3 per cent of the Jewish girls failed to pass the first
trial. One and three-tenths per cent of the American boys and 3.6
WITMER FORMBOARD AND CYLINDERS. 73
per cent of the Jewish boys failed in three trials; while 2 per cent of
the American girls and 1.6 per cent of the Jewish girls failed to pass
the test in three trials. The percentage of failures in the first trials for
both boys and girls is unusually high for the foreign-born Jewish
children, while the percentage of failures of those who had three
trials is higher for the boys, but lower for the girls.
Table 3 shows the time values for the successful performance
on the first trial in relation to the number of cases of different ages,
Table 3.?Time Values for Successful Performance on First Trial
and Number of Cases of Different Ages.
Age
No. of
Cases
Mean
Mean
Deviation
Min-
Lowest
Quintile
Lower
Quintile
Median
Upper
Quintile
Highest
Quintile
Max-
FORMBOARD.
Boys
5.75
5.25
4.75
4.25
130
82
39
lm 8.8s
lm 13.6s
lm 46.1s
lm 41.5s
25.5s
30.4s
49.2s
33.8s
25s
25s
28s
45s
44s
53s
lm Is
55s
55s
lm 10s
lm 21s
lm
lm
lm 26s
lm 37s
lm 5s
lm 3s
lm 39s
lm 41s
lm 30s
lm 18s
2m 13s
2m lis
3m 42s
5m 32s
11m 15b
6m 10s
Girls.
5.75
5.25
4.75
4.25
115
81
68
42
lm 6.9s
lm 20.5s
lm 42.4s
2m 25.3s
24.6s
36.3s
53.4s
86.2s
27s
37s
37s
41s
45s
55s
59s
53s
55s
lm 5s
lm 23s
58s
lm 4s
lm 13s
lm 45s
lm 4s
lm 8s
lm 24s
2m 28s
lm 30s
lm 48s
2m 10s
3m 45s
2m 45s
5m 33s
5m 43s
9m 7s
CYLINDERS?ALL CASES.
Boys.
5.75
5.25
115
74
lm 28s
lm 23s
3m 5s
6m 15s
Girls.
5.75
5.25
104
75
lm 4s
lm 55s
3m 26s
3m 7s
the age groups being divided into first and second half-years. The
first column of the table indicates the ages, the second the number of
cases of each age, the third the time values, in minutes and seconds,
of the mean, and following it the mean deviation in seconds. The
fifth column contains the minimum or shortest time record for the
age, the sixth column the value of the record below which 20 per
cent of the cases are distributed, the seventh column the value of that
record below which 40 per cent of the cases are distributed, and the
74 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
eighth column, the median or the value above and below which 50
per cent of the cases are distributed. The ninth and tenth columns
contain respectively values above which 40 per cent and 20 per cent
of the cases are distributed, and the eleventh column contains the
maximum or longest record made by an individual of the group.
Four-year-old children.
Three hundred and eleven four-year-old children, of whom 154
were boys and 157 were girls, were tested with the formboard. Of
these, 29 or 18.8 per cent of the boys and 44 or 27.9 per cent of the
girls failed to perform successfully the first trial; 2.6 per cent of the
boys and 5.1 per cent of the girls did not succeed in three trials.
Fifty-eight of the boys were Americans and 69 were foreign-
born Jews; 15.5 per cent of the American boys and 23.2 per cent of
the Jewish boys failed on the first trial, while 3.4 per cent of the
Americans and 2.9 per cent of the Jews failed in three trials. Fifty-
nine of the girls were Americans and 63 Jews; 25.4 per cent of the
American girls and 30.2 per cent of the Jewish girls failed in the first
trial, while 3.4 per cent of the American girls and 6.3 per cent of the
Jewish girls failed in the third trial.
The time values for the half year groups are shown in table 3
the same as for the five-year-olds. Except for the 4.25 year boys,
the mean shows a decrease with an increase of age, with a lessened
mean deviation. This tendency continues for the median and
maximum as well as the other values shown in the table. The differ-
ences shown in the half-year groups clearly warrant norms for half
year rather than for full year groups.
Sex differences are not clearly sustained. A larger percentage
of both five and four-year-old girls fail on the first trial than of the
boys, but the percentage of five-year-old girls failing in three trials
is slightly less, and the percentage of four-year-old girls nearly twice
as great as that of the boys. The percentage of both five and four-
year-old girls of American parentage failing in the first trial is much
greater than that of the boys, but the percentage of failure of Ameri-
can boys and girls for three trials is the same, while Jewish girls fail
oftener than Jewish boys. Since the percentage of failure in the
first trial of Jewish boys of either four or five is in excess of American
boys of the same age, and the percentage of those failing in the
third trial is very nearly the same, it seems doubtful whether the
percental differences can be explained on the basis of either sex or
nationality. The differences in time as shown in table 3 are not
sufficiently consistent to warrant conclusions as to definite sex
differences.
Thirteen boys and 15 girls of three years of age were given the
WITMER FORMBOARD AND CYLINDERS. 75
formboard test; 8 of the boys and 7 of the girls succeeded in per-
forming the test on the first trial; 4 boys and 4 girls succeeded on
the second trial, and 1 boy and 3 girls completed the test on the
third trial. One girl failed to complete the test in the three trials.
These children were all in the last half of the fourth year with the
exception of one girl. The time required for the boys who
completed the test on the first trial varied from 1 minute 10 seconds to
7 minutes 40 seconds and for the girls from 48 seconds to 4 minutes
27 seconds.
The shortest time required for a four-year-old American boy
successfully to complete the formboard the first trial was 28 seconds.
Two American girls and one Jewish girl each made a record of 37
seconds for the successful first trial. The best record for a five-year-
old boy was 25 seconds and for a five-year-old girl was 27 seconds.
Both of these children were Americans. In both cases the boys
succeeded in a shorter time than did the girls. The situation is
reversed in the case of the three-year-olds. An American girl of
just three years completed the formboard in 48 seconds on the first
trial, while an American boy of three and one-half years was suc-
cessful in 70 seconds. A Jewish boy of 2 years 5 months succeeded
with the formboard in 6 minutes 10 seconds on his first trial, and
an American girl of 2 years 7 months in 1 minute 20 seconds.
Young, in his article entitled "Physical and Mental Factors
Involved in the Formboard Test," has indicated a method of mark-
ing deficient performances upon an analytical chart on the basis of a
five-point scale, where one is the rating given a subject who shows
the least of any given trait or quality, and five the rating given when
the greatest amount of the trait or quality is present. Three indi-
cates the normal amount of whatever is being rated. If finer grada-
tions are desired, each single group is divided into other groups of
five points each. In Young's chart, he shows all of the mental
elements which can be thus rated by an experimenter on observa-
tion of a subject during a test.
In the present experiment it was impossible to make complete
ratings especially under the headings of physical adequacy or sen-
sory fitness. No attempt was made to determine functional deficien-
cies, and only those with marked anatomical abnormalities were
excluded. Except in cases of obvious myopia, no exclusions were
made on the ground of sensory unfitness. Deafness was not con-
sidered a reason for exclusion where the child understood a gesture
well enough to start work on the test, as he was as well fitted to be a
subject as the child who did not speak English.
Ratings were made under the subdivisions of Vitality, Move-
76 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ment, Responsiveness, Attention, Imagination, and Memory, where
these appeared to be factors in a failure. The attitude of the chil-
dren, while of great importance, was not brought out sufficiently
clearly to warrant a rating being made upon it. In a few instances,
shyness was a factor in producing a refusal to attempt the test, but
once attempted there was no evidence that it made a difference.
Competitiveness did not affect the behavior of these children.
None of them evinced any interest in what their fellows had done,
and but one asked the time required for his performance.
The method of attack proved to be of value and was given a
rating as to its kind, but not in relation to what older children do.
In making the rating for each child, no attempt was made to fill
out a complete chart. Grading was made only in the case of a
performance above or below a certain level which the observer had
noted by preliminary experimentation as the ordinary level for the
child of this age. As this preliminary experimentation was neces-
sarily somewhat limited, the ratings tend to be based largely upon
the standard set by Young for his six-year-olds, and it is probable,
therefore, that the grading made, especially in distribution of atten-
tion, is colored too much by the ratings made on six-year-old per-
formances. When children of two and three years were tested, the
standard for four years was used. This was obviously too high
and it is likely that the ratings for these ages would better be made
normal. However, as they are they serve the purpose for which
they were made.
Each age-sex group were assumed to be a normal group, and
under the five-point scale would be placed in group 3 in sub-
division 3. Closer observation of each group reveals the fact that
certain children have not performed as well as most of the other
children of the group and some few have succeeded better than
most of the group. In a few scattered instances, performances
have been so much below that of the mass of the group that individ-
uals have been placed in groups 4 and 5 rather than in 3.
Of the five-year-old boys, 182 have been placed in group 3.
The time of their performance varied from 40 seconds to four min-
utes. Four boys were placed in group 1 because their performance
was much shorter than that of their associates, and 21 were placed
in group 2 as forming a class doing the formboard in less time than
the rest of the group, but not so quickly as those in group 1. Groups
4 and 5 include the failures, the former those who succeeded in either
the second or third trials, and the latter those who failed to suc-
cessfully complete the board in the three trials.
One hundred and sixty-three five-year-old girls were rated in
WITMER FORM BOARD AND CYLINDERS. 77
group 3, the time requirement being from 40 seconds to 3 minutes.
Ten girls were placed in group I, and 12 in group 2 because of their
quickness of performance. Groups 4 and 5 contain the fail-
ures, the former containing 27 and the latter 4, the division of the
groups being made on the same basis as that of the boys.
One hundred and one of the four-year-old boys and 91 of the
girls were placed in group 3, 18 boys and 19 girls in group 2, and
10 boys and 7 girls in group 1; 23 boys and 39 girls were placed in
group 4 because of failure to complete the formboard the first trial,
and 8 each of boys and girls failed to complete the board success-
Table 4.?Failures and Successes, Distributed bt Quintii.es.
No. of
Cases
Group
One
Time
Group
Two
Time
Range
Group
Three
Time
Range
Group
Four
Group
Five
FORMBOARD.
Boys.
231
154
25s-30s
258-45s
30s-40s
45s-55s
182
101
40s-4m
55s-13m
Failed
Failed
Failed
Failed
Girls.
218
157
25s-30s
35s~45s
30s-40s
45s-55s
163
91
40s-3m
55s-6m
Failed
Failed
Failed
Failed
CYLINDERS.
Boys.
5 189 12 lm-2m 37 2m-4m 103 Failed 32 Failed 5 Failed
Girls.
5 179 11 lm-2m 44 2m-4m 88 Failed 33 Failed 3 Failed
fully in three trials and were placed in group 5. Table 4 shows this
distribution for both age and sex.
Of the failures of the five-year-old boys, two were rated 2-5 and
2-3 respectively in understanding of the test, and the remainder of
the failures were judged to be due to absence of distribution of
attention. Persistency of attention was rated at 3-1 in the case of
one girl, and concentration of attention at 2-5 in the case of another.
Distribution of attention was responsible for the remainder of the
failures, as in the case of the boys.
The same ratio holds true for the four-year-olds. Imageability
was rated at 2-5 in the case of one boy, and persistence of
attention at 2-3 for another. Understanding was rated in group 2
four times as a factor in failures, and the remainder of the failures
78 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
were judged to be due to lack of distribution of attention. Under-
standing was rated once in group 2 and three times in group 1 as
a factor in the failure of four-year-old girls, while concentration of
attention was rated 2-2 once, and persistency of attention 2-3, 2-4,
2-5 in three different cases. As before, the lack of distribution of
attention was the deciding factor in most of the cases of failure.
The failures among the three-year-olds were due to lack of
distribution of attention in all cases except three. Two of these
added to the lack of distribution of attention, poor persistency of
attention. One failure was due to an absence of understanding of
the test. The limited number of observations made upon three-
year-old children makes it impossible to judge whether these failures
are to be expected because the three-year-old child has not yet
developed the necessary abilities for the correct performance of
this test, or whether they are due to the specific absence of some
ability in the individual. Although there is a wide range of individ-
ual difference in degree of maturity, it is assumed that the former is
more nearly the case.
A number of children of two, three, and four years of age were
unsuccessful in their first attempts with the formboard. These chil-
dren were then taught how to complete the test. Analytical ratings
were made as with the other children. A record of the number of
trials for successful performance was kept, as well as a complete
history of each didactic effort.
The Formboard as Didactic Material.
Girl, Jewish, aged 2 yrs. 3 mos.; 2 trials; teaching. Correct
in 3 m. 25s. .
Frieda had not yet lost the chubbiness of babyhood. She
spoke no English but talked a little in Yiddish. She refused to
reach for the blocks on the first trial, and they were handed to her,
with a gesture toward the spaces. As soon as she moved her hand
in the right direction no further help was given. In the first trial
the blocks were all placed in spaces or over them, none correctly,
with several grouped around No. 6. There was an absence of dis-
tribution of attention and the method used was purely trial and
error. Blocks Nos. 6 and 2 were used to teach her how to place
them. As soon as she would place these two, Nos. 1 and 10 were
added. The process occupied three minutes. She was then given
another trial. She reached for the blocks herself, using either
hand but not both at the same time, and completed the board cor-
rectly in 3m. 25s. She then removed the blocks herself and replaced
them correctly. The method used was better than trial and error.
If a block did not fit in the recess in which she tried it, she placed it
WITMER FORMBOARD AND CYLINDERS. 79
back in the tray and selected another block for the same space.
This method increased the time required for the performance but
was successful in the long run. It enabled the child to complete
the test with no change in the distribution of her attention.
Girl, Jewish, aged 2 yrs. 9 mos.; 4 trials; teaching. Correct
in lm. 45s.
Dottie placed all the blocks over spaces in 4m. 38s. No. 9 was
over the correct space with No. 8 on top of it. She tried the star over
the correct space, but did not succeed in getting it in. Distribution
of attention was rated 2-1. The second trial resulted in five cor-
rectly placed blocks in 2m. 8s. Distribution of attention and
understanding of the test were graded respectively 2-4 and 3-1.
The third trial she placed three blocks correctly in lm. 55s. She
was taught with the blocks which she had not correctly placed.
She then placed all the blocks correctly in lm. 47s. After this she
voluntarily performed the test five times, each time correctly.
A block was replaced in the tray if it did not fit the first space in
which it was tried, and the second block chosen was not always
tried in the same space. The rating made in distribution of atten-
tion was not changed in the last trials.
Girl, Jewish, aged 3 yrs.; 4 trials; no teaching. Correct in
lm. 15s.
Elizabeth placed the blocks over spaces, none correctly, in 65s.
Distribution of attention was rated 1-3 and understanding 2-3.
On the second trial, seven blocks were correctly placed in lm. 36s.
The distribution of attention for this trial was graded 2-1. Five
blocks were not correctly placed in the third trial which requred
6 minutes, but blocks were both removed from spaces and replaced.
The fourth trial resulted in a successful performance in lm. 15s.
with no teaching.
Girl, Jewish, aged 3 yrs.; 6 trials; teaching. Correct in 2m. 25s
Rose placed the blocks over the spaces in 3 minutes. None
were correct. She was rated 1-5 in interest and 2-1 in distribution
of attention. After teaching with all the blocks, she again failed to
place any of them, although she played with them for five minutes.
She had constantly to be urged to place the blocks, and was rated
1-3 in persistence of attention. After teaching with all the blocks,
she placed 6 blocks correctly in 3m. 2s. With the blocks not placed
correctly she was taught. After this a third trial resulted in 6
correctly placed blocks in 2m. 17s. She was taught with the
blocks not placed and a fourth trial given. Again 6 blocks were
placed in 6m. 5s. The same blocks were not placed for each of
these trials although the same number of blocks happened to be
placed correctly. In the fifth trial, Rose for the first time removed a
80 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
block incorrectly placed. She still showed the same lack of persist-
ence and distribution of attention. With no further teaching a
sixth trial was given. She completed the test successfully in 2m.
25s. Blocks for particular recesses were chosen from the tray and
she removed a wrongly placed block, replacing it correctly.
Girl, Italian, aged 4 yrs. 3 mos.; four trials; teaching. Cor-
rect in 2m. 45s.
Susie placed one block correctly in five minutes. She used the
trial and error method. Persistence of attention was rated at 2-1
and distribution of attention at 2-5. Four blocks were correctly
placed in 3m. 19s. Constant urging was necessary to get her to
finish, and even then she made no attempt to place the blocks in
spaces, but placed them over the spaces. After 3m. 44s. she placed
3 blocks successfully on the third trial. She was then taught with
the blocks not placed. In 2m. 45s., she then completed the test
successfully. She still required urging to make her work at all and
the rating in persistence of attention was not raised in the last three
trials. There was no lack of understanding of the test.
Boy, Jewish, aged 2 yrs. 4 mos.; 6 trials; teaching. Correct
in 3m.
Benjamin placed Nos. 3 and 6 in 3m. 20s. He was rated 3-1
in coordination and 2-5 in observation and distribution of atten-
tion. A second trial resulted in 4 correctly placed blocks in 65s.
and a third trial 3 correctly placed blocks in 2m. 10s. In both cases
the distribution of attention was rated 2-5. Benjamin was then
taught. He placed 7 blocks correctly in lm. 30s. on his fourth trial.
The method was improved in this trial. Closer observation of the
blocks was made and they were rejected at once if they did not fit
the space in which they were first tried. After teaching, 9 blocks
were correctly placed in lm. 5s. After teaching with the blocks not
correctly placed, the board was completed successfully in 3 minutes.
The increase in time in this trial appeared to be due to fatigue as
the child held securely to the side of the chair with one hand, moved
slowly and yawned frequently, but kept at work until it was finished.
Boy, Italian, aged 2 yrs. 6 mos.; 3 trials; teaching. Complete
in 2 m. 20s.
Richard placed one block correctly in one minute in his initial
effort with the formboard. It was necessary to hand the blocks to
him to get him started to work. He placed the blocks in an orderly
line but did not associate them with the spaces in the board. He
was taught with all the blocks. The second trial he placed 3 blocks
correctly in lm. 4s., removing one incorrect one and placing the cor-
rect one over the space. With the blocks which he had not placed
he was taught, and on a third trial completed the board correctly
WITMER FORMBOARD AND CYLINDERS. 81
in 2m. 20s. The rating for distribution of attention in all the trials
was 2-2. The rating for understanding in the first two trials was 2-3.
Boy, Jewish, aged 2 yrs. 10 mos.; 6 trials; teaching. Correct
in 2m.
Lewis placed one block correctly in 3 minutes. His rating for
understanding was 2-1 and for distribution of attention was 2-3.
After being taught with all the blocks, one block was correctly
placed at the end of 2 minutes. His movements were erratic and
the rating in understanding and distribution of attention was not
increased in this trial. After all the blocks were again used in teach-
ing, 3 blocks were correctly placed in 2m. 3s., showing an adequate
amount of persistence of attention but no better distribution of
attention. After teaching, all the blocks were placed in the wrong
spaces in 2m. 31s. During this trial there was evidence of fatigue
and he was dismissed for the day. On the following day at the same
hour he completed the test with one suggestion in 3m. 4s., pushing
hard at the blocks and grunting happily when he had got them
into place. The suggestion was made in the case of No. 9 which he
could not place even after he had chosen the correct space. The
final trial was successful in 2m.
Boy, Jewish, aged 3 yrs. 2 mos.; 4 trials; teaching. Correct
in 3m. 31s.
Harry failed to place any of the blocks in lm. 20s. Distribu-
tion of attention and understanding were graded 2-1. After teach-
ing with all the blocks, he still failed to place any correctly in 3m. 30s.
He made great efforts to push the blocks into the wrong spaces.
After further teaching with all the blocks, he placed 8 correctly in
2m. 20s. Those wrongly placed were again used as teaching mate-
rial, following which he successfully placed all the blocks in 3m. 31s.
Boy, Jewish, aged 4 yrs. 8 mos.; 5 trials; teaching. Correct
in 54s.
Aleck placed four blocks correctly in his first trial with the form-
board. He was rated 2-3 in observation and 4-3 in rate of move-
ment. The ratings were not changed in the second trial when he
placed 7 blocks correctly in 2m. 6s. Six blocks were correctly placed
in lm. 48s. on the third trial, in which observation was rated 2-5.
He removed correctly placed blocks and tried to replace them with
blocks very different from those removed. In the fourth trial he
placed 9 blocks correctly in lm. 42s. He was then taught with the
blocks which had not been correctly placed, and completed the
board in 54s. Exactly one week later he performed the test in 76s.
with no errors. A final rating of 2-3 in observation in direct com-
parison with four-year-old boys was made in his case.
82 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Conclusions.
Ninety per cent of five-year-old children should be expected
successfully to complete the formboard on the first trial, according
to the results obtained in this investigation. Two per cent may be
expected to fail to complete it in three trials. Seventy-five per cent of
four-year-old children should be successful in the first trial, while
5 per cent may not be able to complete the test in three trials.
Although the number of cases is very small, it seems that half of the
three-year-old children in the last half of the year may be expected
to be successful in the first trial, while many of the remainder will
succeed after several trials, or may be taught in a short time. This
is also true of younger children.
Five-year-old children possess adequate distribution of atten-
tion to be successful with the test. Understanding of the test, per-
sistence of attention and other abilities may occasionally be lack-
ing, but are not conspicuously absent in children of this age. Four-
year-old children show less distribution of attention than the five-
year-olds, and this ability decreases with age. Among the two-
year-olds tried with the test, none showed adequate distribution of
attention for success with a method other than trial and error or
fitting a given space with blocks chosen at random. Fitting the
block to a space was a method which appeared with greater distribu-
tion of attention, and was used by the five-year-olds and most of the
four-year-olds.
The rate of movement was slow with the smaller children and
increased with age, as the shortened time for successful performances
indicates. Only one child tried to hurry when told to do so. Two
four-year-olds and 20 five-year-olds used both hands in placing the
blocks. Either hand, but not both, was used by the younger
children.
Several of the small children sang lustily while working. All
pushed hard at the blocks to get them in the spaces, and all gave the
blocks a pat with the palm of the hand after they were in. Often
this was accompanied by a grunt of satisfaction. Once at work they
paid no attention to the experimenter. At no time was there evi-
dence of ill temper while the board was being used. There were a
few occasions when a child had to be left to himself in the room
while another child performed the test in order that he might acquire
confidence to approach the board. If the child would not approach
the board of his own accord, he was left for another time. Only
one failure was recorded because of refusal to come to the board,
and this was not counted with the others, as the child had just been
removed from her own home to a temporary home.
WITMER FORMBOARD AND CYLINDERS. 83
From these results we may conclude:?
1. The age level for the formboard is four years;
2. It has clinical value analytically for children of four and
five years of age, and probably of those of three years.
3. The passing age level is the last half of the fourth year.
4. The most frequent cause of failure is the absence of sufficient
distribution of attention which seems to be a function of age; and
5. Failing as clinical material, the formboard may profitably be
used didactically for purposes of analysis and for observation of the
learning process.
?2. The Witmer Cylinders.
Of the 368 five-year-old children who were given the cylinder
test, 189 were boys and 179 were girls; 140 or 73.9 per cent of the
boys and 124 or 63.9 per cent of the girls failed to perform the test
successfully on the first trial, (table 1); 41.5 per cent of the boys and
39.1 per cent of the girls failed on the second trial and 32.9 per cent
of the boys and 26.8 per cent of the girls failed on the third trial.
Table 2 shows the percentage of Jewish boys as opposed to
American boys and Jewish girls as opposed to American girls. As
was the case with the formboard, the percentage of failures among
the Jewish boys is considerably in excess of that of the American
boys, while the differences in the case of the girls is very much less
marked.
Of the boys of 5.75 years 33 were successful on the first trial
with an average time of 3m. 21.5s. The mean deviation was 2m.
27.2s. Sixteen boys of 5.25 years were successful on the first trial,
with an average time of 3m. 9.4s. The mean deviation was lm. 17.1s.
Thirty-two girls of 5.75 yrs. were successful on the first trial with an
average time of 3m. 12.4s. The mean deviation was lm. 19.2s.
Twenty-three girls of 5.25 years were successful the first trial; their
average time was 3m. 20.2s. with a mean deviation of lm. 6.3s.
Distribution of the results of the cylinder test by quintiles
showed that the normal group or group 3 contained only those who
had failed the first time. It included also some who had failed on
the second trial, but whose errors on this trial were few in number
and not gross in character; 103 boys and 88 girls were placed in this
group. Thirty-two boys and 33 girls were placed in group four.
They did not succeed in completing the test in three trials, but their
results showed a decreasing number of errors and indicated that
they were learning. Five boys and 3 girls were placed in group 5
not only because they failed in three trials to complete the test, but
also because an increased number of errors in each trial showed
84 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
that they were not learning. Groups 1 and 2 include those suc-
cessful on the first trial, (table 4).
Table 3 shows the time distribution as far as possible and the
distribution by quintiles in even groups. Only the figures for the
lowest quintile or the lowest 20 per cent can be given, as all the
other groups contain only failures. The mean and mean deviation
for the successes of the entire group regardless of the number of
trials are meaningless, as many of those who failed on the first or
second trial learned enough during those trials to perform success-
fully in less time than was required by those who were successful
on the first trial.
The same children who did the cylinders also did the form-
board. By the Spearman rank method, using time as the basis of
ranking, except for the unsuccessful third trials where the number of
final errors was used, the correlation between the two series was
.2065 for the boys and .1492 for the girls. This low correlation
between two tests of apparently such similar character agrees with
the results obtained by Mrs. Mary Hoover Young with the same
tests.
Eleven four-year-old boys and 9 four-year-old girls were given
the cylinder test. They were chosen as being the best of the group
from the standpoint of their performance on the formboard?an
assumption not warranted by subsequent correlation coefficients?
in conjunction with the teacher's opinion of their kindergarten work;
5 of the boys succeeded the first trial, 2 the third trial, and 4 failed
in the three trials. Three of the girls succeeded the first trial, 2 the
second trial and 1 the third trial, while 3 failed in all three trials.
The shortest time required for an American boy to perform the
cylinder test for the first trial was lm. 23s. A Jewish girl gave the
same performance in lm. 4s. Both of these children were five
years of age. A Polish girl of four years, six months performed the
test in lm. 10s. the first trial. A Jewish boy of four years eight
months completed the test in lm. 58s. No children younger than
four years were tried with the cylinders.
The Cylinders as Didactic Material.
Boy, Italian, aged 4 yrs.; 8 trials; teaching. Complete in
lm. 42s.
Pasquale completed the formboard correctly and then placed
3 cylinders in 4m. 59s. His analytic and distributive attention were
rated 2-3. He was persistent, but in a nervous excited sort of way.
He placed 3 cylinders correctly in 3m. 50s. on the second trial and
4 correctly in 4m. 8s. on the trial. He showed the same lack of
WITMER FORMBOARD AND CYLINDERS. 85
distribution of attention and analytic concentration that he had on
the first trial. He was then taught with all the cylinders. The
fourth trial resulted in 3 correctly placed cylinders in eight minutes.
At this time Pasquale was dismissed and was not recalled to the
task until two days later, when he placed 11 cylinders correctly in
3m. 50s. The errors consisted of interchanges of cylinders of small
difference in height. The distributive attention had improved and
was rated at 3-1, and the analytic concentration of attention was
rated at 2-5, while there was much less of the hurried nervous
movement noted the first day. After 2m. Is., 10 cylinders were
correctly placed on the sixth trial, and 12 were correctly placed
after 2m. 21s. on the seventh trial. Teaching with the incorrectly
placed blocks was continued and an eighth trial then given. After
lm. 42s. two cylinders were left interchanged. This was corrected
on one suggestion. Two subsequent trials undertaken on his own
initiative were successful.
Boy, Jewish, aged 4 yrs.; 8 trials; teaching. Complete in
2m. lis.
Sam placed one cylinder correctly on his first attempt. He was
rated 3-1 both in distribution and concentration of attention. He
talked constantly to himself and suggested that some of the tops
of the cylinders ought to be chopped off. He did not remove a
cylinder after having once placed it. He was rated 2-4 in general
understanding of the test, the grade being the same for the first
three trials. The second trial resulted in 7 cylinders being cor-
rectly placed in 14m. 20s. The distribution of attention was rated
at 3-1. During the third trial, when he placed 12 cylinders cor-
rectly in 7m., his attention was easily distracted, and he was rated
2-3 in persistent concentration of attention. Teaching followed
this trial, and then the boy was dismissed for the day. One week
later at the same time a fifth trial resulted in 3 cylinders success-
fully placed in 2m. 5s. Understanding of the test was rated 2-5
in this trial. Persistent concentration of attention was good. The
sixth trial resulted in 8 errors at the end of 6 minutes, with many
deep sighs from the subject. There was no evidence of illness, but
some urging was necessary to induce him to complete the test.
The seventh trial resulted in 2 errors, both interchanges of cylinders
of the same diameter but of different length, after 3m. 5s. They
were corrected with one suggestion. The eighth trial was successful
in 2m. lis., using the method of fitting the cylinder to the recess.
Boy, Jewish, aged 4 yrs.; 4 trials; no teaching. Complete in
5m. 46s.
Max placed 5 cylinders correctly in 5m. 47s., leaving 2 cylinders
86 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
unplaced. On a second trial he placed 13 cylinders correctly in
4m. 31s. He was dismissed without teaching, and two days later
at the same hour was recalled to complete the test successfully in
5m. 46s. The method was trial and error. The failure the first
day was due to lack of understanding, in which he was rated 2-5.
Boy, Jewish, aged 4 yrs. 5 mos.; 4 trials; teaching. Complete
in lm. 31s.
Bernard placed 9 cylinders correctly in 5 minutes. One was
left unplaced. He fitted the cylinders to the spaces. Distributive
attention was rated 2-5. Those cylinders placed in too shallow a
recess he attempted to push in by violence, even suggesting the
use of a hammer. The second trial showed a better distribution of
attention, although but 5 cylinders were correctly placed in 3m. 29s.
Five cylinders were correctly placed and one left unplaced in the
third trial in 2m. 9s. The errors were always among cylinders of
the same diameter but of different length. Correctly placed cylin-
ders were removed and placed in spaces not intended for them, thus
showing an absence of understanding of the test. Teaching followed
this trial and then Max had a glass of milk and a cake. The trial
following the refreshment was successful in lm. 35s.
Boy, Jewish, aged 4 yrs.; 4 trials; teaching. Correct in 2m. 20s.
Teddy placed no blocks correctly on the first trial of the cylin-
ders, which required 6m. 20s. He constantly remarked that he
could not do it, and applied opprobrious street terms to cylinders
which would not enter spaces in which he tried to force them. He
was rated 1-5 in persistence of attention and 2-3 in interest. He
knew what he was supposed to do, but had no intention of doing it
if he could get out of it. He placed 9 cylinders correctly in 6m. 2s.
on his second attempt. He still required urging to get him to work.
His third trial, completed at the end of 3m. 7s., resulted in but three
misplaced cylinders and his reactions to the test appeared normal.
He remarked that he knew he could do it on the fourth trial, and
was successful in 2m. 20s. No formal teaching was given in this
case, but without the stimuli supplied during the first two trials the
test would never have been completed successfully.
Boy, American, aged 4 yrs. 11 mos.; 5 trials; teaching. Cor-
rect in 2m. 25s.
Seven errors were left on the first attempt Hamilton made to
complete the cylinder test. The time was 4m. 48s. He removed
blocks correctly placed, but replaced all but one of them. His
understanding of the test was rated 3-1 and his distribution of atten-
tion 2-5. Six cylinders were correctly placed on the second trial,
completed in 4m. 55s. One cylinder was not placed. Analytic
WITMER FORMBOARD AND CYLINDERS. 87
concentration of attention was rated 2-4 for this performance.
Only 6 cylinders were correct after 4m. 16s. on the third trial.
Teaching followed, and for a third time 6 cylinders were correctly
placed in 2m. 25s. On two suggestions these were corrected and the
test completed in 4m. 15s. The fifth trial was successful in 3m. 12s.
Boy, Irish-American, aged 5 yrs. 5 mos.; 3 trials; teaching.
Complete in 2m. Is.
William was reported very dull by his teacher. He placed
12 cylinders correctly in 2m. 13s. on his first attempt. His errors
were interchanges of cylinders varying in diameter. His rating
on observation was 3-1. Using the trial and error method he placed
6 cylinders correctly in 9m. 2s. the second trial. He removed cor-
rectly placed cylinders, replacing them by cylinders very different.
His rate of movement was very slow, rated at 1-5, and his under-
standing of the test 2-3. Finally he placed all the blocks but the
largest one, which he omitted, replacing it by its right hand neighbor
and continuing the process half-way around the board so that a
large number of errors resulted. He could not find out what was
wrong, so he was told where to place the largest cylinder, after which
he readily placed the others correctly. The third trial was success-
fully completed in 2m. Is.
Girl, Jewish, aged 4 yrs. 10 mos.; 5 trials; no teaching. Com-
plete in 4m. 2s.
Miriam succeeded easily with the formboard, but placed only
3 cylinders correctly in 4m. 8s. She removed cylinders which did
not satisfy her and pushed hard at those which rose too far above
the surface of the board. She was rated 2-3 both in distributive
attention and understanding of the test. On a second trial, 9 cylin-
ders were placed correctly in 2m. 40s. She fitted the space with the
cylinder and made her errors with cylinders of either the same
diameter or height. The distribution of attention was rated 3-1.
The third trial resulted in 12 correctly placed cylinders in 3m. 38s.
Observation of differences was made only for diameters, any height
being accepted for a space so long as the diameter was correct.
There was no teaching at the end of this trial, as the performance
seemed to warrant the assumption that she would get it herself.
Twelve cylinders were correctly placed on the fourth trial in 6m. 15s.
At the end of this trial Miriam remarked that the long one "showed
out," indicating that she was beginning to understand what was
wanted. On the fifth trial there were no errors, the cylinders being
placed after 4m. 20s., the problem being attacked with an assurance
wholly lacking in the first four trials.
88 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Girl, American, aged 5 yrs. 6 mos.; 5 trials; teaching. Com-
plete in 3m. 8s.
Helen, after 4m. 55s., completed a performance in which she
had placed 12 cylinders correctly. She placed the blocks at random
and did not remove them. Her rating in understanding was 2-1.
Eleven cylinders were correctly placed in the second attempt after
lm. 27s., and 3 were correctly placed the third trial after 3m. 21s.
The same lack of understanding was shown in these two trials and
the rating for understanding remained the same. Teaching followed
the third trial. Twelve cylinders were correctly placed in the fourth
trial after 4m. 2s. These errors were corrected on one suggestion.
The fifth trial was successful in 3m. 8s.
The repeated low ratings for understanding given in the cases
which were taught, indicate that the cylinder test is distinctly above
the understanding of children of four years, and the fact that so
many children of five years fail with the test confirms this view
with children of five years. The results show:?
1. The age level of the test is certainly no lower than five years,
and is more properly placed above five years;
2. The test is of value analytically for children of five years,
but requires in the majority of cases too much time for its successful
use to make it of general value as clinical material for children of
four and five years;
3. The passing age level of 50 per cent of the group for one trial
is certainly higher than five years;
4. The most common cause of failure is an inadequate under-
standing of the test as a result of its too great complexity; and
5. Failing as clinical material for children of five years, it still
possesses value as didactic material where time does not limit the
observation.
BIBLIOGRAPHY.
Paschal, Franklin C. The Witmer Cylinder Test. Hershey, Pa.: The
Hershey Press, 1918, pp. 54.
Paschal, Franklin C. A Report on the Standardization of the Witmer
Cylinder Test. The Psychol. Clinic, Vol. XII, No. 2, April, 1918,
pp. 54-59.
Williams, Gertha. A Possible Restoration Case. The Psychol. Clinic,
1916, Vol. IX, No. 8, pp. 221-233.
Young, Herman H. The Witmer Formboard. The Psychol. Clinic, Vol. X,
No. 4, June, 1916, pp. 93-111.
Young, Herman H. Physical and Mental Factors Involved in the Formboard
Test. The Psychol. Clinic, Vol. X, No. 6, Nov., 1916, pp. 149-167.
Young, -Mary Hoover. Correlation of the Witmer Formboard and Cylinder
Test. The Psychol. Clinic, Vol. X, No. 4, June, 1916, pp. 112-116.
