The Seline Mind
================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1918, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. XI. No. 9
February 15, 1918

By Elmer E. Jones,
Northwestern University, Evanston, III.
It was my privilege recently to have charge of an old gentleman
on a long and tiresome journey in a Pullman car. He is eighty-five
years of age, and appears to be in excellent physical condition,
though his mental powers are considerably disintegrated. As a youth
he was a great athlete, being the champion wrestler and jumper in a
whole township in central Indiana. He has lived an active, vigorous
life in a rural community in the Middle West, and was at one time a
fairly successful farmer. He was also a fine workman with carpenter's tools, and for many years built elevators in the western
states. At the carpenter's trade he was regarded as an expert joiner,
and was in great demand for laj ing hardwood floors, such as were
frequently used twenty-five or thirty years ago.
He is the father of six children, was a soldier in the Civil War,
and was a pioneer in the state of Nebraska in the early seventies.
His ancestors were Quakers who migrated from the State of Pennsylvania in the early thirties and settled in central Indiana. His boyhood days were spent in the rugged activities of clearing the forests,
draining the swamps, and many other arduous tasks which fell to the
pioneers of Indiana. His schooling was meagre, but through the
favorable recommendation of a county superintendent who had been
his teacher, he taught school for two or three years.
In recent years he has not been actively employed, but has lived
at his own home with very little responsibility. Two years ago his
wife died, and since then he has spent his time chiefly with two
daughters, one living in Ohio and the other in Nebraska. He has
not been able to transact business for several years, and two years
ago a guardian was appointed to look after his financial affairs. This
action was taken because his children recognized his mental
incapacity.
Having known for several days that I should be his escort on this
(265)
206 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
long journey, I naturally thought of various schemes by which I
could entertain him en route. It struck me that since his mind has
disintegrated so considerably, and is now about the equivalent of a
six or seven year old child, he might respond to some very childish
entertainment and treatment. Incidentally I desired to measure
his mental age at the present time by some such scale as the Binet,
if it could be done without arousing any suspicion on his part that
he was being tested for mentality. By careful planning and some
ingenuity, it was possible to measure his mental age approximately
and, at the same time, afford him no little entertainment.
The first approach toward measuring his mental ability was
through spelling. This was easily accomplished, because in his
boyhood days he was regarded as a phenomenal speller, having
committed to memory every word in several of the spellers of his
day. It was easy, therefore, to enlist his attention in spelling. I
had provided myself with a copy of Ayres' Spelling Scale, and he
very arduously entered into the "match," though he was the only
competitor. I encouraged him in his efforts and somewhat over
two hundred words were pronounced to him. On the basis of bis
correct spellings he should be ranked somewhere in the latter part
of the third school year, according to the Ayres' scale. This would
make his mental age in spelling approximately eight and one-half
years.
From spelling it was easy to proceed to vocabulary. I was provided with the vocabulary scale used by Terman in his Stanford
Revision of the Binet Scale. My subject had great difficulty in
defining twenty words from the list, and the result of this test
entitles him to a mental age of eight years.
In the tests for the fifth year of the Binet Scale my subject
named the colors correctly, was successful in aesthetic comparisons,
gave the correct definitions of terms, but failed on the "game of
patience," and could not give his correct age. In the sixth year
he passed all the tests with the exception of "forenoon and afternoon." In the seventh year he failed in his description of the
pictures, in repeating five digits, in tying a bow-knot and in naming
the days of the week. He could name the days from memory, but
when asked what day comes before Thursday, Tuesday, etc., he could
not decide. He could not tell the day of the week, the month, or
the year.
Beyond the sixth year there was little integrity to his answers
and he could not be given a full score for a single question.
There are several mental characteristics in his senile mind
which may be of interest. In the first place, it seemed impossible
THE SENILE MIND. 267
for him to comprehend the mechanical character of the Pullman
train. He regarded the series of sleepers and the diner as one large
building, somehow connected. The movement of the train, both
forward and sidewise, he regarded with some fear, as if the veryfoundations were being shaken under us. In some instances he
attributed the swayings of the train to his own lack of motor ability,
and complained of being "old and no good." It is needless to say
that I took great pains to explain to him that we were being drawn
along a railroad by an engine, but it all seemed incomprehensible.
To me it seemed that he had about the comprehension of a three year
old child for the whole procedure. In making the trip forward and
backward to the diner, his poor vision only permitted him to get
rather rough kinesthetic impressions, and these were not associated
with any past experiences. Consequently, there were aroused
in his consciousness vague ideas of the meaning of the series of cars,
the diner, and the journey forward and backward three times a day.
It should be said that he has not been a traveler on Pullman trains,
and only a few times in his life has he taken his meals in a dining car
or slept in a berth in a sleeper. This accounts for the fact that the
new experience was practically isolated from all others and he found
much difficulty in making che mental adjustments.
Another observation indicated quite clearly that his mental
activity is like that of a very small child. Upon one occasion I
found him scrutinizing the head of a nail in the Pullman seat.
He investigated it from every angle, and seemed to get a great deal of
pleasure from the visual perception of this bright object, and from
twisting it with his finger nail. It occupied his attention for a
distance of twenty or thirty miles.
At another time I found him busy studying and tracing the
blue figures in the upholstering on the Pullman seats. He was
apparently trying to analyze them and when asked what he was
doing replied: "The picture looks like a field with a river running
through it."
His learning ability was practically nil. I tried to impress
upon him the location of the men's washroom, and the forward
journey to the diner, but each time the route was new to him and
I had to direct his course. In the washroom he made no progress
in learning the use of faucets and drains, though I led him to the
washroom frequently and instructed him carefully each time.
So far as I could determine, each experience for him was an absolutely new one.
He was bothered very much by the reflections in the mirrors and
the windows. In the evening when the lights were first turned on
268 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
he could see the reflection of the interior of the car outside of the
window, which gave the appearance of gliding along on top of the
snow. This interested him exceedingly and he commented several
times on the fact that there was a room closely adjoining the one we
were in. My explanations of the physical phenomenon only seemed
to mystify him, and I finally gave up the task and left him to enjoy
the floating shadows in very much the same fashion as a little child.
His dreams appear to be so vivid that he cannot discriminate
between them and the waking experiences. His sleep on the Pullman
was doubtless somewhat disturbed and his dreams were very vivid.
He awoke at one time and said to me that he had gotten up and
dressed and gone out to look around the town. While down town
he met a man who told him that he had best go back and get into
bed, and he took his advice about it. At another time he awoke in
the middle of the night and stated that he thought he was in a place
where he ought not to be and wanted to leave the train. I went into
great detail in explaining to him that we were sleeping on the train
and that he would soon be at his old home, and then we would get off
the train, where he would be met by his daughter. This satisfied
him and he fell asleep like a child.
This old gentleman's mental ability in certain lines is quite
characteristic of the senile mind. The old associations are the most
vivid, and those habits which have been used continuously are still
fairly efficient. From the standpoint of mental tests it is here that
he excels somewhat the child who would measure about the same
psychological age as he. For example, he has always been very
particular to carry a good watch and have the correct time. However, on this journey he failed to wind his watch and it stopped at
3:45 a. m. It was 10:30 in the morning before he noticed that his
watch had stopped and when given the time he set his watch correctly
to the minute. I watched him very closely, thinking that possibly
the mental ability to do it would be lacking; but he did not hesitate,
and proceeded to move the hands in the most economical manner
to the correct position. He succeeded, undoubtedly, in this test
because he has had constant practice in the use of the timepiece,
though when asked offhand to state whether it was forenoon or
afternoon he could not tell, and never thought of consulting his
watch for the necessary information.
As was previously stated, he was an expert joiner in middle life,
and had had much use for the plane. Recently, while in my home,
in order to test his memory, I handed him a plane from which the
blade had been removed, and asked him to put it together. In this
he failed completely. He was astounded at his own inability and
THE SENILE MIND. 269
expressed himself thus: "I never thought I would forget how to put
a plane together." It is entirely probable that he had in no way used
a plane for fifteen or twenty years, and in this time those habits
formerly well established were completely obliterated. This,
however, is quite characteristic of the senile mind and points distinctly to an educational possibility of retaining many powers
ordinarily lost in old age. If old people can be encouraged to maintain to the end their habitual activities, there seems little doubt
that mental and physical disintegration would be materially lessened.
This, of course, does not mean that old people should be held to labor
arduously throughout the senile period, but they should remain
interested in many of the things to which they have given attention
during a long lifetime.
The treatment of the senile mind is a problem not well understood by those who have old people in charge. There are a few
general principles which would be of value to the administrators of
homes for the aged, and might be of value to children who may be
given the responsibility of caring for aged parents.
In the first place, it should be remembered that the senile mind
is a weakened mind in all its phases of activity. It is impossible for
such an individual to have the proper comprehension of much conversation he hears. Modern topics, up^to-date methods of doing
things, knowledge of the younger generation and their activities, are
subjects in which the senile mind finds no interest, because it has
no contact with them. For this reason conversation along such lines
may prove extremely irritating to the aged, and may be the cause of
much trouble in the home. The same psychic attitude is shown
when a little child manifests vexation because it cannot comprehend
certain phenomena. Obviously the only sane treatment of the
senile mind in matters of conversation is to confine the topics to the
period of his youth when his mental powers were normal. This is a
difficult task, but it is the only way in which the senile mind can be
interestedly engaged. In soldiers' homes, and other institutions for
the aged, this problem is practically solved by the fact that the
inmates can always find those of equal mental age with whom to
associate, and there is the same mutual pleasure in these associations
that are to be found among youth of the same age.
Those who have charge of the aged should study the individuals
carefully in order to discover habitual activities which have been
retained and in which interest is still alive. Effort should be made
to stimulate these activities to the end. To allow one of them to
lapse is to reduce the mental capacity so much, and to render the
subject so much more like a child without the experience that train270 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ing brings. Nothing is more pathetic than old age when the individual is incapacitated for service of any sort, and when he has forgotten all the technique of former days. Every effort should
be put forth by children, who have the care of aged parents, to keep
them interested in some sort of service, active in some pursuits in
which they formerly excelled.
There is a wide difference between the senile mind and the
child mind. The former has lost its plasticity, its curiosity, its
inquisitiveness, its investigative activity. It lives in a remote
past of experience, and has a backward look. Youth looks forward
with great hope for large achievement as a result of investigation and
conquest. Youth has confidence, feels assured of victory, and is
ready to race with competitors. Old age shrinks from contest, lacks
initiative, and is generally satisfied with its past.
With the distinctions from youth, and the similarities to it, the
senile mind should be studied with care, and the life activities of the
aged adapted to their mental and physical possibilities.
