Errors in Scoring Binet Tests
=============================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1918, by Li&htner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. XII. No. 2 April 15, 1918

By Lewis M. Terman, Ph.D.,
Stanford University, Cal.
All the Binet tests made by my research students are recorded
in a twelve page "record booklet" which contains suitable space
for the full recording of each response. Students are urged to make
the record as nearly verbatim as possible and to make notes of
significant peculiarities of behavior. Immediately after a test has
been made the responses are scored by the examiner who also computes the mental age and intelligence quotient and records the
results in pencil on the blanks.
For several years it has been my custom to go over each record
carefully in order to call the attention of the student to errors in
scoring and in the calculation of mental age and intelligence quotient.
In this way some 2500 Binet tests have been re-scored by me in the
last five years. The work has consumed a large amount of time, but
it has been deemed necessary both for accuracy of results and for
student training. Experience has shown that there are innumerable
sources of error in giving and scoring mental tests of whatever kind.
No printed guide, however clear and complete, can be depended
upon to produce satisfactory results with the average beginner
unless it is supplemented by constant criticism and correction of
work done. Moreover, in the training of students it is especially
important that attention be called to errors of scoring before they
have become habitual.
The errors made by five students in scoring 843 Binet tests
have been tabulated and classified and the results are here reported
in the hope that they may be of value both to teachers and students
engaged in Binet testing. The facts presented show:
1. That the percentage of error can be kept low;
2. That carelessness in noting and adding scores and in dividing
to find the intelligence quotient is responsible for a very
large proportion of the errors.
(33)
34 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
3. That not more than half of the errors made result in an
incorrect mental age; and
4. That if errors are to be kept at a reasonable minimum, special
attention must be directed to the scoring of certain tests.
Error in mental age and intelligence quotient.
The amount of total final correction necessary for mental age
is shown for the five examiners separately in table 1. It should
be borne in mind that this table does not take account of all the
errors made, but only such errors or combinations of errors as
resulted in an incorrect result. If a test has three items and only
two correct responses are required, it will be understood that an
error in scoring a single item need not affect the total score in the
test. Moreover, two or more tests may be incorrectly scored without
giving an incorrect result, provided the errors are in opposite
directions and equal. These facts are largely responsible for the
rather good showing in table 1.
Table 1.?Showing Frequency of Errors of Various Amounts in the
Mental Ages Found by Five Examiners.
Amount of
Error in
Mental Age
Mr. A.
(198 tests)
Mr. B.
(275 tests)
Miss C.
(210 tests)
Miss D.
(68 tests)
Mr. E.
(54 tests)
0 error
1 month..
2 months.
3
4
5
110
6
51
7
12
2
6
1
160
12
63
10
16
109
13
52
12
17
3
3
Average amount of error
1.32
months
1.05
months
1.27
months
1.81
months
.78
months
The resulting errors of intelligence quotient cannot be computed
directly from the above table, since an error of a given amount in
mental age affects the intelligence quotient differently at different
chronological ages. An error of two months at the chronological
ERRORS IN SCORING BINET TESTS. 35
age of six is as serious as an error of four months at the chronological
age of twelve. Tabulation of the errors of intelligence quotients
for these five sets of data gave the following:
Table 2.?Errors in Intelligence Quotients.
Number without error
Average error
Extreme error
Number of errors above 5 points.
Mr. A.
(198 tests)
112
1.12 points
10
3
Mr. B.
(275 tests)
162
1.02 points
11
4
Miss C.
(210 tests)
109
1.37 points
Miss D.
(68 tests)
29
1.87 points
9
4
Mr. E.
(54 tests)
37
0.66 points
4
0
Sources of error.
Most of the errors are accounted for under the following heads:
1. Too generous scoring.
2. Too strict scoring.
3. Errors in weighting the tests of a given year when not all
the tests of that year have been given.
4. Mistakes in counting the number of passes and failures in a
year group.
5. Errors in adding credits to secure the mental age.
6. Errors in dividing to secure the intelligence quotient.
The distribution of errors among these causes is shown for the
five examiners separately in table 3. This table includes all errors,
not merely those which resulted in an incorrect mental age. The
number of errors in table 3 is much larger than in table 1 because,
as we have already pointed out, the chances are great that a mistake
in scoring one of the items of a test will not affect the total score.
For example, let us suppose the subject has drawn the diamond three
times successfully; if two are scored correctly it makes no difference
Table 3.?Showing Percentage of Errors Produced By Various CausesTotal errors
Lax scoring
Strict scoring
Weighting
Counting passes.
Adding scores...
Calculating IQ..
Mr. A.
(198 tests)
152
19.6%
57.8%
4%
7.8%
8.1%
0%
Mr. B.
(275 tests)
183
26.1%
31.8%
5%
8.3%
9.6%
19%
Miss C.
(210 tests)
166
36%
32%
6.6%
8.2%
7%
10.2%
Miss D.
(68 tests)
80
35%
12.5%
2.5%
24%
16.3%
11.3%
Mr. E.
(54 tests)
60
2%
75%
10%
7.5%
5%
0%
36 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
how the third is scored. Similarly, if all three attempts are failures,
it is again sufficient if two are correctly scored. A majority of the
tests in the Stanford Revision offer a wide margin for "harmless"
error of this kind in scoring.
Perhaps the most striking and significant fact in the above
table is the large proportion of errors due to what may be called
carelessness. Theoretically there is no excuse for mistakes in
counting the plus and minus marks, in adding the months of credit
earned, and in dividing for the intelligence quotient; yet these three
causes together account for approximately a third of all errors made.
Special attention directed to the reduction of errors of this class
would certainly bring large returns. Practically all the errors of
more than six months in mental age, or more than 5 to 8 points
in intelligence quotient, are sheer errors of addition or division.
It would be a good rule to insist that the scores of a subject be
added twice, and that the calculation of intelligence quotient also be
gone through twice. The latter preferably should be done with
slide rule, a division table, or by means of a chart. Every mental
test laboratory should be equipped with such mechanical helps and
students should be taught to use them. The IQ method of expressing
intelligence seems likely to become very general, and it is to be hoped
that someone will publish a specially prepared table from which the
IQ may be read directly. In table 3 it will be noted that examiners
A and E made no errors whatever in calculating IQ. This is because
it was done by means of a slide rule specially prepared for the
purpose.
Another frequent source of error is the weighting of tests in a
year group when not all the tests of that group have been given. The
rules are fully and explicitly stated in my book, "The Measurement
of Intelligence," and these rules are always "learned" by my
students before they begin testing. The students know, for example,
that if for any reason only five of the six tests in year VIII are given,
then each test given should have a weight of or 2.4 months;
that if only six of the eight are given in year XII, each should have a
weight of 4 months. The trouble nearly always comes from simply
overlooking the fact that a test has been omitted.
From half to three-fourths of the errors made are strictly errors
of scoring. The standard of what constitutes a "pass" is too high
or too low. Examiners E and A graded much too strictly, and D
not strictly enough, while B and C erred in one direction about as
often as in the other. The figures show the desirability of acquainting the student early with the general trend of his errors.
ERRORS IN SCORING BINET TESTS. 37
The total 'percentage of error.
The total number of errors shown in table 3 appears large.
On an average it is about one for each record blank. However,
considering that we have counted separately the individual sub-items
of each test, the proportion of errors to total scores given is really
very small. Usually about 15 score marks must be sssigned in the
tests of a single year group, or a total of 75 or more for a subject
tested through five or six year groups. The ratio of error to total
score marks assigned is therefore about 1.3 per cent. Of these less than
one-half have any effect on the mental age or intelligence quotient.
It should be stated, however, that errors of vocabulary scores
were not tabulated, because in many cases the definitions were not
fully enough recorded to permit this. Had vocabulary been included
the number of incorrect score marks would have been very much
greater, although the number of incorrect mental ages would not
have been greatly increased owing to the wide margin for "harmless"
error in the vocabulary test. As this test is scored in the Stanford
Revision it makes no difference what score is assigned between
20 and 30, 30 and 40, etc.
In order to gain a rough idea of the accuracy with which the
vocabulary test can be scored, the errors have been tabulated for
100 tests made by three examiners, A, B, and D. Only tests were
chosen in which the responses were recorded in full. The results
showed that an average of .62 words per test were incorrectly scored.
In only six tests did the error affect the mental age.
Tests difficult to score.
Many of the tests can give no trouble in scoring, provided the
responses are correctly recorded and provided the rule is observed
regarding the number of successes (2 out of 3, 3 out of 4, etc.)
required for a pass. Among these are: pointing to parts of the body,
naming objects, giving sex and name, repeating sentences and
digits (forward and backward), comparing lines, discriminating
forms, counting pennies, comparing weights, naming colors,
aesthetic discrimination, right and left, naming coins, giving number
of figures, counting backward, giving date, making change,
"induction" test, code test, naming days and months, etc. This
includes almost exactly one-half of all the tests.
It is interesting to note that the easily scored tests fall predominantly in the lower half of the scale, below 9 years. For this
reason it should be easy for first grade teachers to learn to test their
own children. They need to master thoroughly the procedure for
only the year groups IV to IX, inclusive. In the main these tests
are easily learned and the scoring is not difficult. This is especially
38 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
fortunate, since the first grade in the place above all others where
testing should be done. There is no reason why all children should
not be tested in the first year of school life.
Table 4 shows the distribution of scoring errors among the tests,
including only those from groups V to XVI. The tests of groups
VI to XIV were given with almost equal frequency in these series
and those of groups V and XVI somewhat less frequently. Tests
below V and above XVI were not given often enough in the data
analyzed to justify tabulation of errors.
Table 4.?Distribution of 356 Scoring Errors in Year Groups V to XVI.
Sub-items of Each Test are Counted Separately.
Ball and field (VIII and XII)  5S
Picture description and interpretation  49
Comprehension (VI)  12
Comprehension (VIII)  13
Comprehension (X)  21
Diamond  19
Similarities (VIII)  12
Similarities (XII)  17
Definitions (Use)  12
Definitions (Superior to use)  18
Definitions (Abstract terms, XII)  21
Fables (XII and XVI)  24
Designs  18
Three words  8
Rimes  8
Problems of Fact  7
Sixty words  7
Dissected sentences  6
President and king  4
Clock  5
Abstract terms (XVI)  8
Miscellaneous   9
Total  356
The above figures do not, of course, give us an accurate index
of the intrinsic difficulty of scoring the various tests. They reflect
in part the instruction which the examiners had had in scoring.
If the emphasis in instruction had been differently placed, the
distribution of errors would have been different. The figures are
also affected by my own standard as to what constitutes a satisfactory response. Another critic, however competent, would have
gotten somewhat different figures. Even the same judge would
not find exactly the same number of errors in grading the responses
twice at different times. In scoring Binet tests it is not possible
to eliminate the personal equation altogether.
Notwithstanding these limitations, the figures are of value.
ERRORS IN SCORING BINET TESTS. 39
They show, for example, that nearly three-fourths of the errors are
accounted for by the following tests: Ball and field, picture
description and interpretation, comprehension, definitions, similarities, and fables. The appearance of all of these tests in two or
more age groups multiplies the chances of error and gives additional
reason why special attention should be directed to their scoring
difficulties. The need for much special attention is greatest of all
in the case of the ball and field test for the reason that any error
in its scoring always gives an error in mental age. Since the other
tests have from three to six sub-items, they afford a considerable
margin for "harmless" errors.
Summary.
Analysis of the errors made by five examiners in scoring 843
Binet tests discloses the following:
1. The average error of the mental ages secured by the different
examiners ranged from less than one month to nearly two months,
and the average error of the intelligence quotients from less than one
point to nearly two points.
2. Approximately 5 per cent of the intelligence quotients were
in error as much as five points.
3. About one-third of the errors in intelligence quotients are
due to mistakes in counting the number of passes, adding the credits,
and dividing mental age by actual age. These may be classed as
strictly preventable errors.
4. The examiners show rather large individual differences both
in degree of accuracy and in the distribution of errors among the
various causes. The scoring of some is consistently too generous,
that of others too strict. The making of "errors of carelessness"
is also largely an individual matter.
5. Taking the five examiners together and counting separately the
score marks for sub-items under the individual tests, it is found that
a little over 1 per cent of the total score marks assigned are incorrect.
6. Attention is especially called to the wide margin for
"harmless" errors; that is, errors which do not affect the mental
age or intelligence quotient. More than half of the total number
of errors belong to this class.
7. The distribution of errors among the tests suggests the
desirability of special training in the scoring of the following: Ball
and field, picture description and interpretation, comprehension,
definitions, similarities, and fables. The ball and field test presents
the most serious problem, both because it gives the greatest number
of errors and because an error in its scoring always affects the mental
age secured.
