Preliminary Impressions of the Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon Scale
==========================================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1918, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. XII. No. 1 March 15, 1918

J. E. Wallace Wallin, Ph.D., ^
Psycho-educational Clinic and Special Schools, St. Louis, Mo.
For a period of eight years we have utilized the Binet-Simon
Scale in the clinical examination of thousands of juveniles and adults.
We have used this scale because, in spite of all its imperfections,
it has remained the best available single scale for the measurement
of general intelligence. Although clearly recognizing their short-
comings, we have continued to use the first two American revisions,
commonly referred to as the 1908 and the 1911 scales. We did
not deem it advisable to attempt to use any of the later American
versions, because of the limitations under which they were made,1
for purposes of practical mental classification or diagnosis, until
the Stanford revision appeared.2 And we did not deem it expedient
to use this modification until the original data on which it is based
had been given to the public.3 This revision represents the greatest
attempt thus far made to modify and extend the scale, to establish
more reliable age standards and to standardize the method of adminis-
tering the tests. We began to use this scale in the summer of 1917
in a clinic practicum, conducted at a state university, which was
attended by graduate and under-graduate students. The impres-
sions which we have formed regarding this version are based not
only upon our constant use of it during somewhat less than a year
but upon a very much longer use of the 1908 and 1911 Binet-Simon
scales (American versions), and upon conclusions which we have
reached respecting conditions which should be observed in successful
individual mental examination of children. We propose in this
article to give some of our preliminary impressions of the scale:
1 We are not now considering the Point Scale, which is constructed on a different principle from the Binet-
Simon scale. Some of the claims advanced in favor of the Point Scale are amusing, to say the least.
1 Terman, Lewis M., The Measurement of Intelligence. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin Co., 1916.
* Lewis M. Terman, ei al. The Stanford Revision and Extension of the Binet-Simon Scale for Measuring Intel*
ligence, 1917.
(1)
2 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
detailed analysis of results must await the accumulation of more
extensive data.
The justification for this preliminary discussion of the Stanford
Revision should be obvious. The belief has become very general
that an individual's mental capacity can be accurately determined
by means of intelligence tests. In practice we have for several
years been diagnosing subjects as feebleminded primarily on the
basis of their "intelligence age," "years of retardation" or "intelli-
gence quotient," as determined by some form of the Binet-Simon
scale. On the basis of such determinations1 subjects have been
committed to institutions, assigned to special schools for mental
defectives and diagnosed as incompetents, dependents or irrespon-
sibles. It is evident, therefore, that if our measuring devices are
faulty and our standards wrong, our psychological diagnoses will
be wrong or at most only roughly correct. If the standards are too
easy, the percentage of mental defectives found will be too small,
while if the standards are too difficult, the percentage will be too
large. The question is just as important from the educational
as from the social or criminological point of view, for it is unwise
to require backward children to spend their school days in classes
which were established for feebleminded children, as is now done
quite generally throughout the country.2 Moreover, later investi-
gations have invariably shown that measuring scales of intelligence
which have been said to be about as accurate as they can be made,
have in fact proved to be quite inaccurate in certain regions. Nor
do we, in point of fact, know as yet the degree of accuracy which
we should demand of reliable intelligence scales.
Because of limitations of space, we must restrict our discussion
to three or four points.
1. Mastery of the administrative technique of the Stanford
version requires far more study or training than the mastery of the
original scale (1908 or 1911), due not only to the multiplication of
the tests but to the elaborated and rigidly circumscribed conditions
under which the tests must be given. The import of this statement
can be aptly illustrated from the record of a class of university
students, quite equal, we believe, to the average in ability,3 who
pursued a course in mental tests during a six-weeks' period. The
class met during three one-and-a-half hour periods per week. Prac-
tically the whole course was devoted to the study of the Stanford
Revision and the mastery of its technique. One child was tested
1 Of course, other relevant data are always considered by the critical workers.
2 Problems of Subnormality, 1917, pp. 46-96.
8 Three Ph.D., four M.A. and one M.D. candidates, and six undergraduates. Three of these attended merely
as observers.
STANFORD REVISION OF BINET-SIMON SCALE. 3
each period before the class by a student by means of this scale.
At the conclusion of the examination the mistakes made by the
examiner were systematically pointed out by the other members
of the class and by the writer. In order to assist the student in the
mastery of the testing technique, the writer prepared a "Condensed
Guide" of about a dozen typewritten pages. In this Guide all
the directions and conditions bearing on the administration of a
given test, and the exact phraseology in which it should be pre-
sented, were concisely given in one place. Although they possessed
"The Measurement of Intelligence," every student in the class
preferred to follow the Guide rather than the book when testing
the pupils, owing to the convenient, condensed arrangement of the
material in the Guide, as compared with the scattered presentation
of the directions and the qualifying conditions in the book. In
the book one must frequently read through paragraphs or even
pages of comments or discussions to discover all the conditions
which must be observed in giving a test. The students all agreed
that the discursive treatment in the book made it more difficult
for the learner to master the technique with the aid of the unabridged
text.1 Under these favorable conditions and with these special
aids we found that not a single student was proficient in the use
of the scale at the end of the course. That is, no one was able to
administer all the tests used in the examination of any given subject,
in an errorless, free, confident, aggressive manner without the aid
of the Guide.2 With the aid of the Guide, most of the errors made
toward the close of the course were not very serious, but many of
the tests were put too slowly. The number of errors made by five
students whose records we have available were 18, 16, 16, 13 and 8,
the two latter made in the second trials toward the close of the term.
Some of these errors, of course, were minor ones, and probably did
not materially affect the rating. The time that it takes to train
students to give psychological tests correctly, is well known by the
experimental psychologist. When the student finds it difficult to
learn to administer a single test correctly in the psychological labora-
tory, is it to be wondered at that the effective mastery of the Stanford
scale, which contains ninety tests, cannot be secured except as the
1 We laid the above facts before the publishers and the author of the Measurement of Intelligence and offered
the Guide for publication. But permission to publish was refused on the expressed ground that the author "is
entitled to the credit and any financial return for developing his modification of the Binet-Simon testa," nor would
the author give his endorsement. We also prepared an abbreviated record blank, now in use in our clinic, which
serves every need of the practical examiner and which can be issued at a fraction of the cost of the ridiculously
elaborate "Record Booklet," but the publishers likewise declined to publish this blank, or to permit us to publish
it, on the same ground. We understand that the War Department has since published an abbreviated guide and
record blank.
2 Our record blanks, of course, furnished less aid than the elaborate "Booklet."
4 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
result of prolonged study and extensive practice in the actual testing
of cases?
The practical bearing of our conclusion should be obvious.
The amateur will find it much more difficult to administer the Stan-
ford scale than the old Binet scale, while anyone who merely tests
subjects occasionally will certainly not be able to do satisfactory
testing. He will not be able "to keep himself in fit condition."
He will be unable to test a subject without the use of the book.1
While the increased difficulty of its, administration is not a valid
objection to the value of the Stanford Scale itself, it emphasizes
the need of the skilled, experienced examiner and renders less respect-
able than ever the work of the dilettante.
2. The assumption is implicit that the methods which have
been adopted for administering the tests are the best methods to
use. This assumption admits of challenge. An examination of
the book often fails to reveal any convincing reason for giving a test
in the form in which it is given, or for adopting the particular method
of scoring that is used. In some cases it appears that the particular
method of administration and scoring used was arbitrarily adopted
in order to give an arbitrary result, namely, a correspondence between
the median chronological age and the median mental age. The
responses were re-scored "according to any desired standard,"
in order to "fit a test more perfectly to the age level assigned it"?
the standard of "fitness," however, being a variable quantity for
the different ages. The original data were subjected to three suc-
cessive revisions and re-scorings. We have no doubt that it is
possible to produce any desired result by such a process of optional
accommodation. It is evident, however, that the method according
to which the tests were to be given had necessarily been determined
upon before the results could be re-scored, and that it is not possible
to determine the best method of giving a test by a process of accom-
modation or alteration of the method of scoring. That can only
be done, or at least can best be done, by actually testing large masses
of children, that is, by making objective studies of the psychological
reactions of children and determining from first-hand experience
the best methods of giving a particular test. We do not know to
what extent this method was used in the Stanford study. It appears
that the examiners who actually tested the 989 cases2 up to age 14,
i We have seen a psychologist laboriously thumbing through "The Measurement of Intelligence" while examin-
ing children. From the standpoint of an efficient mental examination, the whole performance was ridiculous.
One can no more administer an intelligence scale satisfactorily without automatic command of the technique than
one can perform surgical operations without automatic control of the mechanical operations.
: The Stanford Revision and Extension of the Binet-Simon Scale for Measuring Intelligence, p. 9. On p. 164
the number is given aa 992, and Terman's name is here included among the examiners.
STANFORD REVISION OF BINET-SIMON SCALE. 5
which were examined by the Stanford revision, got the methods
ready-made, and, we may add, were adequately trained on the
ready-made methods so as to secure uniformity. The compiler
of the revision appears not to have tested any of these cases, but
only thirty-two high school pupils between 16 and 21. He had,
however, previously tested 135 pupils in one group, and 90 pupils
in a second group which are used as check series, but these pupils
were given tests which "were practically identical with those in
Whipple's Manual" (save for certain exceptions which are noted).
It is evident that the revision then attempted (in 1912) was based
upon procedures of administration which do not coincide with the
procedures used with many tests in the Stanford revision. We
are unable to find any facts justifying the inference that the changed
methods of administering some of the Binet-Simon tests had first
been "tried on," and had been proved to be the most satisfactory
methods. The changes apparently were based more or less arbi-
trarily upon theoretical considerations. Be that as it may, we do
not think that sufficient study has yet been given to the question
of the best method of giving the tests. Most of the investigators
have largely confined their attention to the establishment of norms.
We doubt whether some of the tests should be administered accord-
ing to the Stanford formulas, while we also question the propriety
of even including some of the tests. Let us point out for a number
of specific tests some of the questionable procedures and objection-
able features, and suggest possible lines of improvement.1
IV, 1. There are no "middle and lower pairs of lines" on the cardboard
supplied in the set of materials. Hence reverse cardboard and ask: "Which
one is the longer (longest) now?" It is a question whether the words "long"
or "big" should not be permitted in this test (in addition to "biggest" and
"longest"), and the words "heavy" in V, 1, comparison of weights ("which is
the heavy one?"). The word "heaviest" is used interchangeably with "heavier"
in the latter test. Moreover, the introductory statements to the weight test
could profitably be eliminated.
IV, 4. There is no need of giving a second or third trial if the child passes
the first time, as the last two trials will not affect the rating. The same remark
applies to VII, 6, third trial, when the first two are satisfactory. Nor is there
any necessity of using a whole minute in the IX, 6, if three rhymes can be given
in shorter time. It is sufficient to ask the subject to "Find as many words as
you can that rhyme with 'day,' " and close the test as soon as three rhymes
have been given, with one minute as the maximum. It requires more time to
administer the Stanford scale than the original Binet and the busy examiner
cannot afford to waste time on procedures which do not affect the rating. The
fact that it requires considerably more time to test a subject by the Stanford than
1 Some statements made in "The Measurement of Intelligence" concerning the individual tests are based on
assumption and theory and probably would not be accepted by many workers who have had extensive experience
with the tests in the actual examination of children.
6 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
by the old Binet-Simon scale is a valid objection to the Stanford scale only in
so far as the experimenter is obliged to waste time on profitless procedures or
procedures which do not affect the rating, and on tests permitting accidental
failures. While all the "waste time" must be eliminated from the Stanford
scale, if it is to be of practical service to the routine examiner whose time is
limited, we view with suspicion the evident attempt to construct scales of tests
that can be given in from five to ten minutes. The mind of man is so complicated
and subtle, and frequently so unevenly developed, with special abilities and
disabilities, that it cannot be adequately weighed, measured, rated or analyzed
by a few tests which can be given in a few minutes.
V, 2. The directions are to give the colors in the order red, yellow, blue,
green. The colors are not arranged in this order on the cardboard, as they should
have been. The error will at least affect the rate of the response. Purely acci-
dental misses penalize the subject, in this test, as a second trial is not permitted.
We have tested a number of subjects whose misses the first time were due to
momentary amnesia, or excitement or too great impulsiveness. They gave
the colors correctly the second time. These subjects had to be scored minus,
although they knew the colors. There are other tests, to which we shall refer
later, in which accidental failures occur because of the arbitrary conditions
under which the tests are given. The argument that the tests are properly
administered because when they are given as directed the median chronological
and mental ages coincide is not satisfying.
We may illustrate the influence of accidental failures by the discrepancies
in the age rating of subjects tested twice within a short period of time by means
of the Stanford Scale. The same experimenter tested the same subject on both
occasions.
Case 1 graded 6.50 years on June 26th, and 6.66 on July 5th. The addi-
tional test passed the second time was VII, 5, differences. Case 2 tested 5.83
on June 27th and 6.33 on July 20th, a difference of half a year in about three
weeks. The first time he failed on VI, 1, right and left, VI, 2, omissions, VI, 4,
comprehension, and VIII, 4, similarities, all of which he passed the second time.
The second time he failed on VI, 5, coins, which he passed the first time. Case
3 tested 7.16 on July 18th and 8.66 on July 24th, advancing half a year or from
an I. Q. of .56 to .67 in less than a week. The tests which were failed the first
time but passed the second time were: VII, 2, descriptions; VII, 3, five digits;
VIII, 3, comprehension; VIII, 6, vocabulary; IX, 2, weights; IX, 3, change;
and X, 4, reading.
We expect to find large variations like these in the intelligence level of
epileptics,1 but when they are found in the simple types of mentally defective
or backward children, we have reason to suspect that unusual alterations in the
physiological condition or state of responsiveness of the individual have occurred,
or that the testing has been inefficiently done, or that the scale is not maximally
reliable, permitting of accidental failures. There were no observable changes
in the physical or emotional states of these subjects. We are inclined to ascribe
the difference in rating chiefly to the fact that some of the tests are so constructed
as to put a premium upon accidental failures.
V, 3. Children of foreign parents who do not quite understand the words
"prettier" or "prettiest" have scored plus on a second trial after they have
gotten the idea of the test. Children with poor vision have also scored plus on
1 Some epileptics whom we have tested have varied four or five mental ages during a few months. Such varia-
tions, however, are exceptional.
STANFORD REVISION OF BINET-SIMON SCALE. 7
a second trial. Some impulsive subjects have scored failures under the condi-
tions of the test, although they certainly were able to make correct distinctions.
It is a question whether these results should be scored minus, in conformity
with the text, which does not permit corrections or even uncertainty.
V, 5. The test permits no sign of approval, even through facial expression,
when the cards are properly placed. The result is that when the child is asked
to try it again he is led to believe that he did it wrong the first time. Naturally
he acts upon this suggestion and tries some other method of approximation,
gets confused, and fails. We have examined many children who did the test
almost immediately the first time, but required five times as much time the second
time or failed entirely, because they were designedly trying some other method.
When told: "Why, you did it right the first time," many of these children
did the test at once during the third trial. These children had to be scored
minus, according to the artificial conditions of the test. One cannot expect
young children to function at their maximum by withholding legitimate approba-
tion or by arousing apprehensions. Those who have tested college students
know how readily they succumb to positive or negative suggestions. We must
not demand of children what we do not obtain from youths. Either the test
should be given according to the original Binet formula (one success passes),
or the subject should be told when he has done it correctly once: "Good!"
or "All right!" "Now, see if you can do it again."
VI, 2. We infer that the "single question" in b, c, and d cannot be repeated.
If repeated, some subjects will pass the test who would otherwise fail. The
test allows chance misses, affecting particularly the impulsive and easily dis-
tracted types, even when they possess fair intelligence. Would it not be well
to allow a second trial on the failed picture? A test of intelligence increases
in reliability as the possibilities of chance errors decrease.
VI, 4, and VIII, 3. Some children are not familiar with the formula "What's
the thing to do?" This formula must "not under any circumstances be altered."
Alternate, equivalent questions, should be permitted: "What ought you to do?"
or, "What should you do?". Exception may be taken to the scoring given
in the text to some answers. Some subjects, particularly children of foreigners
who do not understand English well, will score plus if given a second trial,
especially when the form of the question is changed as above indicated. Thus
the first answer of an Italian boy to VIII, 3 a, was: "To her mother." But
on repeating the question: "Buy another." To VI, 4, b, an 11-year old boy
first said, "Fire." On repeating the question, he said, "The firemen." But
when asked, "But what should you do?" he said: "Ring up the firemen." To
VIII, 3, a, he first replied, "To me." But on being asked, "What should you
do?" he replied: "Pay." A 12-year old girl replied to VI, 4, c, "Can't go."
But when asked, "But what should you do then?" replied, "Wait for another."
According to the arbitrary rules of the test these subjects scored failures, and
yet when the questions were stated so as to be comprehended they were properly
answered. We could cite many similar instances in which, according to the
conditions of the test, we have been obliged to rate the child by his snap-shot
reply rather than by his reflective answer. According to the test the question
may be repeated in the original form only, but only "if there is no response,
or if the child looks puzzled."
VII, 1. Since the scoring is entered for the right and left hand, it would
seem logical to ask, "How many fingers have you on the right hand?" Then,
"On the left hand?". However, we prefer the following procedure: "How
8 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
many fingers on this hand?" "On this hand?" "On both hands?". The
experimenter momentarily holds up his right hand, then his left hand, and then
both hands. The tendency to count is lessened by this method. Some pupils
make accidental errors which they immediately correct if given a second chance.
Thus a girl who said she had five fingers on each hand and five on both hands,
answered "ten" immediately when asked, "On both hands?". One boy who
responded rapidly, "5," "10," "10," when asked, "How many have you on
each hand?" immediately replied, "Five." One girl who responded similarly
replied correctly when asked, "How many fingers have you on that hand"
(pointing)? "And on that hand?". All of these failed on the test, although
all knew how many fingers they had. The test penalizes purely accidental
failures. It permits repetition of the question only when the child has begun
to count.
Ill, 3; VII, 2; and XII, 7. The instructions are incomplete, owing to
the fact that a three-fold procedure is authorized. The text does not make clear
when the question is to be asked as in III, VII, or XII, but leaves this to the
judgment of the tester. If the question was asked as in III, producing enumera-
tive responses,1 and the subject later proved to have a VII- or Vlll-year intel-
ligence, should the pictures be presented again, using the VH-year formula?
According to the text, the test has been ruined for VII if it has been given as in
III. Accordingly we cannot determine in a case like the above whether the
subject is or is not able to pass the test. We have found VIII- and IX-year
old subjects who responded as in VII when the VH-year formula was used but
as in XII, when the Xll-year formula was later used. Should the XH-year
formula also be given to all VIII- and IX-year olds? Moreover, why not start
directly with the XH-year formula with higher grade pupils, instead of wasting
time on the VH-year formula? It is awkward, to say the least, to give the
VH-year formula, and then immediately use the XH-year formula with the
same pictures. The requirement of three enumerations in III should only be
expected when the question is asked, "Tell me everything you can see in this
picture?". The rule in VII, that the reply must be chiefly descriptive, is imprac-
tical. Many pupils only enumerate or describe the outstanding characteristic
of each picture. In some pictures some subjects chiefly enumerate, in others
they chiefly describe. According to the directions, pupils who give one enumera-
tion and one description for each picture would grade III. We have many
records in which the pupil enumerates two or three objects, but gives only one
description. They describe the most important action. Such a descriptive
response is worth more than several enumerations, and should be scored VII.
The original Binet rule did not require more than one descriptive response.
This basis of rating is to be preferred.
VII, 3. The question "Was it right?" may make some subjects more
cautious, but it tends to excite others. It might be eliminated. It is, of course,
necessary to secure the child's close attention to each series. The following
formula will usually accomplish this without arousing apprehension: "Now,
then, see if you can say these numbers. Listen carefully." The same remarks
apply to all the memory-span tests.
VII, 4. Some children fail on this test merely because they have never
been taught to tie a bowknot, while others fail becaue of the unnaturalness of
the situation (tying the string around a stick). Some girls who have failed on
1 On page 146 the author states that "enumeration" rarely occurs "before 9 or 10:" The Measurement of
Intelligence.
STANFORD REVISION OF BINET-SIMON SCALE. 9
the test have instantly tied a bowknot with a hair ribbon in place, while some
boys who have failed, have had no difficulty in tying the knot in their shoe-
string. In our judgment this test should be discarded.
VII, 5. Many pupils who fail on this test, will pass, if asked: "You know
what a fly is?" "And a butterfly?" "Are they the same?" ("No.") "Well,
then, what is the difference between them?" This form of approach was wisely
permitted by some of the earlier versions, in order properly to prepare the child
to apprehend the concept of difference. Of course, many foreign-language
children who now fail will succeed on the test as given above.
VIII, 1. Many VIII- and IX-year old pupils respond with a vacant stare
to this test. Some of the foreign-born children (Italians) have no idea what is
intended by the word "path." With other children, the trouble is that the
test does not adequately prepare the child's imagination to receive the suggestion
that the circle is a field. To do this, the test should begin with the statement:
"Suppose this is a round field with a growth of short grass." (Or high grass.
The test is silent on what is in the field.) The following statements serve no
purpose, they are time consuming and should be eliminated: "You don't know
what direction it came from, how it got there, or with what force it came."
The scoring of this test presents considerable difficulty. The grading of the
sample responses supplied on the score card, is not satisfactory, if the object
is the finding of the ball. This may be illustrated by the criticisms made of
the score card by our class of university students.
K (the initials refer to the subjects): No. 12, mark failure; 7, place lower
down; 10, place in superior class?"It is perfectly natural to walk thus in looking
for a ball;" 5 and 10, exchange.
L. S.: No. 2 should not be in superior class compared with 10, 14, or 15;
5 is better than 4, "because the path begins at the gate;" if 1 to 5 are to be
retained in superior class, would rank them as 1, 3, 5, 4, and 2; 12, mark failure,
or place below 14, 15, 19, and 20; a better order would be, 10, 7,14, 15,19, 20, 6,
8 and 11.
A. S.: 7, 8, and 10 are equal to 2; 12 is not a satisfactory search; 17,
"though lacking in plan covers the field satisfactorily"; 22 perhaps equal to
17; "if the object is to find the ball," 21 would do it.
M. S.: 7 and 10, and 8 very nearly fulfil the requirements of "No inter-
sections or breaks," while 2 does not. A "person would naturally walk irregu-
larly as in 10, or turn square corners as in 7."
B. D.: Mark 12 failure; 2 and 10 might be interchanged.
The above judgments illustrate the disagreements which one finds in
practice with the theoretical rating given on the score card. Of course, designs
are frequently received which do not resemble any of the patterns on the score
card, and it is frequently difficult to determine whether they should be rated
as VIII, XII or zero. We have found subjects who draw a line outside of the
field (many do this), but who, when pressed to tell what they would do, say
they would walk around and hunt until they find the ball. This test may well
be eliminated. It impresses us as "freakish," and it so impresses many subjects.
VIII, 4. Some pupils respond properly to this test if asked, "How are
they the same?" But this form of question is not permitted.
VIII, 5. When the child has merely given a functional definition in response
to the stereotyped question of the text, we have frequently received a descrip-
tive definition by asking the further question: "Yes, but what is a ?"
The following are illustrative answers to the text question (1) and the additional
10 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
question (2) given above: football: (1) "you can kick;" (2) "a ball you can
kick;" balloon: (1) "round;" (2) "a round thing that goes up in the air;"
soldier: (1) "he helps to fight for us;" (2) "a man who fights." It is not clear
just what value a test has as a test of intelligence which is so administered as
to allow fortuitous failures. By a slight twist of the question or the proper
placing of an accent, the response can often be transformed from a failure to a
success.
VIII, 6. The illustrative scoring given in the text shows that different
degrees of perfection are exacted for different words. Since the scale contains
tests which are designed to appraise the quality of the subject's definitions,
the only object of this test should be to determine whether the child knows what
the word means. It should be immaterial whether he indicates this by an illus-
tration or by a good or poor definition. The test permits the use of articles with
nouns. Does it permit the use of prepositions with verbs? Judging by the
illustrations given, No. But this is not clearly so stated. The test is too long
(it seems to have been shortened one-half, according to a recent record booklet).1
The selection of chance words is objectionable. It would be better to follow
the plan of the Ayres spelling list in the selection of words. The vocabulary
formula with this selection of accidental words does not, we fancy, give a reliable
index of the size of a pupil's vocabulary.
IX, 1. May the following supplementary or alternate questions be used?
(a) "What day is it today?" or, "What day is this?" (6) "What month is it
now?" or, "What month is this?" (c) "What date is it today?" "January
what?" (d) "What year is it now?" Some children pass these questions who
fail on those given in the text, while others pass on a second trial who fail the
first time. The text merely allows a second trial when the day of the month
and the week are interchanged.
IX, 2. The question is too lengthy. The following part adds nothing
and tends to confuse the subject: "Find the heaviest one and put it here, the
next heaviest here, and lighter, lighter, until you have the very lightest here."
Omit also the introduction: "See these boxes. They all look alike, don't they?
But they are not alike."
The square cubes with the reversed numbers on one face are inferior to
the metal pill boxes with the weights indicated by initials on the bottom, owing
to the time required to find the numbers on the cubes. The initials on the pill
boxes can be found at once by turning up the bottom. Moreover, if the child
examines the reverse numbers and arranges the boxes according to the size
of the numbers he will score plus. Many subjects fail who misplace only one
box. The factor of accidental error operates in this test. We have elsewhere
presented facts indicating that this test might well be differently administered.2
IX, 5. The form of the test does not sufficiently emphasize that all of
the words are to be used in one sentence, or the same sentence. The combina-
tion desert, rivers and lakes is more difficult than the other two, and many fail
because of this fact.
1 The assumption, of course is that the difficulty of the words in the two lists supplied is equal. That
thia assumption may be without warrant is indicated by the number of words defined in each list by th e
following subjects:
Subject: ABCDEF G H
List I: 10 18 9 17 7 18 23 20
List II: 6 10 10 15 5 14.5 13.5 17
The differences are sometimes considerable.
1 The Individual Tests in the Binet-Simon Scale. I. Psychological Clinic, 1917, 79f.
STANFORD REVISION OF BINET-SIMON SCALE. 11
X, 2. The matter-of-fact, colorless, smileless manner in which this test
must be given renders the administration forced and unnatural and does not
tend to stimulate the child to put forth his best effort.
X, 3. In spite of the aid given from the elaborate instructions and the
score card, the marking of the reproductions is not always as easy as might
be inferred from the text. Not all of our students fully agreed with the ratings
of the samples on the score card. We have also found a lack of agreement
regarding the marking of some of the sample answers given in tests VIII, 3,
and X, 5.
X, 4. The units in the rating are of unequal value. Are words pronounced
for the subject counted as errors? We question the advisability of the rigid
two-errors standard. Children who have made three, four or more errors have
reproduced from ten to fifteen memories.
XI, The increase in the number and value of the tests in XII is not an
adequate substitute for the lack of tests in XI, even though by a process of
artificial scoring we may cause 11-year olds to score XI. In testing children
with a base of, say, VIII years, it frequently is not worth while giving the XII-
year tests, all of which are too difficult for age 11, according to the tabulated
data, while it would be quite worth while giving tests which are not too difficult
for 11-year old children. Artificial sur-scores will not take the place of tests
actually adapted to a given age during the preadolescent period. We regard
this lacuna as a serious defect in the scale, causing all children to grade too low
who cannot do any of the XH-year tests but who could do easier Xl-year tests.
XII, 4. It is not clear why the instructions may be repeated and a new
trial allowed when the subject adds new words, but not when he leaves out
words. Many impulsive subjects who make minor mistakes succeed within
the time limit when told: "Look carefully and try it again." Their failures
are accidental. They have the capacity to do the test when made to deliberate,
but must be marked minus.1
XII, 5. This test requires more time than it is worth. It should be abbre-
viated or eliminated.
We have had less experience with the tests above XII. Some, however,
are too cumbersome to administer or require too much time.
To recapitulate: Not sufficient attention has yet been devoted
to the determination of the best method of formulating the tests?
the technique of the tests is not yet instrumentally perfect. In
some tests there is a discrepancy between the text and the test
materials; in some tests time must be wasted on details which do
not affect the rating; in some the instructions are unnecessarily
long and involved; in a few the directions are too meagre, or not
sufficiently specific (however, the conditions are more minutely
set forth for most of the tests than in any earlier version); in some,
the conditions are impractical; alternate questions should be per-
mitted and should be provided; in several tests a premium is put
upon accidental failures; in some the procedure is calculated need-
lessly to mislead or confuse the subject; in some the experimenter
1 Of course, wo are rating our subjects according to the prescribed formulas, whether or not we consider them
proper.
12 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
finds it difficult to give the test with natural expressiveness, so as
to encourage the subject to exert his best efforts; and some tests
should be discarded. It is evident that to introduce desirable
changes in the procedure would necessitate the establishment of
new standards.
3. Previous analyses have shown that the "scattering" is
extensive in both the 1908 and 1911 scales but that, from the stand-
point of scattering, the 1911 is inferior to the 1908 edition.1 We
are not yet ready to analyze our Stanford records, but it is evident
that the scattering is very extensive in this scale, apparently more
extensive than in the 1908 and 1911 editions. The practical signifi-
cance of this fact is a problem for future study. The large amount
of scattering in this scale is partly due, we believe, to the rigid con-
ditions under which some tests are given, which results in accidental
failures, to the rigid base requirements (all tests plus) and to the
misplacement of some of the tests. We expect to make detailed
analyses of our data in future.
4. The most fundamental question, after all is said and done,
is whether the Stanford version actually grades American subjects
more accurately than the earlier American versions. It has been
generally conceded that the 1908 and the 1911 editions were too
difficult in the higher ages (say above X), and that they were too
easy in the lowest two or three ages. On the other hand, it has
been felt by the most cautious workers that the age standards have
been approximately correct between VI and IX. Our previous
analyses2 have shown that the 1908 scale gives a higher rating than
the 1911, that the smallest difference is in the lowest ages (especially),
from III to V, and the middle ages, from VII to IX, that the largest
difference is in the highest ages, from X to XIII, and that the 1911
scale is probably more accurate in the lowest ages, and possibly
in the middle ages, while the 1908 is more accurate in the higher
ages.
The claim is put forth that the Stanford scale is accurate in
all ages, because the tests have been so placed, so administered and
so scored that the median mental ages are identical with the corre-
sponding median chronological ages. Whether with the particular
tests and the particular processes of scoring used, and the particular
groups of children tested, we have obtained age standards which
are maximally accurate and generally applicable to American
1 The Phenomenon of Scattering in the Binet-Simon Scale. Psychological Clinic 1917, p. 179ff. Wide Range
versus Narrow Range Binet-Simon Testing. Journal of Delinquency, 1917, p. 315ff. A Further Comparison of
Scattering and of the Mental Rating by the 1908 and 1911 Binet-Simon Scales. Journal of Delinquency, 1918,p.l2f.
iA Further Comparison of Scattering and of the Mental Rating by the 1908 and 1911 Binet-Simon Scales.
Journal of Delinquency, 1918.
STANFORD REVISION OF BINET-SIMON SCALE. 13
children, is a question to which a positive reply cannot as yet be
given. Our own use of the scale has been largely restricted to the
ages from III to XII. For practically all of these ages in which
we have comparative scores for subjects who have been tested by
the 1908, 1911 and Stanford scales, the Stanford rating is appreciably
lower. We may cite a few cases which include all the mental ages
(Stanford) from IV to XI, except VIII, IX, and X.
A, 8.16 yrs. Stanford, 4.83 yrs. 1908, 5.8 and 1911, 5.6 yrs. Difference
(between the Stanford and 1908 and 1911; given in this order throughout),
1. yr., and .8-yr. Seguin, 5.3 or 4. The first age rating for the Seguin form-
board is according to the average scores of three investigators and the second
rating according to the writer's norms, as given in table XLIX, of Psycho-
Motor Norms for Practical Diagnosis, 1916.
B, 8.41 yrs. Stanford 4.83 yrs. from the lower base (III) and 5.33 yrs. from
the upper base (V). 1908, 5.4 and 1911, 5.6 yrs. Difference, based on the lower
base, .6 and .8 yr.; or, based on the upper base, .1 and .3 (Stanford lower).
Seguin, 5.5 or 4.8.
C, 11.25 yrs. Stanford, 5.66 yrs., 1908, 6.6 and 1911, 6.2 (or 6. yrs. from
lower base). Difference, 1. and .6 yrs. (or .4 from lower base). Seguin, 8. or 7.2.
D, 10.16 yrs. Stanford, 5.66. 1908, 6.8 and 1911, 6.6. Difference, 1.2
and 1. yr. Seguin, 5.5 or 4.6.
E, 9.75 yrs. Stanford, 6.16. 1908, 7.6 and 1911, 7.2 (or 7. from lower
base). Difference, 1.5 and 1. yr. (or .9). Seguin, 10.5 or 9.
F, examined May, 1916, age 7.66. 1908, 6.6, and 1911, 5.6. Re-examined,
'January, 1918, age 9. Stanford, 6.33. 1908, 7.2 (7.6 from lower base) and
1911, 6.8. Difference, .9 and .5. Seguin, 9.2 or 7.5.
G, 9.33. Stanford, 6.66. 1908, 8. and 1911, 7.8 (7.6 from lower base).
Difference, 1.4 and 1.2. (or 1.). Seguin, 9.8 or 8.
H, 8.41. Stanford, 6.6. 1908, 7.6 and 1911, 7. Difference, 1. and .4 yr.
Seguin, 5.5 or 5.
I, examined October, 1916, age 11.5. 1908, 7.4. Re-examined, January,
1918, age 12.83. Stanford, 7.75. 1908 and 1911, 7.8. Difference .1 yr. Seguin,
9.5 or 8.
J, 14.66. Stanford, 11. 1908, 11.8 and 1911, 11.6 (11. from lower base).
Difference, .8 and .6. Seguin, meaningless because of spastic paralysis.
The Stanford rating is lower in every one of these cases, and
in every age. It is decidedly lower than the 1908 rating. In only
one or two cases is the difference insignificant. The difference
between the 1908 and the Stanford rating ranges from .8 to 1.5
of a year in 8 cases, and between the 1911 and Stanford rating from
0.5 to 1.2 of a year in seven cases.
While the diagnosis would not differ for some of these cases
no matter which rating was followed, in spite of the large age differ-
ences, in other cases, the child would be adjudged feebleminded
according to the Stanford age, while he could only be diagnosed
as borderline or backward or "deferred" according to the 1908
14 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
or 1911 scale. Thus subject E according to the Stanford standard
would be "definitely feebleminded" by the Stanford scale (I. Q.,
63), while according to the 1908 (I. Q., 77) and 1911 (I. Q., 73)
he would be borderline or backward, or "possibly feebleminded."
Subject G would be borderline and probably feebleminded by the
Stanford scale (I. Q., 71) but only "dull" by the 1908 (I. Q., 85)
and 1911 (I. Q., 83). It is perfectly evident that the criteria of
diagnosis of "The Measurement of the Intelligence" have no value
with any scale of intelligence except the Stanford, and their value
with this scale is still "sub judice."1
Which age rating of the above cases is the most accurate?
Taking the Seguin formboard performance as a criterion, and using
as criteria the average scores of three investigators, the 1908 and
1911 results gave a more accurate measure in six cases, the 1908
in one, and the Stanford in two. Based on the writer's formboard
norms, the 1908 and the 1911 ratings were more accurate in five
cases and the Stanford in four. From the standpoint of this single
criterion, the old scales have a slight advantage. We may further
evaluate the mental ages by the pedagogical status of the children.
In estimating the pedagogical status it is of importance to rate the
child according to the grade of work he is capable of doing success-
fully and not according to the grade in which he is classified. When
so rated (by the teachers and principals on our Forms 13-A, and
13-H?the detailed reports cannot here be given), the Stanford
mental rating seems to be more accurate for two pupils, the 1908
for one, and the 1911 for two, while the results are approximately
the same for one and uncertain for four pupils. The pedagogical
data for the latter four were not furnished with sufficient accuracy
to enable us to reach a satisfactory conclusion. It is evident that
our analyses do not justify the categorical assertion that the Stanford
scale is much superior to the other scales (in the ages we have con-
sidered) because its age standards are more accurate (our results,
however, do show that they are more difficult). Certainly an
analysis of the Stanford data in table I2 does not justify the con-
clusion that the age standards are absolutely correct, for only in
three ages does the number of children tested equal or exceed 100,
while in age 4 only 17 were tested and in age 5 only 54. According
to the table on p. 164, only 10 pupils were tested in age 3. In spite
of all that has been said upon the subject, we are not ready to accept
i No demonstrable proof has been furnished of the correctness of the standards of feeblemindedness there
given. We do not subscribe to the sweeping statement that aStanford I. Q., "below 70" invariably indicates
"definite feeblemindedness."
1 The Stanford Revision and Extension of the Binet-Simon Scale for Measuring Intelligence, p. 9.
STANFORD REVISION OF BINET-SIMON SCALE. 15
implicitly the dictum that norms based on such limited numbers
are entirely trustworthy and that it would be a pure waste of time
to increase the number of examinees.
The more we have used the scale the more we have felt that
the standards in IV and V (and possibly in III) are too difficult,
while we suspect that those standards above age VI which we have
been considering are somewhat too difficult, due, among other things,
as we have intimated, to the administrative technique in some tests,
which permits chance failures, and to the absence of tests in age
XI.
That the examiner must be wary of implicitly following the
Stanford age norms and standards appears from the following
consideration. Many young children who would have to be called
"definitely feebleminded" by the rigid Stanford standards have
graded exactly like children whom we examined years ago by the
old scales, who were diagnosed at that time as backward or border-
line and who have subsequently developed beyond the feebleminded
status.1 These young children graded from a year and a half to
two and a half years retarded. By the Stanford scale (judging by
our records) they perhaps would have averaged another year back-
ward, and would thus have tested indubitably feebleminded accord-
ing to the conventional standards.
Altogether, we are inclined to feel that the Stanford revision
marks some advance, but we feel that it would be unfortunate if
the scale were to be regarded as a finality. Intelligence testing
is still in its early stages. We have now had a considerable number
of private revisions, to which we owe much. But the limitations
of such revisions are inevitable. We believe that the next revision
should be undertaken on an extensive scale by a subsidized bureau
or by a psychological association. One of the incidental fruits of
such a revision would be that it would serve to check the profiteering
tendency in connection with the exploitation and sale of testing
manuals, record booklets, and materials.
The best form of scale for the measurement of intelligence is
still an open question. Many of the arguments for the point scale
are specious.
i Others, on the other hand, have lacked the potentiality for development and have eventually proved to be
feebleminded.
