The Mental Hygiene Movement
===========================

:Author:  A. Helen Boyle, M.D.

Vice-Chairman, The National Council for Mental Hygiene
i am deeply sensible of the honou when we
Rowing me to address this meeting to- y> .^t,
Welcome so heartily the presence of our J* ing
and also so many friends and chance of
* Present conditions, have had httle chance o
corning together. Good social ^stment^
f the essence of mental hygiene, a d
l we must meet. But we miss many gcOy
riends who are away, practising
I would not have you think that ^aV^eCause
given the task of delivering this add ability.
xt Ye. any special oratorical or persu:1S ? arian
u is largely for a certain, shall I say, f
tih est ? For I attended the birth of .all. three o
^ great voluntary Mental Health ass
fV>x Guidance Council, the Centra -j for
wr Mental Welfare and the National Cou ^
Rental Hygiene. We still have growing 'Qrily
We hope in the future to see the three satisfarton y
J^ed in one body. It is of ^National Counc^
x Mental Hygiene, and of its history, that to speak.

It all began with a very sick younga
^rnerica, the late Mr. Clifford Bee?. ^h? fSon_
esult of his illness became the outstand g P He
aiity in the work of mental hygiene in h ? ^
roke down mentally from the age o ^is
Underwent indifferent treatment, surmoun
difficulties with courage, and, with oatient,
courage, used his experiences as ame y^is
n? light matter in those days, to write a boo .
book, A Mind that Found Itself, published in 1908,
describes in detail his mental processes and recovery.
He sent it to various distinguished people, among
them the late Professor William James, who gave
him heartening help. The book aroused intense
interest in the subject of mental hygiene and the
urgent need for its improvement. Among the
things Clifford Beers said was this: " Improvement
can never be brought about without some central
organization by means of which the best ideas in
the world may be crystallized and passed along."
What he preached he practised.

He started the National Committee for Mental
Hygiene, supported by many brilliant and thoughtful
Americans, both lay and medical.

Just after the last war I went to America to see
what was being done, and of all that I saw I thought
this movement the most worthwhile activity in
mental hygiene. On my return I approached
various people, among them Sir Maurice Craig, a
memorial to whom we hope to have soon. He had
already heard of Mr. Beers' work, and was himself
a pioneer in the promotion of early treatment for
mental disorders, urging the importance of physical
rest and methods of treatment then new, but now
generally recognized and used. Sir Maurice gave
his far-seeing and powerful aid to starting the
National Council for Mental Hygiene and later was
the means of interesting the late Duke of Kent,
who graciously became the Council's President and
gave it strong and ready support in every way
possible, speaking warmly of its work on many
fhe Pr^fdlrietSSTx*ven at a special meeting of the National Council for Mental Hygiene on.!^e<!icc?Q?i1 ?f ^'e v's'( ?f
estaent, H.R.H. The Duchess of Kent, at Manson House, Portland Place, W.l, on April 26th, 1944.
occasions. May I be allowed to quote some of the
things His Royal Highness said:?

At the Fourth European Reunion in 1936:
These reunions, followed every five years by
international congresses at which members of all
mental hygiene councils can meet, are a very
valuable means of helping to solve the mental
health problems which confront the world.

Later in the same address he said:

There has never been a time in the history of
the world when sane balanced minds are so
needed, nor when mental hygiene propaganda
is so greatly required.
Surely those words are as true now as when they
were spoken.
At the Fifth Biennial Congress we heard these
words:
I want to stress straight away that the aim of
this Council is not only to prevent mental illness
but to improve the mental health of the community.
With that strong and inspiring lead nothing less
should content us: not only to aim at relief and
cure, not only to prevent mental illness but to
improve and raise the standard of mental health
throughout the world, and it is possible, and probable, that the International Committee which Mr.
Beers founded, and to which before this war
53 nations adhered, may well be his finest and most
permanent work. At present the links are tenuous,
but the work is going on and the Provisional
National Council for Mental Health has arranged
lectures on mental health subjects for members of
other nations in this country who wish to know
more of our methods.

Mental hygiene has made great advances in the
last twenty years. The Mental Treatment Act is
one of the most noteworthy, enabling any patients
to be admitted voluntarily to a Mental Hospital
if they feel they need treatment and rest. Previously
they had to wait till they were so ill that they could
be certified as insane. It was an absurd, a tragic
position. I remember one case of a white-faced
little mother who was refused admission and the
treatment which she urgently needed, because?this
was the reason given?" no one could say she was
insane ".

Another great advance is the provision of OutPatient Clinics, which are becoming more and more
numerous, enabling patients troubled with any form
of nervous difficulty to get advice and treatment
easily, and usually at the same hospital which they
are accustomed to attend for physical illness.
Unfortunately, beds for such cases are still woefully lacking. They are needed for patients for
whom treatment inside a Mental Hospital is not
suitable, and for children who need treatment away
from home. Here is such a case, the case of a
little girl who refused to speak at all outside her
home. At school not one word would she utter.

It was plain that she adjusted all right to her hofl^'
It was the outside world that was the difficulty'
So she was taken into hospital. There it ^
discovered that she had been badly cuffed on u?
head at school by the teacher for talking when, 1
fact, it was not she, but the girl next to her who h<*
talked. The injustice rankled in her soul, and &
did not speak again except in the security of hofli *
In the end she became again a normal child in honj
and school, but it took months to warm her lip .
heart before she could trust the world and not fea
those in authority.

Great advances have also been made not only lIj
the opportunities for treatment, but in the treatmefl
itself, by the use of electricity, by the new use o
drugs, and by " rehabilitation ", but perhaps tfl
greatest advance of all has been in the change.0,
public opinion on the whole subject, a change whip
this Council has helped by its propaganda, 11
lectures, the work of its committees and the evident
which in different ways it is continually putting
before the public.

There is still much to be done. One of oll.j
biggest problems is juvenile crime, and the Counci
is very much interested, from the mental ^eale
aspect, in the Criminal Justice Bill. It has for n\
moment been put on one side, but we all hope tha
this will not be for long.

That, very briefly, is how the Council began 11
work and what has been done since then,
history, however interesting, is of little worth unles
it leads to wider understanding of the present, an
to the development of fruitful ideas for the futu^
I should like to make one or two suggestions for t*1
future, and in doing so, let me say that I am n?
speaking for the Council but for myself alone.
There is still a fertile field for energy, a vaS_
country where, indeed, there is no room for coin
placency. As the men and women of this W?r'
develop, ever adding to their powers and, let it "
said also, to the difficulties they have to surmouf1
physically, mentally and spiritually, so will t*1
knowledge of the body, mind and spirit of man hav
to grow also. Pathologists tell us that there af
millions of resting, or undeveloped, cells in the braj
of whose uses we know nothing. Are they nierev
to replace others in case of need, or, more splend1
idea, are they the seeds of fresh capacities and po^r9
which remain to be explored, understood and used ?
Certain it is that there seem to be powers possess^
by certain races which are absent in others. Son1^
Eastern people have powers of concentration, an
can attain a curious degree of suspended animati0"'
which are strange to us. Across India, and acros
Africa, so those best acquainted with the country?
tell us, news is transmitted with a rapidity inexpl1
able to us, for it is done without wires, accumulator'
batteries, or any of the means that we understan ?
Indeed, have not the powers of the spirit bee7
demonstrated over and over during this war ?
There is a land of hope and glory ahead of u >
Who can say that we may not master the problenj
matter, as we know it, and be free from our bodi
^ explore the universe ? Probably ^ on^
shall fly to the moon, which I am . , j yov
twenty-eight flying days away. Wi
wiU say. Maybe; and yet, maybe n small sjze
I wonder if anyone here has notice ordinar>
of a goose's head. (I am referring v,eads ma>
goose, not to the human variety whos ^ has i
he large.) And yet what a brain ? . ^
When a hen that has hatched ou^os i jn his
a coop on the lawn, a gander, who know
hfe seen a gosling, being an only <? . with a
at once that they are his chddren, ^ ^ does
Queer mother he has never met them and
not trust. He will mount guard ove so
one gander I knew would hardly fee ^an
concerned was he to take care of his larM rtant
II be that the actual brain-matter is advantage
than we sometimes think ? To ge t we
of all human possibilities we must loo t^e care
do not stultify our powers by ne?lect^gd body,
of. the three parts of which we ar= made, boj,
mmd and spirit, and to use all three
recovery, to protect, and to develop. ^ more
This unity of man has never bef _ Qf the
clearly recognized than it is now, ncern, the
first importance in what is our^ch continually
Prevention of mental instability. body,
^e the inter-relation of the three par ? cessively,
if acting irregularly, insufficiently jn(jeed
may perturb the activities of the min<d, d by
seem to affect the spirit. A mmd PP t Qn the
flings of inferiority or by loss m ^ Gf appetite
body, driving it to sleeplessness, mind may
a"d other disorders, and anxiety o . ? seen a
affect the activities of the glands. teen days
Patient develop a large th^??ijf^hen th anxiety
of anxiety, to disappear as quickly wnen
Was removed. , . t_ u0th mind
Of the power of the spirit to domi lately
and body I would say that m0^ ^e0LP what Mr.
^en proof of it, and I would qu recently
Winston Churchill said of it when he spoK
?f the " miracle of the British Empire .
What is this miracle, for endsofthe
which calls men from the utterm reach a
earth, some riding twenty day . t0 be
recruiting station, some armies?a ? they
sent 14,000 miles across the seas bet
reach the battlefield ? . which makes
What is this force, this mira*cle, . as any
Governments, as proud and sovere g
that have ever existed, immediate
all their affairs and set themselve
Old Land to beat the common ioe . f and
You must look deep into the heart of m ^
then you will not find the answ it js that
look with the eye of the spirit. dominated
you learn that human beings are n they
by material things, but by ideas for wh.clftw
are willing to give their lives or th
To enhance this knowledge of the spii'it, to^ an(j
facts showing this inter-relation of b y, anything
sPirit is worthy of research, is indeed w
; we can pay in energy, industry, work and treasure.
i There must be more research. The work of Child
1 Guidance?work of great delicacy and precision, and
perhaps needing certain qualities of personality?is
i contributing greatly to our understanding of mental
r instability and to the preventing of it. Observations
' and records of early difficulties have already thrown
! a blaze of light on certain basic troubles, and
i perhaps will enable us not only to cure cases of
; instability, but to succeed in that greater task of
which the Duke of Kent spoke when he said that
our aim was " to improve the mental health of the
community ".

Much of this research is for the future, but what
immediate improvements can we consider ? Do
we wish to see perpetuated the mental hospitals
with vast buildings and patients whose numbers
reach thousands ? The one I was Medical Officer
in, not far from here, had 2,500. patients. What
should the immediate future do in planning and
building its mental hospitals ? Before the Town
and Country Planning is completed it is important
that the needs of mental health should be considered
and that its hospitals should not be thrust out into
the wilderness, very truly the wilderness. Many
are now placed in the depths of the country, miles
from the town they serve. One I know is five
stations away, with a walk at the end. I would
submit that we should aim at small hospitals near,
or in, the area from which they receive patients.
The Board of Control have suggested that a thousand
patients should be the maximum. I venture to
suggest 500. There is hope, and intention, that the
psychiatric teaching units, proposed for the teaching
hospitals, shall be small, and what a splendid thing
it will be to have all medical students trained in
them ! But we must think, too, of the desirability
of having all mental hospitals smaller, so that those
erected by the Local Authorities shall never again
house thousands a long way from their own homes,
and that the term " put away " shall never again be
used of mental patients.

A new problem of importance will be the mental
hygiene of the people demobilized after the war.
Never before has a war so entered the homes of the
people, either directly by bombs or by evacuation,
or indirectly by calls to the Forces and other war
work. One great difficulty may be the large
number of girls and women who, having become
accustomed to a social life never before experienced,
and also to the handling of their own money, may
find a small house very dull, even with babies, when
their men are away all day, or the harder cases of the
girls whose husbands will never come home and who,
leaving their war work, will have to try to settle
to a new and lonely life.

After a League of Nations meeting some years
ago, at which I had said that social opportunities
were needed, a reporter came up to me and contrasted that cold meeting with one which he had
attended the night before, where a number of old
soldiers had met, had had coffee and buns, had sung
the old songs that they all knew and had almost had
to be driven out of the hall in which they had met.

He asked: How can we perpetuate the camaraderie
of war in peacetime ? We must answer that
question, too. Would it be possible to have
something in the nature of clubs with accommodation for whole families, where the tired man could
have a drink and a smoke, and the tired wife, too,
where the children could be cared for and where, if
not tired, the parents could dance, play games,
read or chat, and possibly have general talks on the
subjects they voted to discuss. The present
opportunities for such meeting and recreation
provided by Women's Institutes and the Mothers'
Union, by the Boy Scouts and the Girl Guides, by
the Y.W.C.A. and the Y.M.C.A., plus pubs,
invaluable as they all are, tend to split the family,
and the wife cannot go out with her husband, whom
she may not have seen all day. The Peckham
Pioneer Health Centre I believe already supply
much of all this, but I would prefer not to start W
having other things in these clubs. They should
solely for recreation. They should be simple, an
they should be run by the people themselves. .
Others may have better suggestions to make, an
I hope that all will give thought to it, for it is ofl
of the many things to which we must give though
and on which we must act, if we are to have a
nation with a sound mind. .

In this brief talk I have only been able to toucn
the fringe of this mighty subject, and I would say
again that in all we think and plan and do, we mus
remember the inter-relation of body, mind an(i
spirit, and their relation to God. That is ?
stupendous importance, and the possibilities of p.
work of mental hygiene, carried on in that belieI>
are illimitable.
