Hostels for Children in need of Psychiatric Attention
======================================================

:Author:  Lucy G. Fildes, B.A., Ph.D.

Chairman of Ad Hoc Committee on Hostels, Provisional National Council for Mental Health
During the past few months the Provisional
National Council for Mental Health has had under
consideration the question of the provision of hostel
Accommodation in post-war planning for children
ln need of psychiatric attention. The main results
?f these considerations are outlined below:?

The Need for and Function of the Hostels
While it is accepted that, as a general rule,
Psychiatric investigation and treatment of children
should be carried on while the children are resident
ln their own homes, a certain proportion of such
cases cannot so be dealt with, e.g. where the home
conditions are grossly unsuitable, where distance
from a clinic militates against treatment, etc., etc.
Foster home placement might provide a solution
for some of these cases, but, in view of the often
seriously disturbing behaviour of the children, this
cannot always be found. For the same reason,
and because of the particular needs in the handling
the children themselves, they do not fit into a
hostel or home for normal children. It seems
inevitable, therefore, that all Authorities planning
for the psychiatric treatment of children under
their care, must also plan some provision for
residence in special hostels during treatment for a
Proportion of these children.

The function of these special hostels would
therefore be to provide care and a suitable environ-
ment for the full development of a child who, for
his own welfare, has to" be removed for a period
his own home or his normal place of residence.
Either some problem in the child or factors in his
environment may make this transfer advisable.
far as is possible the hostel should provide
normal family conditions, the child should go out to
school, mix with other children and be prepared to
take his place in the community. He should be
discharged when he is fit to return to life in the
community.

Administrative Controls. Admission and Discharge
It is clear that the Authority or Authorities
Responsible for the setting up of such a hostel must
nave full administrative control, but, owing to its
specialized nature, it appears essential that arrange-
ments should be made whereby all admissions and
discharges should be directly recommended by the
psychiatrist to whom the case is referred for investi-
gation or who is conducting treatment. Further-
more, opportunity for consultation and discussions
between the staff of the hostel and that of the clinic
conducting treatment should be made readily
available.

The Hostels Themselves
The Committee felt strongly that no attempt
should be made to set up any fixed or rigid standards
for the hostels themselves. Flexibility and freedom
to experiment were most essential at this stage.
They did, however, agree that our present knowledge
of the problems involved justified us in laying down
certain broad general principles which should be
taken into consideration in making plans for the
starting and running of such hostels.

1. Size of Hostels. It is best that a hostel
designed for the accommodation of maladjusted
children should be small in size, taking about
8-10 children. In this way the close personal
relationships with adults which most of the children
need, can then more easily be achieved. If for any
reason the hostel must be for larger numbers,
arrangements should be made whereby groups
within the whole number of children are each made
the particular care of one adult.

2. Age Range. In a small hostel (8-10 children)
all ages could and should be catered for since this
arrangement the more nearly simulates a family
group. Age differentiation is probably essential
in larger hostels.

3. Sex Differentiation. So far as evidence
could be gained by the Committee it is preferable
that boys and girls be together in one hostel, and
that a reasonable equality of numbers be aimed
at between them.

Definite decisions with regard to this matter must,
however, be made after our consideration of the
nature and ability of the staff, the type of child
receiving treatment, and the nature of the house.
4. Facilities for Play and Occupation. It is
important for the development of the children that
adequate play space (both outdoor and indoor) and
play material be provided so that both destructive
and constructive impulses may be worked out.
A small room or rooms for quieter forms of play
and recreation is also desirable, these rooms should
be pleasant and homelike, giving the children a
sense of ownership coupled with responsibility for
their care and maintenance. Separate lockers
should be provided for each child's individual
possessions.

5. Sleeping Accommodation. On this matter the
Committee felt that information which they had so
far received was not adequate for any definite
opinion. However, with regard to the special
group of children under consideration, information
and experience indicated that preferably not more
than two or three, with a possible maximum of four,
should sleep in one room. This policy would
certainly be practicable in a small hostel.

6. Meals. Suggestions were made as to the
desirability of communal provision of meals (with
children in other hostels, in schools or special
centres, etc.). On this point the Committee felt
strongly that mealtimes were so essential a part of
the children's education and training that all meals
should be served in the individual hostels.

Staffing
----------

Since success or failure in the hostel's purpose
depends ultimately on the staff, selection of staff is
of the highest importance. Points to be borne in
mind are:?

(a) Personal suitability.
(b) Adequate training and knowledge.
(c) Adaptability and initiative, together with the
power to co-operate with others.

Small hostels are necessarily expensive in staff,
while maladjusted children certainly require a
proportionately larger staff than normal children.
Preferably the staff should be mixed. A man
and wife, if suitably qualified, might be the ideal
arrangement as people to take charge. The
number of assistants would depend on the size of
the hostel, type and numbers of children, etc.

Classification of Cases
-------------------------

1. There should be no classification of cases for
particular hostels on the basis of symptoms only.
This point is of special importance because of a
tendency, unfortunately still prevalent, to group
together children who show the same symptoms
whatever be their cause (eneuresis is the most
obvious example). It is clearly recognized that
any special symptoms may be the result of widely
differing causative factors, while the same funda-
mental disorders may reveal themselves in a variety
of ways in different individuals. Classification by
symptoms alone tends almost inevitably to attempt
to cure the symptoms without further analysis.
This, even if successful, may in itself be dangerous
in obscuring yet further the fundamental trouble.
Such classification is psychologically bad for the
children concerned?its only defence is convenience
which can in no sense be set against the child's
well-being.

2. Separate hostels should be provided if
possible for the following two groups of children
i. Those constitutionally inferior, whether their
inferiority is intellectual or emotional or both.
ii. The neurotic, i.e. the child of essentially normal
personality make-up distorted by environ-
mental circumstances.

This need for separation rests on the fundamental
differences in make-up between the two groups of
children?those who are by nature inferior, either
intellectually or emotionally, need above all things
adult guidance and support to a degree above
what is usually considered normal. Neurotic
children, on the other hand, require maximum
freedom.
