Special Schools and the Education Bill
=======================================

Correspondence

ni1
Sir,
tjhere has been general approval of
J, s requirement that all children should have the
Ration suited to their age, aptitude and ability, and
J??se interested in handicapped children have welcomed
? e clause stressing " the need for securing that provision
nrtHac!e for pupils who suffer from any disability of mind
body by providing, either in Special Schools or otheiww >
difCu?(. ed"cational treatment " appropriate for the
'^ability, in the practical interpretation of the Bill s
t Usps there may, however, be difference of opinion a
what is the most suitable educational treatment lor
u5 group of mentally subnormal children which lies
rftvvfen those deemed to be ineducable and those,
tin 1^ whose needs can be met by special educa-
?nal treatment in the ordinary school.
the purpose of this letter is to stress the fact that there
e subnormal children, relatively, however, few in
oni ur' whose " special educational treatment can
nly be given adequately in a separate Special School
.^'i-onment, s;nce their primary need is removal from
\^itk n8 effect of association in school and class
a majority of children who are superior to them in
usability and social adaptability.
, " should be noted, and is apt to be overlooked, that
,tine children, even when associated with the dull ar
dnii much in the minority. It is true that they, like the
in!l' need special methods of teaching, smaller classe
more practical curriculum. But these alone do
rp! to sive the more subnormal children that selt-
sPect which comes to them when, no longer the inferior
members of the group but in company more or less with
J?.Ua.ls> they recognize that the life of the school com-
munity depends on their efforts, that their success is the
J|rst concern of their teachers, that the little responsi-
DlIlties of the school and the leadership in games and
other activities are theirs by natural right, not by
condescension however sympathetic, and that their
progress, though slow, is not overshadowed by that of a
great many others. Children, even those who are
mentally subnormal, are quick to see through the most
well-meaning ruses of adults, and it is not to be expected,
nor would it be right to expect, that their brighter
schoolfellows should give place continually to these
weaker members. Even were such an unnatural
adjustment made in the classroom, in the free play of
the playground the brighter children would naturally
dominate.
Long and varied experience of teaching children
classified as educable mental defectives, as well as those
merely dull, of examining (in association with medical
officers) thousands of children referred for Special
Schools' examination, and of inspecting and observing
children in Special Schools and classes, leaves me with
no doubt that there are children whose only chance of
thriving socially and of developing to the full education-
ally lies in their admission to a Special School. Few
who have had first-hand and understanding contact with
these children will deny this, unless blinded by theory,
by ill-judged sentimentality or, at lowest, by fear of
expense. In spite of the much talked of " stigma " and
the natural regret of the parents that their children are
not fit to be educated in ordinary schools, it is an obvious
fact that the children themselves are happy in Special
Schools where they are free for a whole school day from
comparison with and criticism by other brighter children.
No one who cares for children would want to separate
them from the ordinary group except in their best
interests and for their happiness, but though opinions
may differ at the upper and lower borderline as to the
need of individual children for education in a Special
School, the fact remains that there are in the community
12 MENTAL HEALTH
children whose general mental feebleness demands the
very special treatment of a separate school environment.
Some people have been frightened by the numbers as
foreshadowed in surveys, e.g. those of the Wood report.
My own opinion, based on years of work with the select-
ing medical officers, is that the number of mentally
handicapped children requiring Special School teaching
is not as great as such reports indicate. It must be
remembered that selection is an individual thing. There
is no question of assessing examination results and
transferring everyone below a certain I.Q. or of so many
years' educational backwardness to a Special School.
By such a method the number would indeed be large.
In fact, however, the selection is of individual children,
of " Johns " or " Marys " with full consideration of
every factor of their case, their I.Q., their temperament,
their social adjustment, their home environment?
material and psychological?their physical history and
so on. Everything is weighed up and the decision made
in the best interests of the child as a whole.
With selection of this type, I doubt if, even with.full
ascertainment, the number selected for Special Schools
would exceed 1 per cent, of the school population,
especially if everything possible were being done in the
ordinary schools for the treatment of the backward and
dull children. Increasing social security, attention to
nutrition, earlier medical supervision and extension 01
nursery school education should have their influence'
too, in reducing the numbers who appear to need Specif
School education. But in spite of every ameliorating
influence there will always be a proportion of children
who will need education in Special Schools and who wil?
only by care and education in that environment, specially
planned for their development and needs, be fitted, vvitn
such after-care as is necessary, to take a lowly
useful part in the community when they leave school-
Some people, while admitting this, object on grounds oi
practicability, but with the Education Bill's provision f?*
boarding as well as day Special Schools and for join1
committees of neighbouring Education Authorities, there
should be little or no difficulty in making arrangements
for the Special School education of all children who need
it, even of those in country districts.
Yours etc.,
Mary M. Lindsay.
Liverpool.
{Correspondence on this letter is invited.?Ed.)
