The Modern Prison System of India
===================================

MENTAL HEALTH 39
Reviews

By Lieut.-Colonel
-------------------

F. A. Barker, I.M.S. (retd.), sometime S.M.O.,
Port Blair, and Inspector-General of Prisons, C.P.
and Punjab. With foreword by Lord Hailey.

Preface by Professor P. H. Winfield. Edited for
Department of Criminal Science, Faculty of Law,
University of Cambridge, by L. Radzinowicz and
J. W. C. Turner. Pp.139. London: Macmillan &
Co., 1944. 10s. 6d.

This book is based on the Report of the Indian Jails
Committee 1919-20, the recommendations of which are
8iven in detail in an appendix. The Committee envisaged
a prison system for India providing all the services with
which we, in this country, are familiar, and adapting
them to the conditions it had to serve. The problems
which had to be met in applying the recommendations
to a sub-continent of many races and in which the various
religions and their political implications formed other
sharply defined cleavages, are indicated in the text.
The fact that access to statistical records was not
available to the author has resulted in emphasis being
thrown on his more personal observations, and he has
added to this his wide experience of both prison condi-
tions and Indian life as a whole.

The compression of the subject into a space of 139 pages
has limited the detailed discussion of its various aspects.
Jhus one chapter is allotted to mental defectiveness and
abnormality, and in it the growth, from small beginnings,
of the measures taken to deal with these conditions, is
traced. The allocation of special establishments,
treatment by experts, and the training of subordinate
staff in the care and management of the cases are instances
of the steps which have been taken to implement them.
The development however has been uneven, some
Provinces and presidencies being more advanced than
others. It is interesting to note that no more profitable
"eld for the ascertainment of these defects is to be found
than that of the prison population. As would be
e*pected, idiots do not reach the prisons and imbeciles
are rarely found there. Psychotics and post-psychotics
are receiving appropriate care in increasing numbers.
Education and the employment of prisoners were the
subjects of careful attention by the Committee. The
Primary education of illiterates has greatly increased. It
js interesting to note that at least one province has laid
down that the object of labour in prison is to provide
exertise for body and mind and a training in trades
which may be of use after release. The use of power
driven machinery to increase output and of unproductive
labour as a means of punishment has therefore been
discountenanced.

. Crimes of violence in a country where in many districts
jife is cheap, education, especially of women, is meagre,
the standard of life is low, and religion is bound up with
Politics, are extremely common. In the United Provinces
W'th a population of 49? millions the murder rate per
annum has increased from 800 before 1936 to 1,135 in
'^38. The crime is committed often for the most trivial
reasons. An appendix contributed by Sir Louis Stuart
and Mr. A. Campbell gives a broad outline of the
different classes of homicide.

The classification of prisoners has been extended to
Segregate recidivist from first offender and children
a?d adolescents from both. Special consideration is
&lven to the training of juvenile offenders and the
borstal system has been introduced. The influx of
Political prisoners has strained the already limited jail
accommodation severely from time to time, and has
hampered progress in prison administration.
Among other advances is the enactment of a Probation
Act, and the machinery designed to reduce the number of
sentences of imprisonment and to restore the offender
into a useful member of the community is in operation.
After-care on release from prison is also receiving
organized attention.

In the prisons themselves improvements have been
effected in the selection and training of all grades of staff.
Revising Boards have been set up to reconsider the
sentences of long-term prisoners at the appropriate time,
for it is appreciated that judges may have difficulty, when
imposing a sentence, in assessing the date on which an
accused person can safely be released.

Preventive medical measures have been highly success-
ful, especially in reducing the number of cases of pneu-
monia, dysentery and malaria. The importance of
relieving physical defects as a means of preventing crime
is also properly stressed.

The book is a valuable contribution to the study of
prison systems.
H. T. P. Young.
