Psychologist Looks at Educational Reconstruction
====================================================

:Author:  Agathy H. Boley, Ph.D.

Senior Psychologist, School Psychological Service, Leicester
In a recent address to a representative group of
Psychologists, Dr. Lucy Fildes spoke in encouraging
jerrns of the Brave New World which is opening
in ue us* She stressed the part we need to play
? the work of Educational Reconstruction?that
e have not only to deal with sick children, but also
eed to prevent children from becoming sick. This
Positive and preventive aspect, this constructive
ature of the work of a psychologist is of major
?^Portance, and often receives insufficient attention.
Surely the present situation?when we are on the
Ve of the passing of an historic Bill concerning
education?is an occasion when psychologists must
become articulate. We have had much experience
of children who have become maladjusted in
personality from the effects of a disturbing home
environment or an unfriendly school environment
working upon inner emotional factors. Local
authorities have entrusted us with the task of
organizing classes for backward pupils, of assisting
teachers in the management of the difficult child, of
urging greater understanding of the problems of
growing up. We write books, we give lectures,
we hold friendly discussions. Indeed, we have a
real opportunity of knowing when the educational
system does not fit the needs of the child, and
we welcome those parts of the new Education Bill
which seek to remedy this.

Many psychologists and educationists recognize
the unique importance of the emotional relationship
of the child to the parent in the early years of
childhood. It is only out of these early experiences
of affection and security that good emotional growth
can proceed harmoniously and without this the most
efficient teaching in the world will only fall on
unfertile, or rather neurotic, ground. Therefore,
we deplore the necessity of establishing residential
Nursery Schools, which represent an artificial
situation to the young child and prevent strong
emotional ties from developing, but we recognize
this to be a wartime necessity and seek to make the
conditions as satisfactory as possible. Similarly
we insist that very young children should not be
urged to attend Nursery Schools until their emotional
maturity is sufficiently advanced, and in the majority
of cases 3 years is a better age than 2 years.
Knowing the nature of the intellectual develop-
ment of children, we realize the importance of
approaching education, i.e. in the narrow sense of
formal work, from the child's angle. The child's
most natural medium and language is play, and the
great value to later education of providing outlets
through play in the Infant Schools has been most
ably demonstrated by Miss D. E. M. Gardiner.

It is interesting to note that the age of compulsory
education in Poland is 7 years and that a mental age
of 6 years is considered the best age for the com-
mencement of the 3 R's in the U.S.A. All observers
note the rapidity with which the older child learns
to read if he has not been introduced to formal work
too early. Methods in the Nursery Schools have
had a great influence on Infant methods, and the
3-7 Nursery-Infant School may well be the most
suitable approach to school life for the child.
The essential individuality of children's develop-
ment, the unevenness of intellectual growth, the
variation in mental ages, the fluctuation in social-
emotional growth, are well-established psychological
facts. So the demand for smaller classes (a
maximum of 30), for individual methods of teaching,
for adjustment classes and special classes, and even
for smaller school units (300 perhaps being a
suitable maximum for one department) is stressed
by workers in the fields of Child Guidance, Infant
Welfare, Juvenile Delinquency and the like.
The value of Experimental Schools is recognized
by the Board of Education. In such, one aims to
provide an educational milieu which will satisfy the
special needs of the less stable child, the over
anxious, over aggressive, or unadjusted child. The
school to which the Children's Centre at Chesterfield
is attached, the Haddenham Road School in
Leicester and Open Air Schools suitable for the
nervous and delicate child are outstanding examples.
At the Haddenham Road School in Leicester,
children are examined by the psychologist before
admission, and the home is visited by the psychiatric
social worker. Close contact is maintained with
the school and home by the Psychological Service
staff and informal conferences are held regularly-
Teaching methods are carefully adapted to the needs
of the child and individual work is the rule. Outlet
in play, arts and crafts, drama, cooking and house*
craft, boxing, swimming and other athletics are
provided. A wide measure of freedom within afl
ordered framework of wise discipline helps the chi'd
to gain control and get easement from inner tension
and conflict. Children who are described as restless>
backward, unruly, troublesome, nervy or unco*
operative readily adapt to such a school, and after3
period spent there?usually about a year?are ab'e
to readapt to the ordinary school and behave 3s
ordinary citizens. Only children of normal intel"
ligence are accepted. Their educational progress Is
rapid. However good our normal schools may be>
I think there is always likely to be a place for Infan
adjustment classes and experimental schools in our
educational system. They serve both a remedial an'1
a prophylactic function.

The gradual replacement of the competitiv^
scholarship examination at 11-plus by a careful
scrutiny of scholars' record cards and the results oj
standardized tests of Intelligence, of English an"
Arithmetic will be widely welcomed. This may o?
much to alter the character of the Junior Schools*
reducing the pressure and emphasis on forma1
work and giving more opportunity for tne
development of "centres of interest" and for a
wider curriculum.

A more careful selection of pupils for appropriate
Secondary education will be an important step
forward. We have yet to learn to value the skilled
craftsman as highly as the capable business man
the distinguished University professor. Technic
education will receive an impetus and there will be
more opportunities for both girls and boys in this
field. Provision is to be made for the girl or boy
who shows special abilities at 13 or later, and there
is much need for research to determine the bes
method of discerning special abilities at an early aSe'
We have yet to decide whether a specialized education
or a wide general education is the best for the young
adolescent. Division into modern, technical an<j
grammar schools may be beneficial to the child afld
convenient for administration, but it is wise 10
remember that wide cultural education with oppor'
tunities for creative work is required by all youn?
people, and at adolescence the provision f?
emotional outlets is most essential. There are
many people who oppose the over-academic bias o
Secondary schools and think that segregation an
over-specialization of pupils at 11 is unwise. YounS
People's Colleges carry this idea further. Furthf
education, if conceived on the widest possible basi^
will assist the individual to gain more maturity l{l
intellectual outlook, in social and emotion3
development. He will begin to recognize his p'?c
in the community, his obligation to the community
and to learn greater poise, tolerance and adaP1'
ability. Character training during the years 15'1
? ?-4uaiiy important as further book learning,
skilled athletics, or technical instruction. Here also
will be an opportunity to continue sex education,
o teach hygiene and parentcraft. Sex education
should be in three stages: the first between 3 and
years when the first questions about birth are
answered by the parent, the second at about 11 years
when straightforward information in a framework
?* simple biology, concerning the facts of human
^production, can be given in the upper Junior
classes, and thirdly during adolescence at the end
?l the Secondary School period or during part time
education after leaving school when the principles
ot hygiene and the dangers of illicit sex relationships
can be taught. This point of view, is now, I think,
accepted by most psychologists and many teachers,
ut has yet to be worked out in practice.

A School Psychological Service, in close relation-
ship to the schools, and working under the aegis
01 the Education Department and in close co-
operation with the School Medical Service, should
I^ set up in all areas; the function of this will
e to render diagnostic, advisory and therapeutic
service to those children who by reason of dullness,
retardation or emotional disturbance are causing
concern to their parents and teachers. The expert
service of the psychiatrist, perhaps attached to the
uture Health Centre, of the psychologist, and ot
ne Psychiatric social worker will be needed to
nvestigate and remedy psychological illness at its
?nset. What price our new schools, our new teachers
?r our new system if the child is the victim of an
nxiety neurosis and unable to profit from such
mProvements ? . .

i .hat of the new teachers ? Are they to be
astily trained, immature people who take up
aching as a stopgap to marriage or as an insurance
gainst old age ? Higher salaries, employment ot
parried teachers, smaller classes, improved con-
! ions and modern training methods will, one hopes,
attract more people into the profession who will
r'n8 their zeal, experience and inspiration into the
chools. Careful selection is of first importance,
ut the wider experience of the individual gained in
war work may be more beneficial for the enrichmen
of the teaching profession than the recruitment of
teachers direct from high school and college.
Intelligence and book learning is not enough.
Balance of personality, width of view and above all
understanding of children's needs are the best
qualifications for the future teacher.

The psychologist has an important role to play
in the field of teacher training. Students need to
learn not only the meaning of the Intelligence
Quotient, but also the remedies for juvenile delin-
quency, not only how the child thinks, but how he
feels. The normal development of the child has
first to be learnt and then the exceptions that prove
the rule?the neurotic child, the unstable child, the
defective child. Moreover, the study of child
development begins at birth and in the home, and
students must turn their attention to the pre-school
years whether they wish to teach in primary or
secondary departments. A close liaison between
Child Guidance Clinics and Training Colleges,
where it exists, proves of great value to both, and
the psychology of learning now embraces the
mechanisms of the unconscious as well as the
memorizing of nonsense syllables !

We are indeed looking forward to a Brave New
Educational World. There is good hope of its
realization if all individuals co-operate to this end.
The goodwill of the administrators is of first
importance. Directors of Education hold key
positions. It is fortunate that in Leicester we are
not handicapped by material conditions, by a
ca-canny policy or by narrowness of vision. Mr.
Magnay flung a challenge to a recent meeting of
psychiatric social workers urging them to recognize
the wide implication of their work and the vital
service they can render an Education Department.
The provisions of the new Education Bill must be
fulfilled in spirit as well as in the letter of the law,
and psychologists and educationists must work
together to this end. Directors, attendance officers,
youth organizers, juvenile employment officers,
probation officers, teachers and psychological
workers are the figures which make the pattern of
the new education rich, integrated, many coloured
and satisfying to the child of the future.

Leicp?? artl?le was requested as a result of an address by Mr. H. S. Magnay, M.A., Director of Education,
er> given to the recent annual meeting of Psychiatric Social Workers in London.]
