Backwardness in Rural Areas
============================

:Author: J. M. STEPHEN, M.A.

Psychologist, Somerset County Council
At a recent Teachers' Refresher Course there
were four series of lectures, one being on " Back-
wardness in the Basic Subjects More than half
of the teachers attended these lectures. This gives
an indication of the seriousness of the problem of
backwardness.

My experience related in this article is based on
work in a county where there are schools of all
sizes. It is agreed that educational backwardness
should be tackled in the Junior school; the question
is how this can be done in a county area. In the
town where there are Junior and Infant schools of
200 or 300 children it is possible to run backward
classes of 20-25 children in each Junior department
if necessary. Where there are two or three Junior
departments, one backward class may adequately
serve the entire Junior school population, depend1^
on the number of backward children. A slight difficulty may arise over the transfer of childr?
from one type of school to another, but this can
overcome, in my experience, by visiting the pareo
and getting their co-operation. . .

My main concern in this article is with the villa. t
school. The experiment described was carried 0
in schools of roughly 90 children, juniors and m^n(
In a school of this size there is usually a staff
three teachers. One is the head teacher, who,
addition to teaching a class, is overwhelmed by &
multifarious duties of a head teacher in wartifl1^
A group of perhaps eight backward children
school of this size creates a Pr?Sn?"nvolved.
Proportion to the number of chikl ^ reception
This article is based on work don inc^enCe of
area under wartime c1on^lt'onSThere are evacuated
backwardness is unduly high. Th t schools,
children who have been to several <bflerem
who have missed long periods of . ^ m the
of air raids, and some who are suffenns; trom
emotional disturbance due to seveJ"? -p)e local
ences as well as separation from ? fathers are
children are also affected; many o ?cu00]s there
serving, and in many of the coun t y changes 0f
have been frequent and unav<oida f evaCu-
staff, due in part to the corning andg was not
ated teachers. The plan described & a
hased on a survey of conditions 1 matter of
whole, but was evolved ^rgely nressed head
expediency to meet the needs of har p but
teachers. It is still in an experime the
may prove to be a possible solution o p
Problem. ? iar> from a
In 1942 a distressed letter was rece?e there
head teacher. In her school of 90 cnno Uy
were 15 who were seriously retar<de a^ classes,
and incapable of learning in the They
These children ranged in age from -jj* jntelli-
were all examined on the Terman- -thmetic
gence Scale and were given rea^m? high-grade
tests. The group consisted of t , educa-
defectives who were not seriously one
n^nally' seven dul1 and bau!!n nf low average
Physical defective and four childre jucationally.
intelligence but extremely retarded children
11 was decided to form a class of fifteen^c Qf
under a specially qualified teacher the
^ months. The aim of the class.was to^ ^
children at least a sufficient ground^ g return to
subjects to make it possible for th progress,
their ordinary classes and make ^ group
It was, in fact, found that with sue= individual
^as Possible to give each child inte: adapted
attention as well as to make use of carefu y d
teaching methods, and that at the en essfuiiy.
they did return to their classes qu . children,
} was necessary, especially with the same ^nes,
for the class teachers to continue on acquired
tit this was possible as the childr general
a foundation. Unfortunately, owing to ^ bad
shortage of staff throughout the ar affected
influenza epidemic?which ^^f^dass?the
rnost of the children in the back _ . ? -n this
teacher only spent four teaching m ^ was ,
school. The children were aU /Maintained or 1
found that the three defectives had ^ ,
accelerated their progress, in the ;^ reading and
average progress was one year in groUp the T
'J year in Jrithmetic. In the norma group ^ ,
average progress was one year in enormously t
year in arithmetic. The children gai towards 1
^confidence and their general a resuit was t
school work improved. A secoIjf s relieved of ^
t^the children in the ordinary cla ' made I
the burden of carrying the retarded children,
1 great strides. In a small village where everyone is
interested in everything that happens in the school,
1 it is necessary to avoid the stigma of the " silly
f class In this instance, at the request of the head
1 teacher who had known the village for a very long
time, the object of the class was kept secret, thanks
: to the discretion of the staff. This was possibly
the best course in this particular village.

In the meantime another group of unduly back-
ward children had been discovered. The influenza
epidemic having subsided, it was possible to extricate
the special teacher, who was on supply work, and
dispatch her to run another backward class. This
was possible thanks to the generosity of the Educa-
tion Authority still extremely hard pressed for staff.

This class was also in a Junior and Infant school of
90 children. This time it was decided to enlarge
the class to 18 children, including four retarded
children from a neighbouring school. Although
on a small scale, this is an important development.
The incidence of backwardness, so far considered,
is unduly high owing to wartime conditions. In
normal times there would not be fifteen backward
children in one school of this size. The tendency
might be, therefore, to form one class to serve the
Junior schools in an area. Transport and accom-
modation are the two main difficulties. In this
instance it was possible to arrange for the junior
children attending the backward class to travel on
the bus which transported the Senior school children.
The children in this class were more intelligent
than the children in the first class. The average
Intelligence Quotient was 89. They were, however,
very retarded educationally, particularly in reading.
Eight children were non-readers. The retardation
in arithmetic was not serious. The explanation
of this is that probably the children have more
practice in numbers than in reading in their everyday
life. They shop for their mothers or foster mothers,
and nowadays most children have considerable
pocket money. Although the parents are anxious
for their children to read, there is little active help
given, there are often few books or even papers at
home. In the backward classes a modified infant
method is used. Each child works individually
most of the time, the class is taken as a whole for
stories, etc., and they do some work in pairs or small
groups. The reading and number apparatus is
based largely on Infant apparatus but modified to
suit children of the Junior school age. Before this
class was formed head teachers of both schools
interviewed the parents of the children concerned
and explained the purpose of the class. The
parents were most appreciative when they heard
that their children were to learn to read at last.
The special teacher was somewhat disconcerted
when, on the first day, she found herself confronted
with eighteen eager children who evidently expected
that the ability to read would descend upon them
like manna from heaven without the least effort on
their part ! They have, in fact, settled down very
well, and their enthusiasm for reading is simply
phenomenal. It is not possible to give the results
of this experiment with this second class as the
period is being extended to eight months ending at
Christmas. It is evident that all, except three of
the youngest and dullest children, have made a
very good start; some non-readers are now tackling
Infant Readers Books III and IV.

This experiment, which involved collecting
children from two Junior schools, might be extended
in more normal times. It might be possible to
organize permanent backward classes of 20-25
children to serve an area, the class being attached
to the Junior school nearest to the area Senior school.
This would solve the question of transport, as the
Junior children would use the same facilities as the
Senior school children coming from the surrounding
villages. Even if the plan were generally adopted, a
peripatetic teacher, able to spend short periods of
6-8 months in schools where there was a temporarily
high incidence of backwardness, might be useful.
In my experience there is a tendency for the incidence
of backwardness to decrease fairly rapidly once the
backward class has been in operation for some time.
A permanent class has at first to deal with the
accumulated backwardness throughout the whole
Junior school, but when this has been tackled, the
numbers drop and there remain the mentally
retarded children and the new intake from the
Infant school.

In a rural area remedial work with backward
children may have to be postponed until the Senior
school. It is obviously simplest to run backward
classes in the area Senior schools, because the
children are naturally collected together in them
from the subsidiary Junior schools and there is
usually more space available to allow of extra
classes. Unfortunately by the time the backward
children reach the Senior school, they have developed
a strong resistance to learning based on continuous
failure. It is also extremely difficult to evolve
teaching methods and material which will hold their
interest and at the same time be simple enough in
content to be within the scope of their educational
attainments.

An alternative solution might be to have the
backward classes of children of Junior school age
in the area Senior schools, thus making use of
existing facilities for accommodation and transport.
If this were done, however, the younger children in
the backward classes would miss being an integral
part of a Junior school, and they could not take
part in the general school activities on equal
terms.

The intensive work with very small groups of
backward children described in this article, does
seem to indicate that it is possible to give educational
first-aid in a fairly short space of time. In other
words, to give children a groundwork in the funda-
mental tools of learning so that they are no longer
completely at sea in the normal classes. In my
experience this applies to the dull and retarded
children as well as to the retarded children of
average ability, though to a lesser extent; ideally
they require special teaching throughout the
Junior school.
