Mental Abnormality and Crime
==============================

:Author: L. Radzinowicz and J. W. C. Turner. Macmillan. 18s.

This is an important volume containing an introduction
by Professor P. H. Winfield and 13 essays by recognized
psychological experts with experience of criminology.
It is pointed out that punishment used to demand payment for the wrong done, then the infliction of pain on
the wrongdoer so as to deter him from repeating the
offence or others from imitating him. Nowadays a more
subjective attitude is being taken so that the welfare and
reform of the criminal are considered. This leads to the
conception of partial responsibility and the infliction of
the indeterminate curative sentence. The first essay is
by Brig. Rees who stresses the importance of diagnosis
before treatment. He classifies delinquents into (1) those
suffering from physical disease including mental
deficiency and encephalitis lethargica, (2) Psychotics,
(3) those influenced by other psychological motivations
which may be trivial; simple (example of others, etc.);
reaction character traits (aggression to inferiority or
punishment, etc.), these are generally stubborn and proud
of their delinquencies; or psychoneurotics (compulsions,
etc.), these are ashamed of their delinquencies.
In the second essay Dr. McNiven deals with the
psychoses, and, after a clinical description of various
forms of psychotic delinquents, gives an excellent
discussion of criminal responsibility. He points out the
difficulty of the general application of the McNaghten
rules owing to the vagueness of the conception of mental
illness. He suggests that the questions requiring answer
are (1) Did the prisoner commit the act, (2) If he did
was he at the time insane, (3) If he was not insane has it
nevertheless been proved that his crime was unrelated to
mental disorder.

Air Commodore Gillespie deals with the relationship
of psychoneurosis with crime and points out the frequent
similarity of the genesis of psychoneurotic and criminal
behaviour. To rank crime as psychoneurotic there must
be no really significant gain to the perpetrator, or the
apparent gain must be shown not to be the real meaning
of the act for the individual. The crime must be shown
to be the outcome of conflict and the actual crime to be
a substitute for or a compromise between the opposing
tendencies. Other psychoneurotic symptoms should be
demonstrable in the criminal.

Dr. E. O. Lewis points out that crime is not common
amongst M.D.s, but if it occurs it is due not so much to
a defect of intellect as a defect of temperament.
Professor Henderson in dealing with Psychopathic
constitution points out that people so diagnosed are not
mentally deficient or certifiably insane, but are either
predominantly aggressive or predominantly inadequate.
They are especially the people who may be held in
accordance with Lord Alness's judgment only partially
responsible, and they require an indeterminate sentence
since they so frequently become recidivists.

Dr. MacCalman discusses traumatic factors in relation
to workmen's compensation. Although courts readily
accept the idea of neurosis being the result of a single
shock, this is seldom the case for a psychoneurotic soil
can always be found. Neither work nor lump sum
payment is a panacea since light work has no meaning
nowadays, and financial worry especially for the future
is a potent factor in prolonging the illness. He discusses
the difficult problem of post-concussional neurosis in
relation to compensation.

Dr. Norwood East reviews the theories of the physical
criminal type and is of opinion that there is nothing
conclusive or helpful to be got out of such studies. He
is sure that sterilization of criminals would have no effect.
Dr. Scott discusses the pharmacology of alcohol, and
concludes that although alcohol is often associated with
crime it is not its sole cause and abolition of alcohol
would not abolish crime.

Dr. East gives an excellent summary of sexual psycho-
pathology. Such cases require prolonged treatment, but
prison is not the place for it and special institutions may
be needed.

The section on juvenile delinquency is weak. Dr.
Pearce deals with the physical and mental features of
juvenile crime, and Dr. Emanuel Miller With limited
researches on Social and Family influences and the
problem of birth order.

Dr. Rudolf deals with the psychological reactions of
the recruit to military life and their relations to military
crime which is more extensive than civil crime in view of
special regulations.

Dr. Glover gives a good description of the origin,
work and results of the Institute for the Scientific
Treatment of Delinquency, and finally Dr. Craig describes
the Exeter Child Guidance Clinic, though this should not
be taken as exactly a typical clinic.

Altogether the book is packed with useful up-to-date
information and helpful suggestions, and should be read
by all those interested in social welfare.
R.D.G.
