A New Form of Group Psychotherapy
=================================

:Author: Joshua Bierer M.D.,
Visiting Psychotherapist, Runwell Hospital, Essex;
Econ.D. (Vienna), Lieut., R.A.M.C.
Clinical Assistant, Guy's Hospital, London
* iie experiment which this paper rec?r^.^. mental
form of social clubs, two of them m a p t.patient
hospital and four attached to *he <fjathem
Apartments of voluntary hospitals,
teaching hospitals.

^-Patients' Clubs n
We started with a club for in-patients at u
with three main ideas in our minds.
(a) Patients robbed of their freedom on entering an
institution would probably improve if they
were given at least the illusion of temporary
freedom in the club.

(b) Patients might improve more quickly and
relapse less readily if trained whilst in hospital
to mix with other people in varied forms of
social life which encouraged them to take
responsibility and to use their own initiative.

Summary of paper given at the Royal Society of Medicine on December 16th, 1943.
(c) Patients might be dealt with more effectively if
situational treatment were used, and this
could be provided by the club.

The first step we took was to gather a few suitable '
patients together in order to put the idea of a club
before them, asking them to develop it and to
suggest the things they wanted to do. In this way
they were led to feel that the club was their own
invention, and we found neither men nor women
lacking in ideas.

This first club met three times a week at the
beginning, but war conditions made it necessary
later to reduce the meetings to once a week. The
Council meets separately once a week, and various
subsidiary meetings take place occasionally.
The club is run in a democratic manner, a fresh
group of officers being elected at a general meeting
every three months. The chief officers on the
Council are: Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary,
and the Conveners of Magazine, Sports and House
Committees. These rather frequent changes of
officers prove useful in giving more members a
definite period of responsibility and a good opportunity to use their own initiative.

At its weekly meeting, the Council makes out
the programme for the coming meetings, considers
the suggestions or complaints of members, and
organizes extra events.

Members of the hospital staff can attend the
socials only by invitation from one of the patients.
This is one of the details which help to make the
patients feel that they have an opportunity of giving
instead of always receiving.

Patients become eligible for the club on the
recommendation of their doctor; they are then
introduced as guests by members, and are eventually
elected to membership at the next general meeting.
This first social club was for chronic, but not
deteriorated patients. In four years, 350 patients
have attended it, and the average attendance has
been 50. The members are of both sexes, ranging
in age from 15 to 70 years, and there is almost as
wide a difference in their social and intellectual
standards, a fact which has not proved a drawback.
From the diagnostic point of view, the types of
disorders from which the members suffered included
schizophrenia, anxiety states, paraphrenia, and
paranoia.

Group treatment at the meetings took the form
of community work?intellectual exercise in discussions and lectures; entertainment in games,
cards and dancing; physical activities, such as
sports and rambles; occupational therapy in the
preparation of food; and finally, the training of
officers in running a second club, for the more
chronic patients.

The chief difficulties which are likely to arise
may be enumerated as follows:?

(1) The relationship between the psychotherapist
and a group is inevitably different from the
relationship between the psychotherapist and
an individual patient. There is no doubt in
my mind that the majority of psychotherapists
are of the schizothyme rather than the cyclothyme type, and, though they have learned to
overcome their shyness with regard to individuals, they may have difficulty in contacting
and handling a group. Similar difficulties
are met with by assistants?social workers,
occupational therapists and group leaders?although the last two have the advantage or
dealing with groups continually.

(2) A difficulty which we have not yet solved is the
probable conflict between the transference of a
patient to his own psychotherapist and his
transference to the therapist in charge of the
club. There is no doubt that if the therapist
in charge is also the patient's own therapist'
he can do more for him than he can for the
patient of another doctor. We have not
actually experienced any difficulty on this
transference point so far, but the problem
does exist and will have to be dealt with sooner
or later.

(3) It is interesting to note the relationship of the
patients to each other. In clubs for so-called
normal people, one often finds gossip, jealousy
and petty personal encounters. We have
never experienced the slightest tendency to
any such behaviour in any of our clubs. The
atmosphere is delightful, and practically a"
new members notice this and comment
on it.

(4) It is of course difficult to keep within hospital
rules and still give in-patients that freedom oi
action which they so badly need. This is
facilitated if the doctor and his assistants
behave as ordinary members of the club, so
that patients feel that they themselves are in
complete control. Any work done by the
staff" must be behind the scenes and not
apparent to the members.

(5) This is perhaps a question of danger rather than
of difficulty. We set out with a firm belief that
we must trust the patients and give them as
much freedom as possible. It meant taking
a certain amount of risk, as the sexes are
mixed, but we are happy to say that the
patients did not let us down, and we have
not had a single unpleasant incident in the
whole four years.

In-Patient Club for Chronic Patients
. A few months ago we started a second club for
the more chronic and deteriorated patients.
might say that at present it is run on the lines of the
" total push method " popular in some American
hospitals. This club is quite different from the
other, and we have only recently taught the members
to make it a self-governing affair. The programme
is based on the need for movement and collective
action, and very simple games, community singing
and dancing go down well. The Club is a great
treat to most of its members, who look forward to
it eagerly each week.

The club also provides an extra field of activity
for some of the " older '',membe^and run it.
club, a few of whose ex-officers org ^ when
Their task in the club fills the gap they tQ
their official posts in their own club ar ^ find
uew members, and it gives them S that is
that they can really supply s ^ fortunate
tremendously appreciated by thei
fellow-patients.

Qut-Patients' Clubs v,r?<mital
When we decided that clubs outside t e t^oug^t
could be used for mass psychother py, continue
hey would help the discharged P^ents ^
the process of social adjustment beg ther> we
from which they had benefite ? treatment,
pondered how far, as part of theirj5? of possible
" might help us to lessen the numb P?
relapses. We also wanted to see wbettjaMm
^ea could be used in treating out;P^n Jch clubs
was difficult to know how to introduce^ carry
-jdto avoid the stigma which they
The idea that the social club might Reconsidered
useful for out-patients struck us wh Nearly
the enormous number of social ' ents has
every patient in our out-patient dp stonishingly
difficulties in social adaptation, an(i the
rSe number have no social life 'tisfactory.
majority have one that is complete* unsa ^ ^
To counteract any stigma al precaution
buildings other than the hospital. Every p uke
is taken to make the premises apption wjth the
those of any other club, and the co ^ people,
hospital is never emphasized. muers and as
Properly introduced, may become bee'n either
a result we have several who have n
m-patients or out-patients. for
We started these clubs in the sam -ents and
^'Patients?by collecting a few Liable. In
discharged in-patients who would be su^ both
making our selection, we have to tient and
how far the club will be good for eac P ^ it is
how far he will be good for the club. ^ intellinecessary to have compatibility of aje smoothly?
gence. Later, when the club is ru more mixed. 1
it does not matter if the members are m but ]
The doctor and his assistants ho bs meet <
one of them is always present. ? and one 1
once a week?three of them in the . t anc[ i
on Saturday afternoons. Expenses as is j
be defrayed by the members themseive , t
done in two instances. . , , one in c
In 1940, we opened two out-paUen war r
East Ham and the other in Southend^in^ t
forced us to close these down after .nce which
hut we had collected some valuable exp ?y these
helped us to avoid mistakes later. months g
[wo original clubs were re-opened, a _?atients of
ater two more followed?one fo Bartholouy's Hospital and one for those ? ^ t^e a
^ew's. It is interesting to see how eacn fi
clubs strikes a different note.

il Guy's Club meets near the hospital, but many
t. of the patients live far away, some in Kent. Meetings
i are in the evening, but it is significant that some
a members, with over an hour's journey, attend
i regularly in spite of air raids and the blackout. The
s average attendance is 15. In this club all the
3 members are either patients of the doctor in charge,
or are seen by him in the hospital before attending
the club. This is the easiest way to get the patient
to attend, for he feels there will be at least one person
. there whom he knows. There is no conflict over
transference, and the doctor can see the patient
' twice a week as he and an assistant attend regularly.
The atmosphere is good and the club flourishes.
Southend Club has been running for just over a
year with the help of a doctor and of the Occupational Therapist from Runwell. This club has a
particularly intimate and intellectual atmosphere.
Programmes contain very little dancing, but plenty
of mental exercise. Most of the members are
out-patients at the Southend General Hospital, but
there are a few discharged patients from Runwell.
The average attendance is 15.

East Ham Club has been open about eight months
and is just finding its feet. There is a bright and
happy atmosphere. Nearly all the members are
discharged in-patients from Runwell and the doctors
attend from time to time, although the Occupational
Therapist and the Social Worker are there regularly.
The average attendance is 15.

Bart's Club has been running for eight months
and has an average attendance of 30. Members
come from the hospital, with a few from Guy's;
some are private patients and a few are not patients
at all. The link between Bart.'s and the club is
provided by the Sister from the Psychiatric Outpatient Department, as the Doctor in charge of the
club does not work at Bart.'s. It was deliberately
decided that he should not make personal contact
with the Bart.'s patients, so that there should be no
split in transference, and so that we could find out
how far the club was useful as an institution in
itself. It was about six months before it achieved
the right atmosphere, but it is now very successful
and indispensable to many of its members.

Apart from the difficulties which we have already
mentioned in connection with in-patient clubs, one
has to keep in mind that the organization of a club
outside a hospital has difficulties of its own. People
live far away, they are working and must therefore
adjust their timetable to attend, they usually do not
previously know each other, and there is no administrative control over them. There is also the
difficulty of finding the right locality?the management is different, and the problem of " stigma "
must be taken into account. We can say now,
however, that we have succeeded in overcoming
all these difficulties.

Situations and Symptoms combated by the Clubs
These may be enumerated as follows:?Shyness
and loneliness; general and social inferiority
feelings; sexual maladjustment; lack of incentive
and aim in life; inability to co-operate with others;
claustrophobia and agarophobia; parental domination; acute disappointment (e.g. a love affair);
psychological effects of physical defects (e.g.
alopoecia generale, etc.). As we continue the work,
this list will probably be extended.

Suggestions
------------
Our experience appears to justify the putting
forward of the following suggestions:?
(1) Any mental hospital could try to organize both
in-patient and out-patient clubs for its
patients, but to avoid disappointment this
should only be attempted where there is an
enthusiastic doctor (or leading member of
staff), an understanding superintendent, and
assistants who are ready to learn and adapt
* themselves to new methods.

(2) Out-patient departments not connected with
mental hospitals might well organize clubs for
their patients. Sometimes it may be necessary
to exchange patients with other hospital
departments, where the patient's home or his
free time fit in better with the hour and
locality of another club. But it should be
emphasized that it will always be necessary to
make a personal bridge and to remember that
the club is never a treatment in itself.
(3) Not every psychiatrist is able, merely by virtue
of his position, to use Group Therapy successfully. The same applies to social workers and
occupational therapists. Only those who feel
that they possess the ability should attempt it,
and should seek the necessary experience. It
is necessary to train people as assistants. Just
as there are " occupational therapists ", there
should also be " group therapists In the
meantime, some social workers could do ths
work of the out-patients' clubs, and sofl|e
occupational therapists the work of :
in-patients' clubs.

To sum up, these social clubs achieve results ofl
three different levels:? .

(i) As institutions they aim at helping shy peoP
to lose their shyness and to develop initiative.
This is achieved by other types of clubs too*
but in them our patients cannot be helped s
successfully because of the lack of tl1
personal links which are needed if they ar*j
to be brought out of their over-protecteo .
environment. The particularly congei*1*1
and well-planned atmosphere is an antidp1
against ideas of reference and persecute
and against inferiority feelings, and in menta
hospitals the very fact of having a club
their own helps patients to forget the restflC'
tions to which they are otherwise subjec ?
(ii) As a forum for different kinds of group therapy'
the clubs provide for mass treatment O-6'
group suggestion), class treatment (lecture
and discussion), and collective treatme0
(different forms of group-analysis and group
activity). .

(iii) As an opportunity for the psychotherapist
his assistants to apply as unobtrusively
possible, different forms of " situational
treatment.

In conclusion, I have great pleasure in expressing
my indebtedness to Dr. R. Strom-Olsen, Dr. R- P'
Gillespie and Dr. E. B. Strauss for their construct^
criticism and encouragement in this work, to
Felix Brown for his useful advice, to Dr. MBrody and Dr. M. Duncan for their co-opera tic11!
and to Miss K. Thompson, Miss M. Hastie-JoneS
and Miss D. Butcher for their help.
