The Problem Child in the Hostel
================================

:Author:  C. A. WOLLEN
Deputy Warden, Bourton Grange Hostel, 1940-1943 ; Warden, West Park Hostel, Yeovil, 1944.

Bourton Grange was opened in 1939 by a private
committee, financially supported by the Ministry of
Health, to assist with the problem of unbilletable
children. This strange group produced considerable
controversy among those responsible, and opened a
new field of investigation and experiment.
Time for preparation was short, and the staff" had
little experience apart from general social work,
except for the Warden who had done psychological
work under clinic conditions. Premises were fairly
convenient and the house furnished to accept thirty
children. A large garden with open country behind
was a great asset.

At first, approach was dominated by Child Guid-
ance Clinic methods and a belief in the child's
ability to make his own adjustments, given a
sympathetic understanding and freedom of expres-
sion. The first major problem was the conflict
between the claims of the individual and the group.
A considerable amount of destruction and general
unrest was considered a necessary evil until confi-
dence was established in the staff. Modification
was so slow, while destruction threatened to make
the hostel uninhabitable.

It was apparent that a strict framework of
discipline could stop this disintegration, backed up
by sanctions and eventually corporal punishment.
We appeared to be forced to choose between a
" free hostel " in which the comfort and interests
of the community were subservient to the free
expression and development of the individual, and
a " disciplinary hostel " where external standards
were forced prematurely and the personality robbed
of opportunities for expansion. Eventually vve
built on compromise and devised a reasonable
system of group control allowing the individual t0
move freely in an atmosphere of order and security-
This treatment of problem children in a specially
planned hostel appears to be a new type of therapy
to be approached along the lines of " experimental
experience
While planning the hostel we found the individual
needs as conflicting and varied as the children-
They could be roughly classified as:?

fa) Neurotics and pre-psychotics, suffering from
severe anxiety.

(b) The behaviour problems, children lacking
adequate social training and discipline.

(c) The dull and backward child.

The hostel had to be the temporary home and
Provide love and security expressed by affection and
knowledgeable authority. We had also to present
a simple community life with opportunity to build
satisfactory human relationships, although social
adaptation was difficult "for the problem child.
The responsibilities of daily life appeared frightening
and exacting to them all, the neurotic was unadapt-
able, the behaviour problem lacked the training to
c?pe, the dull child was baffled by it all. They did
not flourish in an atmosphere of anarchy and needed
the interpretation of daily existence into a simple
routine, allowing energy and time free for individual
Play and expression. We wished to avoid dictatorial
Methods, although these could give superficial
results, but when withdrawn produced aggression or
regression. It was always the crowd that got in
the way; the neurotic excitable child found it far
tQo stimulating, the dull and backward child,
Enable to join in at the same level as brighter
companions, sought attention by notoriety, while
the untrained child became a thoroughly disrupting
element. The secret was to get the child to feel the
life of the hostel existed for him and his interests.

link was essential between the child and the
c?mmunity. Normally this existed in life outside
the hostel in the family, where the sympathy and
experience of home life prepared the child for the
Wider and more impersonal responsibilities of the
community. Although ten or twelve years of age,
the children proved emotionally infantile and only
able to respond to demands and discipline linked
With personal relationships. In the large group it
Was impossible to prevent property, routine labour,
etc., from becoming impersonal for many children.
The hostel was a " no man's land " and no longer a
substitute for home, the property and concern of
loved ones.

Both reason and experience forced us to find some
substitute for the family, so children were divided
into four small groups of seven or eight, with a
Member of the staff in charge. The aim was to give
security and a focus for affection; a group to which
the child felt he belonged and which was peculiarly
nis. The leader acted as a parent substitute.

Various considerations were borne in mind when
arranging these families:?
w) The child's chronological and mental age.
V>) The child's problem.
vc) Personality of the leader.

While not grouping strictly to age we found those
troni five to seven best apart from older children
who tended to bully. The few girls in the hostel
?r a time were included in this group, which was
Under the charge of a woman. The dull and back-
Ward appeared to progress better in one group
Where they were not in competition with brighter
children of their own age (with these children
there appeared temperamental difficulties complicat-
ing relationships, and this selection would not
necessarily be a wise pattern for grouping normal
stable children). Certain excitable and hysterical
children did well in this group as it was not unduly
stimulating, the leader being a patient and rather
passive type of man. A very aggressive child was
better in a group able to protect themselves, and
with a leader able to enter into aggressive and
active occupations providing legitimate outlets.
The child with artistic trends, finding great
satisfaction from expression in handicrafts and
constructive occupations, was placed in a fourth
group whose leader had gifts in this direction.
A certain amount of juggling and adaptation of
premises was required to give the groups the
necessary partitioning. Each group had a dormi-
tory and common room. These were their own
rooms which gave privacy, previously sadly lacking.
Leaders were able to offer the little attentions
meaning so much to the children?reading aloud,
preparing little tea parties to celebrate birthdays,
welcoming their children home from the village
school, showing an interest in their occupations,
tucking them into bed at night, helping them to
write home and chatting about their families. All
these gestures welded them into a family and gave
a sense of ownership and security. Admittedly
many of the children had come from bad homes and
projected their family hates and grievances upon the
parent substitute, but this proved a more hopeful
situation than when the child had no focus for his
confused fears and hate and just knocked his head
against any resemblance of authority.

Total segregation was carefully avoided and the
wider community life preserved by communal
meals and playroom. Children invited each other
to tea parties in their common rooms, and leaders
exchanged visits. Getting up in the morning,
making their beds, cleaning and maintaining their
rooms, finding boots and shoes and getting to school
early, was the private concern of the group, while
other matters concerning the whole life of the
hostel, such as raiding village orchards, anti-social
behaviour in the dining room, larder raiding and
destruction, were governed by the impersonal and
impregnable laws of the house.

Children were flung into the hostel willynilly
and newcomers felt no obligation to respect our
organization and Authority. There were also
cyclical waves of general problems affecting all,
such as stealing and raiding, excessive ragging at
night, window breaking, which threatened to dis-
integrate the hostel we were endeavouring to build.
These decreased in time as tradition was built. It
was this situation that forced us seriously to consider
strengthening our organization and authority by
punishment. There was many an argument over
coercion and punishment in staff meetings. What
is written now is from observation of our experience,
rather than theoretical consideration. We were
forced to use penalties and ultimately corporal
punishment. Some children appeared to struggle
until up against adult opposition, and to obtain
reassurance from a knowledgeable discipline. All
appeared to consider parent substitutes omnipotent
and expected to find strong and active intervention.
In some cases it appeared to relieve guilt and
anxiety. We watched for the pathological anti-
socialist who was extremely rare. The hysterical
child reacted favourably to the shock of punishment,
feeling free to let himself go knowing he would not
be allowed to be a danger to himself or others.
Being emotionally young the children apparently
accepted punishment as just and automatic and
felt that this retribution was necessary.

Through varied occupations we aimed to divert
the child from punishment by legitimate outlets
for aggression, adventure, excessive restless energy,
etc. We tried to see that offences were understood
and that it was in the children's power to correct
them. An impersonal attitude was maintained to
house laws; punishment quickly followed the crime
and the penalty was short and sharp. Deferred
long-drawn-out punishment, such as stopping
pocket money or privileges over a period, always led
to further trouble. The child's memory being
short, he had not the control to meet the recurrence
of the sanction. We found our community spirit
was not developed enough for the community to
accept responsibility for the misdeeds of a few.
Eventually we accepted the use of corporal punish-
ment. It was only used as a last resort when every
possible means of obtaining the child's co-operation
had failed. It was used as a deterrent for wilful
destruction, larder raiding, general buccaneering
and defiance, after repeated warning had been given.
Although its effect seemed negative, the result
appeared to justify the means. The anxious
neurotic child did not appear to suffer harm when
corporal punishment was administered for breaking
one of these house rules, and it was certainly better
than long-drawn-out punishment which brought
uncertain reaction to the repeated stimulus. We
were always on the look out for more constructive
methods on the occupational side, and as we were
doing this we used the cane confidently when driven
to it. The way the punishment was carried out
appeared important: firstly the children were of
school age (under 14) and emotionally young; it
was executed formally in the office and always in
private, with no apologies; it was short, sharp, and
never accompanied by a lecture. The attitude was
one of " silly little beggar, you have driven me to
this " or " you have got yourself into this mess,
you little fool, and you have got to see it through ",
and the attitude of sorrow rather than anger was
avoided as we realized the child reacted to atmo-
sphere as well as to the stick. Undoubtedly this
action met the problems of destruction and group
buccaneering which forced the step and had threat-
ened to destroy the constructive and positive
organization of the hostel, and there appeared to be
no bad feeling. It was noticeable that the occasions
for resort to corporal punishment became less and
less as the hostel became more established. It is
important to stress that this negative side of our
policy served the active programme designed to
meet the needs of the children with, e.g. better play
equipment, more toys (now not immediately
destroyed), sets of woodwork tools, choppers, saws,
etc., and a supply of logs for rough carpentry,
drawing and painting, handicrafts, mud or water
play, gardening, picnics and expeditions, rock and
tree climbing, bonfires, organized team games,
boxing and wrestling, sports meetings, music and
percussion band, dramatics, etc. Punishment was
not just designed to protect adult interests but to
make the children's programme possible. It
prevented the staff being worn out and driven to
nagging, piling up petty punishments and bringing
despair and revolt. We were tempted to make
exceptions of persons and occasions, but the
children obviously thought this unjust and lost
confidence in our organization if it appeared to
make unfair discriminations.

Sexual misbehaviour was another problem
in the hostel. We had many children referred for
masturbation or sex play involving attempted
sexual intercourse. These complaints were usually
greatly exaggerated and the children often arrived
over-excited and stimulated. There was also the
quiet suppressed child who, freed from the bogey
of guilty secrets, went in for excessive discussion.
We recognized excessive masturbation as unfortun-
ate, as a preoccupation preventing normal develop-
ment of interests, although masturbation in some
degree appeared almost universal. Direct con-
demnation was avoided and as little apparent notice
was taken as possible. We tried to prevent the
subject being regarded as a dirty secret by recognizing
the general nature of the practice, and treating it as
an infantile habit to be outgrown. Mutual sex play
was also rather prevalent amongst some. We
protected young children from exploitation, if
necessary, by direct intervention.

Our approach to the problem was through sex
instruction and education supported by an attractive
programme of constructive occupations. The child
not only received formal instruction from the
Warden but was encouraged to discuss sex with the
Group Leader in his own somewhat crude terms, in
an endeavour to make the knowledge his own. We
found some children suspected the adult story, as
it appeared to be entirely different from knowledge
gleaned from their own pals. Ultimately they
became quite uninterested in sex talk and it lost its
novelty. A new child coming into the group
would march out a treasured bit of spicy gossip
and would be met with the scorn of the fully-
informed, who would be more interested in some
absorbing occupation?" We know all about that !
Be quick and lend me the mallet and chisel."

We tried to prepare our children for the realities
of life in a billet or home and sought a normal and
sympathetic approach to all their problems. Some
children needed the assistance of individual treat-
ment in the near-by child guidance clinic, but the
majority considerably modified their behaviour as
the result of a period (average time twelve months)
in the hostel. Life was designed to give assistance
in making significant human relationships, and
spreading these relationships over a wider society
?f children and adults; in developing powers of
expression through varied activities; in accepting
authority; in recognizing personal differences and
limitations; and in coping with the everyday
superficial demands of life without friction. Security
and affection made this possible, and previous
failure was overcome through the mediation of
this planned life, and successful experience ultimately
enabled the children to accept the more exacting
and harsher demands of life outside.
