The Therapy of Play
====================

:Author:  Kathleen M. Todd, M.B., Ch.B., D.P.M.
"7"
Me objea 'W to.prove nor t0 explain. It is to accede to vision. If we are to have vision we must learn to participate
?J the vision. The apprenticeship is hard." Antoine de Saint-Exupery.
. -v^woiogical medicine has made Sre^j? stvpars
smce the beginning of this century; of lattta-year
lhe searchlight has been turned on the clhi!Id, an
many studies have been made of his intellec
eniotional processes.

We now know that the roots of nervous and
mental disturbance are laid down in childhood and
that the numerous psychological disorders of the
adult man can be traced back to their beginnings
in the young child. This knowledge has shifted the
focus from the adult to the child, and research is
attempting to devise new ways of exploring the
hidden places of the child mind. Out of this has
arisen the Child Guidance Clinic, and many varieties
of treatment including therapy through play.

What is "play therapy"? It appears there is
immense confusion in the minds of many as to its
meaning. What are its methods, who is competent
to undertake it, and under what conditions is it
carried out in Child Guidance Clinics and private
psychological practice ? It seems opportune to
attempt to clarify its meaning and functions, to give
some limitation and definition to the word " play-
therapy ", and to try to indicate in what way it fits
as one approach into the larger scheme of treatment
of the child mind, made by those who seek to
ameliorate or cure symptoms of nervous disorders
in childhood.
What was the usual picture conjured up in the
past in the mind of the average worker in psycho-
logical medicine when he heard the word " play-
therapy " ? I think he visualized a play room,
probably large, a group of disturbed children,
materials such as a tray of sand and water, toys
including dolls and dolls' houses, and animals?
from the farmyard to the jungle; a good deal of
noise and aggressive outbursts, and in the back-
ground an adult called a "play therapist" who to a
greater or lesser extent directed, guided, encouraged,
or more rarely checked the primitive urges of the
group as each child expressed in a multiplicity of
shapes and forms the wide range of his emotional
distortions and deviations. In the hands of the less
experienced, aggression appeared to be encouraged
to the neglect of the other instincts, and " self-
expression " was at its maximum. This kind of
Group gives a false picture of Child Guidance work;
it belittles the commonsense and sense of values of
psychologists, and is not countenanced by a well
trained staff.

Group work has its place in the Child Guidance
field, but its limits should be defined and its sphere
of usefulness made clear. Its main value lies in
observation of the behaviour of children in a new
and unfamiliar setting, where conventional rules are
not imposed and the " natural " child is allowed to
emerge. A trained worker, not necessarily a
therapist, may give significant information concern-
ing the ego and social reactions of a child from a
study of his behaviour in a series of play sessions
with other children, and her report furnishes the
psychiatrist with useful supplementary information
as a prelude to his individual interview with the
child.

Then again a group may be instrumental in
socializing a child whose main problem lies in his
inability to fit himself into the social setting corre-
sponding to his age. This may be due to a variety
of causes, mainly environmental, e.g. deprivation by
isolation or illness, too indulgent or protective an
environment, or too harsh an atmosphere causing
thwarted rebellion and a bullying attitude to younger
children. As he plays, the child learns to take the
measure of his feelings, his loves and hates, and*
through familiarity, not to be afraid of their expreS'
sion: he comes to know how to assert himselt
without fear, how to give way without loss oI
prestige. If his nervous symptoms are due to fflOf?
deep-seated causes, socializing is dealing only
the surface of his problem and individual treatment
by a trained therapist is then essential.
Group work should ideally always be carried ouj
by workers trained in a Child Guidance Clinic and
under the aegis of the psychiatrist, but it is not <j
specific treatment which could in any sense be call#}
psychotherapy; perhaps the word "play therapy
had better not be used in connection with sucl1
groups. .

If the play group is mainly observational an.
socializing and not specifically therapeutic, whatlS
" play therapy " and what part does it play in the
whole field of psychological therapy ? f
A child like an adult possesses a mind capable ot
thinking, feeling, willing and being; he com*
municates with others by means of speech as does
the adult, but his speech is neither so developed, s?
controlled, nor can he use it with the same exactitude
to express his individuality and his needs, this ot
course varying with his age, intelligence and specify
language capacity. The child, however, has a
richer and more readily accessible phantasy We
which is not yet relegated to its subsidiary place by
the adult rational functions. In his earlier years he
has a remarkable ability to switch backwards and
forwards from reality, i.e. his contact with the reaj
objective world, to phantasy?his own persona'
inner private world. This can be observed by
anyone watching a child shedding the role of the
fairy prince when called to wash his hands f?r
supper and bed. This lively and vivid phantasy
the possession of every small child, is not in ah
respects the same quality as imagination, the posses-
sion of the few, although in the creative child
endowed with artistic gifts, the two intermingle
The phantasy life of the young child is at its richest
up to 7 or 8 years when it is partially replaced by
realistic attitudes and drives towards the world ol
objects.

The small child expresses his phantasy easily and
with a sense of fun and enjoyment and he finds it a
ready medium for emotional expression. He is as
yet undeterred by civilized restrictions and
standards, so that his feeling life externalizes itseli
freely and easily on to material objects and imaging
tive scenes. This emotional life which in adult
treatment is explored mainly through dreams and
free association, expresses itself in the child through
a much greater variety of media, but broadly
through two fundamental activities, i.e. speech and
bodily activity including play. The psychiatrist
recognizing this, utilizes for therapeutic ends such
material as sand and all the forms of messy play*
toys, especially dolls in family groups, animals*
bricks, etc., but also paints and pencils for drawing
and painting, clay and plasticine for modelling.
addition he uses play of the dramatic type, the
a<^i"""uuin2 which the child can so readily
teach16 ^ r?^es Parent ar)d child, child and
Qr ner, animals in the forest, policeman and prisoner
ex any other combination of characters which
AmSSeS conscious or unconscious problem.
and?n??t Pretending games are the popular cooking
games specially loved by the toddler and
thrnU t0 the therapist because of the light they
anH on habit training, lavatory fears, food fads
Th ^ears-

0fte . dreams, too, and his dream world is
thatnulnextr'cably mixed with his daytime world, so
Co ~?e may relate the beginning of a dream and
His h 0hviously resorting to his phantasy.
as vvareaums are a valuable index to his personality,
?par that of the precious only little girl of adored
child1 wh?.dreamt she was a clinging vine. The
plav sw*n.g 'n ^e same interview from dramatic
draw t y materials. He may sit down and
and h? ^ah?rate his play or to illustrate a dream,
remaif ^umines all with talk, a composite of
siinerfiS- drawn from the deeper and the more
build layers of his mind. In one interview his
anoth8 m the sand is silent and absorbed, in
evpr, er there is a running commentary illustrating
ItV?i?Ve *n game.

and it capacity in the child, his love of phantasy
and tS exPression in play, so familiar to parents
therae^c .s' which is utilized by the modern child-
diSor^1St *n his investigation of psychological
Varv ur an4 the causation of symptoms. Opinions
child ?11 *s this writer's view that therapy in the
rapidiaS ln aduh? reaches its desired goal more
with th anc* successfully if it is individual, i.e. alone
the ad 1 t^lerapist, for the child is just as unlikely as
of otL to divulge his deepest self in the presence
temDn ?' so that groups even though they
econ~ranly ahsorb numbers are in the end not
Th cal ?f time.

childrrC are t^vo types of persons qualified to treat
can en offering from nervous disorders, and neither
tfai . arry out treatment without a specialized
(ingwhich extends over several years.
qualifi h psychiatrist who is a medically
Psvch i ?an or woman with further experience in
(2) disorders of childhood.

qualifi h 'aY therapist who is not medically
childr ^ut *s sPecially trained in the treatment of
be fa Both these groups of therapists should
(talk !ar with all the above methods of treatment
syrnh r rnaterials in both realistic and
drawi? \ sPheres, play of dramatic type and
frequp1 and not confine themselves as has been
throiiou" ln the past to one approach, e.g. only
call^ speech, or only through what has been
Let it Klay therapy "?

in the emphasized that there is no special magic
Sroun ra?y through play, nor is there any special
Possec Persons in Child Guidance Clinics who
thro KS?me mysterious gift in utilizing it. Therapy
thera ? P'ay *s Part ?f the equipment of all child
tool pists?doctor and lay, but it is merely one
and should not be dignified by a separate
y name. It would clarify our thought if we were to
d call all treatment "clinical psychology" which
r would include every method of treatment, all the
i above materials and methods being designed to the
same end, that of modification or cure of nervous
I and behaviour disorder in the child. The art of
i therapy lies not in any magic properties inherent in
r the toys themselves, nor in any specific atmosphere
> derived from a room in a Clinic called a Playroom,
but in the skill, wisdom and experience of the
> therapist himself.

> Every modern child-therapist, whether medical or
I lay, has a collection of suitable materials in his
consulting room which are as important to him and
his work as the stethoscope is to the physician, and
it is of little moment whether he calls his room a
playroom or not. In the future, the term Clinical
Psychologist might be used broadly to include
doctor-therapist and lay-therapist, although the
word " Child psychiatrist " will always retain its
specific meaning: the terms "play therapy" and
"play therapist" could then disappear into oblivion
and take with them the confusion they have
engendered.

Every child therapist should be trained to treat
children of all ages, toddlers of 2 to 5 years in whom
of course play is the method of election, children of
school age, and adolescents with whom talk is the
more usual but not invariable vehicle for therapy.
In a large Clinic it is possible to select cases of
certain ages to suit the special capacities of individual
therapists particularly gifted with certain age groups
and one or other sex, but during training it must be
emphasized that all therapists, doctor and lay, should
be familiar with the mind processes of children of all
ages, not only to fit themselves to cover a wide field
of work in the Clinic employing them, but also to
ensure that when they take more responsible
positions they can collaborate with colleagues in
every branch of child work.

It is at the first interview when the child is
examined by the psychiatrist that the particular type
of treatment most suitable to the child's nervous
illness and most fruitful of results is decided upon.
There are certain constitutional lacks, intellectual
and temperamental, which preclude treatment along
psych o-therapeutic lines, particularly deeper therapy.
The nature of the child's disorder and its causation
largely determine the type of treatment chosen.
Broadly speaking, disorders which are the result of a
recent precipitating trauma are more likely to
respond to short treatment: many of the anxiety
states fit into this category, whereas an obsessional
character change imperceptibly developing over a
period of years may require long and intensive
psycho-therapy of the analytic type.

The choice of treatment as to its length, depth of
investigation and method of approach depends upon
several factors, e.g. the severity of the disorder, the
degree to which the personality has deviated from
the normal, the child's innate make-up, and lastly
his insight. This quality of insight is not an
equivalent of intelligence; it is dependent upon an
awareness of inner processes, a capacity to view one's
subjective life with a discerning eye. It has in it
something of vision, of intuition and a willingness
to explore the interstices of one's mind. Many
young children, not necessarily of superior intelli-
gence, are highly endowed with this quality; many
intellectual adults are denied it, but neither the
nature of his disorder nor the child's insight
determine whether or not play shall be introduced
into his treatment.

Therapy deals with conscious and unconscious
processes of mind, the therapist being the judge as
to what extent unconscious regions of the psyche
are to be explored. All treatment, including
adult treatment, may broadly be divided into two
types:

(1) Suggestion, persuasion, re-education?mainly
but not entirely on conscious and preconscious
levels.

(2) More or less analytic treatment involving the
investigation of the unconscious whether
interpretation is employed or not.
Play material may or may not be used in both
these types of treatment and at any age. The child
comes into the room where a collection of material
is readily accessible; he chooses for himself what
pleases his fancy or satisfies his needs. He may
reject what offends his image of himself or his
family standards, e.g. the child who does not like
to get his hands dirty with sand. He does not know
how revealing his choices are or how dominated by
hidden conflicts his selection may be. Most young
children are drawn to sand and water and the
delights of building something; this something is
often of great significance in divulging his inner mind.
There is the child who builds a lighthouse far out at
sea and says dejectedly that the light has gone out
and the sailors will all be killed on the rocks: another
builds enclosing walls of sand higher and higher and
then places his fort at the top guarded by guns with
a solitary soldier inside. A third child crowds his
scene with every toy and figure in the room, driven
by his obsessional mould of mind to include every-
thing, and a fourth builds a jolly house and garden
and fits it out with a family, a cat and dog and farm
animals. Then again he may prefer to draw or
paint, and a picture emerges which unknown to him
clearly presents the therapist with the whole family
setting and its emotional complexities, e.g. a little
girl who drew a horse on which were riding four
people but they were slipping down its tail. At the
side stood a helpless figure?she called the latter
figure the father and those on horseback the mother
and the children; it is obvious what the child felt
about the incapacity of her parents and the
uncertainty of life for children in their care.
The little patient may play for a time and as the
friendly atmosphere of toys, reminiscent of the
nursery, draws forth his confidence, he may settle
himself in a chair and relate in words the difficulties
which beset him. Few young children can do this,
however. In most the interview alternates between
silent play, sometimes symbolic, sometimes realistic,
and play that is interspersed with talk, coherent o
incoherent, racy or solemn, his talk serving either a
an illustration to his play, or as a response \
interpretations that may be given. Interpretation1
the most difficult field of the therapist's art; by it
doctor makes known to the child the content of n'
more deeply hidden fears and worries, his hates an,
loves, his unsatisfied longings, his conflicts an
anxieties. This may be done by words or "j
gestures, by direct language or indirect communis'
tion. Herein lies the art of the therapist, and heI^
are expressed his qualities of wisdom, human undef'
standing and imaginative vision. Depending up0
the personality of the therapist, interpretation take_
many forms. Suffice it to say that its skilful
one of the most valuable of the therapist's tools, tha
it is a fine-edged tool and can be kept sharp-poin^
only by constant use. It above all should be in w
hands only of the highly trained.

The ability to play and use toy material as
medium of expression is not restricted to any a?>
group. It is not true that only young childre
" play " and older children talk, and it is errone?J|
to imagine, as many do, that "play therapy" is fj
province of the lay therapist and talk with the olde
child that of the doctor therapist. A boy of 13 can
play out a complex emotional problem in sand>
another of 9 can carry through his whole treating
by means of speech, with perhaps drawings to il'uS^
trate his talk as he goes along. One little boy
retreated into a complete phantasy machinery wor
where every human function including birth ^
mechanized; his drawings were expressive and j11.
vocabulary wide and exact, and treatment needs
no other medium for its successful termination
his particular but rather unusual case. Again 1
should be reiterated that both the doctor and W1.
lay therapist should be competent to deal with a
ages and every variety of medium.

Play material is there for the child throughout ni
whole treatment; he may express himself aggr^
sively against figures which symbolically stand J?
parents or teachers who have ill-used him: he, 0
more likely she, may pour out her locked ^
maternal tenderness on a family of dolls. The
may depict an imaginative account of unfulfil'e
adventurous longings in a " story " in the sand trjtf
with animals and " people ", then translate tjj
same story into dramatic play with himself in tflg
chief part and the therapist perhaps in sotf
subsidiary role. Play is always guided by ^
therapist who with experience knows best how 1
direct it to promote recovery but his role is neV.?j
wholly active or wholly passive; he leaves the ch1'
largely to his own choice of materials, yet help
him to find himself when lost, frustrated or w
against insoluble psychic barriers.

Play should never be of any set or rigid patteIj^
never confined, because of the predilections of ^
therapist, to one set of material, nor dependent upfj,
a wealth of complicated material. A young c^lL
with the aid of his phantasy can express all
richness of his emotional life with nothing m?r
anim ^CW sma^ dolls, some wet sand, a dozen
eve-, -J? Preferably some domestic and some wild?
brioi-mutilated as many are in wartime?some
' matp - ?r pegs and his own hands. These simple
guid^K P'US child's capacity for dramatization
I intnV Merest, originality, keen observation,
the th?n a-nc* we^ timed word of interpretation by
\ the i .ei!aP^st are the ground plan on which is built
r>,n. ricale pattern of the therapy of play.
which therapy then, is a wide field of treatment of
for an P'a-y " *s on'y one approach. Play is not
child Part'cular group of children, or for the young
excli, -?r imaginative child only, nor is it the
I treatSlVC to?^ PeoP'e w^h some occult gift.
[ tion nt on Psychotherapeutic lines is a combina-
I denenH an art anc* a technique; an art in that it is
oent on the personality and gifts of the
therapist, a technique because its confines lie within
certain limits and it can be taught to others; and part
of the modern therapist's technique is that of
play.

It is because play is the natural expression of all
children that the therapist has captured its spon-
taneity and fitted it into his therapeutic plan, but he
remembers that there are many avenues into the
territory of the child mind, that the future may
reveal many more, and that unless he keeps his mind
supple and his approach original, the child will not
be left free to give up his secrets in the way best
suited to his individuality. Play has opened the
door to a large world of the child's phantasy and
imagination, but the fascination of its use must not
blind the therapist to the other means by which the
conscious and unconscious life can be reached.
