First Year Out
=================

:Author: Margaret Halden.
Illustrations by
Barbara Flynn. Thos. Nelson & Sons Ltd. 6s.

Hearty congratulations to all those responsible for the
production of this book ! The publishers could scarcely
expect that it would have a large sale or a long run,
especially with the sub-title, " Diary of a Special School
Teacher ", emblazoned on the wrapper, but then this
firm has a reputation for wide professional interests.
The illustrator has certainly caught the spirit of the
author. One wishes Barbara Flynn had given us more
of her work, for she has talent. The frontispiece, " The
Playroomis a clever impressionist drawing that
conveys in a remarkable way emotions, action, noise
and atmosphere, even the mood of the shivering teacher
on duty, turning her back on the horde of wild young
creatures while she stolidly drinks her cup of cocoa !
The author, Margaret Halden, has enshrined in these
few chapters a memorial to all the courageous people
who in the blackest days of this war worked, indeed
sometimes slaved, in most ill-adapted buildings in out of
the way places, with the minimum of equipment and the
maximum of inconvenience, to keep safe and happy?as
well as to teach?groups of very difficult children.
Their work was never in the limelight. It was always
hard to find helpers, and spells of inadequate staffing
were frequent occurrences. This type of work is difficult
under the best conditions. Yet these two young people,
the author and her friend the illustrator, having joined
the staff of this school and hostel for evacuated mentally
defective children, were sustained not only by their
lively sense of humour but by their abounding interest
in humanity. This is shown in the delightful word-
pictures of the children, but even more in the brilliant
though sometimes devastating character sketches of the
staff?and of the visitors ! That any people at all could
be found to put up with the conditions described is .

tribute to the profession. Miss Halden and her
had vigour and personality and intellectual resource tn
served them in good stead in such circumstances, so tn? >
as far as we know, they did not " get the sack and/
were carried out on stretchers as had been the fatewe
some of the others ! Behind the sardonic humour
can trace a real sympathy with these children, hail
capped not only by lack of intelligence but so often a'
by the effect of slum conditions. We suspect that t
teachers were rather the better for their experien '
developing in the course of events considerable una
standing of the children's needs.

Let us hope that if the recommendations of the
Report are carried out, many more such courageous a
gifted young people will be forthcoming to help
handicapped of all types, but that for them the way v .
be made happier and easier by adequate training 3
better conditions of service.
E.L.S.R-
