The British Medical Association 
=================================

Report on
:Author: A. M. McCUTCHEON, M.B., Ch.B., F.R.F.P.S.

Although this report was prepared for, and mainly concerns the medical
profession, it contains much that is of great interest to all workers with defec-
tives. As was to be expected, the Committee found that the enquiry presented
so many different aspects that they have considered it from several points of
view. In doing this, they have touched on all sides of the problem, save the
purely educational one. The constitution of the Committee was so arranged
as to allow for the proper presentation and consideration of these various view
points.

Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee of the British Medical Association. B.M.A.
House, Tavistock Square, W.C.I. Price 1/- net.

As the different grades of mental deficiency are legally defined and the
practitioner must work to these, the Committee have accepted them. At the
same time, they rightly point out that these grades are not sharply defined,
but tend to merge one into the other. There seems, to judge from the form of
the report, to have been the usual difficulty over the moral defective. In
practice, one finds the number who can be so designated to be small, but none
cause so much difficulty and anxiety in diagnosis. Emphasis is laid on the
necessity for the exclusion of all other probable diagnoses, and for a full investi-
gation into the environmental factors, the lack of which investigation might
lead to a wrong diagnosis. Attention is called to the importance of this class
when considering illegitimacy and sexual offences. A most helpful suggestion
in connection with these difficult cases is for the provision of a proper diag-
nostic clinic. Even more helpful from the point of view of other defectives
is that, when a definite diagnosis has been made, moral defectives should not
be sent to an ordinary certified institution, where they are a constant source of
embarrassment, but to a special State institution. The same point of view
might with equal force be urged with regard to the feeble-minded confirmed
absconder and rebel, a certain number of whom are met in every large institu-
tion, and for whom the State institution is not now available as, according to
present legal interpretation, they are not dangerous or violent. The best that
can be done at present is to institute within the Colony something of the nature
of a " refractory block." It would seem better if this could be avoided, because
it tends to single out these defectives within the Colony, as different from the
remaining population.

The report considers it essential for the existing law to be altered so that
it be the duty of the Local Education Authority to notify to the Local Mental
Deficiency Act Committee, all defective children whether or not they have
attended a Special School. The existing law on this point is most unsatisfactory,
as it deprives many defectives of the advantages Parliament intended them to
have under the Mental Deficiency Acts, with consequent loss to themselves
and to the public. The present unsatisfactory state of affairs thus permits
among some defectives during adolescence or early adult life, certain social
disasters otherwise preventable if more complete notification were enforced.
The report follows the lines of the Wood Committee in suggesting that the
certification of defective school children should be abolished. It is arguable
whether, in practice, this would in the end mean very much difference from
the present method, since these children would still require to be carefully ex-
amined and selected, and to receive some form of specialised individual
instruction, no matter what label is applied or what course is followed. It is,
however, an anomaly that, in view of the fact that mental deficiency is an
incurable condition, certain school children designated defectives, cease to be
so solely on account of their reaching the end of their school career at 16 years
of age.

In the section dealing with causation, there would appear to have been
some difficulty in arriving at any definite conclusions on the role of heredity,
although the Committee agree that this does play a part in certain cases. Many
of our best-known British experts, who are constantly dealing with large
numbers of cases, estimate from 50% upwards, as the figures in which heredity
is held by them to be involved. In America, as far as can be judged from the
literature at present, there appears to be a swing towards crediting environ-
ment with a very much larger share. Even if this be true, and it is by no
means generally accepted in Britain, it is not at all certain that the same type
of case is always being described and dealt with. In England, the social
criterion is incorporated in the legal definition, whereas in America, so far
as can be ascertained, many of whom British practice would class as dull and
backward cases appear to be grouped with the defective, which puts quite
another complexion upon the results. So much so, that in Davies's " Social
Control of the Mentally Defective," page 376, is found a quotation "... are
curing their morons even after they have been all but ruined in the public
schools and are sending them out no longer feeble-minded." The B.M.A.
Committee conform to the current British belief that mental deficiency is an
incurable condition.

The Report discusses some of the difficulties involved in obtaining reliable
family histories, urges the need for more research, and strikes a very cautious
note, preferring to express no opinion as to the relative importance or frequency
of hereditary influence. It is suggested that, to supply more information con-
cerning the marriage of cousins, marriage registration forms should record
any blood or family relationship of the marriage partners.

The Report sets out in some detail the various conditions usually held to
be the causes of mental deficiency. With regard, in particular, to alcohol and
tuberculosis in the ancestors, there are doubtless difficulties in assessing the
proper values to be assigned. There is, however, no doubt as to the marked
frequency with which these are found in the family histories of defectives.
When speaking of diagnosis, the Report points out the difficulty often
experienced in correctly interpreting the legal requirements of the certificate
under the Education Act. The Board of Education appear to take the view
that, if the child will benefit from the specialised school instruction, he should
be given the benefit of the doubt. At the same time, it is well to remember
that in the medical officer's certificate are used the words " feeble-minded
within the meaning of the Mental Deficiency Act." This implies, on the face
of it, the social disability as well as the educational one. The number of ex-
special school children who afterwards rise to positions of some responsibility, in
itself, would indicate that there must be many who, in spite of this wording
of the certificate, were defective only educationally and not socially as well.
The certifying medical officer is often placed in a very difficult position, as the
correct diagnosis may only be possible after some considerable period of time.
The suggested abolition of the certification of such school children might thus
he a distinct relief to the school medical officer. With regard to diagnosis for
the purposes of the Mental Deficiency Acts, the Report sets out the differential
diagnosis in a way most helpful to the practitioner, and points out also the
altered conditions created by the amending Act of 1927.

In a most interesting biological section is given an account of the present
knowledge and views on the structure and development of the nervous system,
and certain pathological findings in defectives. Also the biological standpoint
on heredity is explained, while the respective roles of heredity and environment
are made easily understandable to the non-expert reader.

Since the position of the defective in society is the ultimate test of all
work with defectives, the Report attaches great importance to a progressive
social policy. It points out that no matter in what form this is undertaken, the
medical practitioner must play a responsible part in its execution. An important
paragraph should dispel the mistaken belief held by many that the defective
is of necessity markedly anti-social. It is true that in institution work the
numbers of such anti-social types may be somewhat high. On the other hand,
it must be recalled that the Wood Committee estimated that at least two-thirds
of defectives can safely be dealt with under some form of community care.
Some reference is made to community-work in America, and in all our minds
is the work done throughout this country by the various Associations for
Mental Welfare, co-ordinated by the Central Association.

The same methods are by no means applicable to all areas, as local con-
ditions vary much, but great developments in this direction must be urged
forward, if the benefit of the good already done is not to be lost.
Provided the right sort of instructed help is given, and recent happenings
indicate that the public are at last understanding the value of this, the problem
of mental deficiency is by no means the hopeless and depressing one that some
would have us believe. On economic grounds alone the work is fully justi-
fiable. It is to be hoped that the present national emergency will not lead to
undue interference with the carrying on nationally of the necessary construc-
tive work. A marked dislocation would, indeed, in the fullest sense, be
uneconomical.

The Report goes on to give various official statistics, details of the various
lines of treatment in use, studies in illegitimacy, and concludes with some
observations on the marriage of defectives, a subject upon which the Board of
Control has several times expressed the official view that there should be some
restrictions. On the thorny subject of sterilisation the Report does not say
much, no doubt because of the lack at present of reliable information, and
possibly because this is now the subject of an expert Government enquiry, from
which it is hoped some light will emerge.

The Committee recommend that all Local Authorities should press for-
ward with their statutory duties, and that every known step be taken to prevent
mental deficiency, with its attendant risk of lessening the full value to the State
of such afflicted citizens.

The most important features of the Report to a medical man are the
realisation of the necessity for the medical practitioner to receive more instruc-
tion in this increasingly important branch of psychological medicine, and the
urgent need for further research, some suggested lines of which are indicated.
Attempts have, in the past, been made to interest the Universities and
Teaching Schools in the great need for further up-to-date practical tuition in
this subject. With the conspicuous exception of London University, in con-
junction with the Central Association for Mental Welfare, and of Edinburgh
University, unfortunately these efforts, up to the present, seem to have proved
unsuccessful. Possibly this Report to the profession itself, may stimulate the
Authorities to the necessary action. The facilities already available and the
work being done in all directions, require very little special organisation to
provide a clinical field equal to any in the world. The professional man would
then be in a position to take his full share in the co-ordinated effort required
for the handling of the mental deficiency problem.

The Report consolidates our knowledge on the subject, indicates and
emphasises the special aspects needing more attention, and is worthy of the
closest study by all who have at heart the welfare of the mentally defective.
