The Nature and Treatment of Stammering
=======================================

MENTAL WELFARE 23
:Type: Book Reviews *82 Abstracts
:Author: E. J. Boome, and M. A. Richardson.

Methuen. 1931. 3/6 net.

The collaboration of a doctor in medicine
and a teacher, experienced in the treatment of
speech disorder, is one of the most perfect one
c?uld wish to deal with the subject of stam-
mering. This book, as the wrapper states, is
110 result of several years of research and
Practical experience, and, as such, should
Prove of inestimable value to all who are
atllicted with stammering, as well as to those
^ho come into contact with them.

In the first chapters, the authors do much to
tr:ar away false conceptions of the origin of
1118 distressing disorder, and give a brief ac-
pount of the beliefs held by experts of to-day.
hey do not hesitate to condemn " secret
^Ures " and many methods of treatment prac-
lSed in the past, some of which, unfortunately,
are still in vogue. An extremely interesting
and unusual feature of the book is a chapter
t5v?ted to the stammerer's own Point of View.
, ere a dozen cases, of all ages and both sexes,
iii(Ve .recorc^ec^ their own experiences and feel-
? in regard to their stammer, and the way
Xvhich the people they meet react to it. This
\v ^cst thing of its kind that has been
an(l repay very careful study,
tai?rcling, as it does, an insight into the men-
ol ^r?Cesses of a stammerer which could be
-j, ained in no other way. The section on
inre^tment *s PerliaPs the most disappointing
fa t k0?k- The authors' emphasis on the
fr ^at this disorder must be approached
Hi 111 a Physical> psychological and environ-
hontal standpoint is excellent. One feels,
that in their condemnation of
Tr ?1?-(^s " Voice Production," " Speech
difjllllriS," and " Breathing," rather more
a (rCrentiation might have been made between
also? anc^ ^ad use SL1C11 things. One feels,
p0s,\ that for the book to be of the greatest
anth value to those who stammer, the
ins^ 0rs might have given rather more definite
o^^^ions for carrying out the exercises they
a {J.11?- These, however, are minor faults in
m0st?k which is a great achievement and a
iiig ]?Sane and valuable addition to the exist-
1 erature on the subject.

M.F.
Report of Departmental Committee on
Colonies for Mental Defectives. H.M.
Stationery Office. 1931. 2/- net.
A Departmental Committee was appointed
by the Board of Control with the approval of
the Ministry of Health in January, 1930, with
the following terms of reference :?" To con-
sider and report what are the essential struc-
tural requirements of a complete colony for
mental defectives of all types and to what ex-
tent the cost would be reduced by the adoption
of semi-permanent or temporary buildings or
other new methods of construction, having
regard to the comparative cost of mainten-
ance, as well as the initial capital expenditure
involved."

The Committee acknowledge in submitting
their Report that the proposals put forward
are in no sense startling or revolutionary and
that it has been no easy task to cut estimates
finer than they have been cut already.
Throughout the Report suggestions have been
confined to the minimum requirements con-
sistent with the reasonable welfare of the in-
mates of colonies and the efficient administra-
tion of the Mental Deficiency Acts.

The Report is divided into two parts; Part
I deals with the essential standard require-
ments of a complete colony and Part II with
the economic effects of adopting other than
permanent methods of construction.

In discussing and investigating the question
of the minimum size of a colony for efficient
working, the Committee give 880 patients as
representing the practical minimum size
desirable. This number may appear rather
high but it must be borne in mind that for the
efficient organisation of a colony there must
be classification not only of grade of defect
but of sex and age. The following table giving
the suggested classification for 880 patients is
given on page 12 : ?
ADULTS M. F. Total
High grade patients, homes for 60 60 120
Medium ? ? ? 60 60 120
Lower ,, ,, ,, 60 60 120
Selected adolescents ,, ,, 60 60 120
Troublesome patients ,, 40 40 80
CHILDREN
Higher grade patients ,, 50 50 100
Lower ,, ,, ? 50 50 100
LOWEST GRADE
Homes for ... ... ??? 40 40 80
HOSPITAL   20 20 40
440 440 880

The evidence submitted on the subject of
the desirable maximum size of a colony varied
a good deal. It was submitted that in an in-
stitution accommodating over 1,000 patients,
the patients tend to lose identity and the
Medical Superintendent is unable to keep in
personal touch with the progress of each case.
This was considered unsatisfactory in view of
the fact that the Medical Superintendent is
not only responsible for the classification of
the cases, and has to prescribe the occupation
and training they need, but he is also the only
person empowered to sign the certificates upon
which the original order in each case is con-
tinued. After close consideration the Com-
mittee felt that these arguments were uncon-
vincing. They considered that the unit that
matters from this point of view is the villa,
and not the colony; provided that the number
of patients in each villa is not too large (60 or
under is suggested), the individuality of each
case should be adequately safeguarded, no
matter how many the number of villas. In
the case of large numbers the Medical Super-
intendent would act on the reports of respon-
sible officers who in turn would obtain their
information from the staff actually in charge
of the patients. The Committee see no reason
why a colony should not expand to 2,000 beds,
though in order to ensure that the visits of
relatives should not be unduly difficult or ex-
nensive, the ereneral limit would probably fall
between 1,000 and 1,500 except in crowded
industrial areas.

The Committee urge that in every case the
oroposal to erect a colony should be preceded
bv an exhaustive ennuirv into the number of
defectives requiring institutional accommoda-
tion in the area or areas to be served. After
a suitable site has been acquired and the gen-
eral lay-out agreed unon. it is then possible to
determine the order in which the scheme shall
be developed. The tendency during recent
years has been to space homes or groups of
homes, which are the most important units,
widely apart, imitating the scattered village.
The Committee, however, are of opinion that
fairly close grouping of units can be carried
out without rendering the colony unattractive
and that this would result in greater economy
and efficiency.

After careful consideration on the second
part of their reference the Committee
have concluded that there is little likelihood
in general economy resulting from the adop-
tion of semi-permanent or temporary methods
of construction, except in the case of work-
shops, farm buildings and similar structures,
for which any light and especially cheap type
of building might be adopted.

Suggestions for reducing cost have been
made with regard to detailed equipment and
general administration, such as the use of semi-
detached instead of detached homes, the limit-
ation of the number of single rooms, etc.
Several plans, illustrating the various sug-
gestions made are given in Appendix B of the
Report. The Committee do not suggest that
these should result in any standardisation of
design, but hope they may prove useful to
local authorities.

The Manual for Mental Deficiency Nurses-
Compiled by Royal Medico-Psychologica
Association. Bailliere, Tindall & Cox. 1931-
6/- net.

This book, produced under the authority
the Royal Medico-Psychological Association*
is a happy event in the History of Mental De'
ficiency Work, for it appears to put a seal 011
the ever-widening gap between Mental Denc'
iency nursing, and nursing in Mental Hospitals'
There is much to praise, but chapters ?n
and five stand out above the rest.

Chapter One on the duties and qualification^
of a nurse is especially fine, both for simphc1i y
of phrasing and lucidity of arrangement, W-h}
Chapter Five is notable for the ease with ^h1^
it explains and makes interesting, a ve
difficult subject.

There would appear to be some over-elabo
tion of teaching in some of the other chapte '
and it is extremely doubtful whether nlir^
either male or female, are vitally intereste ^
or admitting the interest?in any wayimpr? Qf
as nurses by such things as a knowledge
the microscopic structure of a motor nel1
the intermedio-precentral area of the left c
bral hemisphere, or even the pyramidal (s V
granula or association) cortical level; Pe ue
ally, I think a Mental Deficiency Nurse ea ^
quite efficient without a knowledge ot
things.

This is perhaps cavilling at very fine P
but I feel that the Royal Medico-Psycholo
Association would do well to avoid 1
curriculum for its examinations, any
burdening of candidates, with knowledge of
Medicine at the expense of pure nursing. The
advice given on how to prepare for the nursing
examinations is excellent, but many of the
questions, taken from recent Final Examina-
tion papers would surely feel more at home in
the Final Year paper of a medical student.
The Manual on the whole is a worthy con-
tribution, admirably set out, and with one or
t^'o exceptions, the chapters will be under-
wood by probationer nurses without much ex-
planation.

The book should obtain immediate and last-
*ng success and in its production the Royal
Medico-Psychological Association has fulfilled
a long felt want.
N. M. H.
