The Rome State School and Its Colony System
============================================

MENTAL WELFARE

Mr. Robert York, the Director of Vocations, Colonies and Parole at the Rome State
Schools, New York, paid a visit to England last October. He very kindly consented to
address the Annual Meeting of the C.A.M.W. at Caxton Hall on October 12th and we give
below a summary of his interesting remarks on the organisation of the Colony system in
the United States where social conditions differ so much from those in this country.
.... Before I speak of the Rome State School I would like to say some-
thing regarding what I have seen here. You know we do things on a big
scale in the States and a great many times when we have effected a large
project we are satisfied just because it is large. What interests me here has
been the fact that while your Institutions are not so large as ours, the after-
care which you give is away out of proportion to what I have been acquainted
with at home, and I think you have put the pedal on exactly the right spot.
I have been going through London Special Schools and seeing different Homes;
1 have also read your reports and I find that you always keep track of those
who are sent out from your Institutions. There seems to be very definite
follow-up work.
The Rome State School was started in 1894 ^or Unteachable Idiots, and
continued as such until the departure of Dr. Fitzgerald and the arrival of Dr.
Bernstein, when the name was changed, " Unteachable Idiots " was dropped
out and it was called " The Rome State School." Early in 1900, after a great
deal of contention, Dr. Bernstein rented a house a short distance from the
school. There was much objection to any attempt to place any of the boys
outside the parent Institution, but the Doctor insisted that it should be done.
He sent to this farm a man and wife with about a dozen boys with mental
ages of eight and below, and gradually added to it cows, horses and other
essentials. This all had to be done without full co-operation from the
Authorities in the State Board. This particular farm proved quite a success,
unfortunately for those who did not like the idea. The scheme was extended
until now there are thirty-five farms and fifteen homes in cities distributed
throughout the State. The success of the first few farms indicated that if
this could be done for boys it might be done for girls. We were sending girls
out into the city to do domestic work but always coming back to the School at
uight. It was one thing to get boys into the country but it was terrible to
think of getting girls into the cities on the same basis. In several cases either
citizens went to the State Government, or neighbours went to Mayors, and if
a Colony had been started, insisted that it be closed immediately. They did
n?t want girls of their own town to be contaminated by a group of girls
definitelv known to be feeble-minded.
8 MENTAL WELFARE
The Colony acts as a working-girl's Club. The girls take their meals
where they work but come home at night. The fact that they are living in
one place makes it easy to supervise their work, their recreation and also their
health, which is one of the biggest factors in keeping the girls happy in their
work. The local physician makes examinations regularly, as, also, does our
woman physician. We have tried the same system in knitting mill towns.
We have, also, a colony of girls sewing baseballs, no machine having been
discovered to do this. I think that possibly the distance from the School is
directly responsible for the success of the project. After all, if you give people
an opportunity to do a good job and do not watch them too closely, they
usually do well. These colonies are rather casually supervised. We hire a
man and wife, or possibly two women, and these women are not chosen because
they are Social Service graduates. We try to get our help within reasonable
mental touch with those with whom they are to deal. For instance, we had
a woman with an M.A. degree and she was very much interested in the
psychological side of the proposition but made a hopeless failure of the work;
whereas, a woman who had never been through a Grammar School made a
great success of it.
In looking over your facilities for the employment of boys trained in
your institutions, I find you have fifty-seven varieties of perfectly good in-
dustrial activities. We do not have this in America, for the Trade Unions
prevent it. However, the agricultural section consumes about all the boys
available. The State of New York, while it is the most populous of the Union,
leads in agriculture, and it is in this line that our boys seem to be the most
successful. Throughout the State there are a great many farms where only
the father and mother now live?the children having gone to the city. These
farms, usually, are back from the main roads and are not particularly modern
in equipment but are most decidedly within the capacity of the boy.
Many of these people are very anxious to rent these farms to us at a
nominal rate. We make such improvements as are essential to proper sanita-
tion but do not try to modernize the farm; the effort being to train these boys
in an environment which is about the same type as that to which they will
return, or to which they may be sent out for employment. This system of in-
expensive housing makes the Institution very elastic. It does away with over-
crowding and a waiting list. It also reduces tremendously the per capita cost
as most of these farms are largely self-supporting.
The girls' colonies are started in very much the same way. Where we
find a locality in need of domestic help it is a simple matter to rent a house
and place therein some twenty or thirty girls who have been trained in the
Institution along domestic lines. It takes practically no capital to do this. For
instance, in the case of East Aurora, which is a suburb of the city of Buffalo,
the inhabitants were anxious that we should start a domestic colony there.
So, a Matron with six girls, sufficient bedding and essentials for immediate
needs were taken along. They were, however, without money to make
MENTAL WELFARE 9
necessary purchases for food and other essentials. We went to the merchants
and said, " Here we are, you asked us to come, now you have to take care of
us. We want a stove, food, etc." These were provided, credit was established
and in a few days a colony was running.
They hired our girls by the week, day or hour. About one-third of the
girls' earnings are given directly to them for the purchase of clothing and
other personal wants. Another portion is placed in the bank to the credit of
the girl who earned it and the remainder goes into a fund which is used to
provide those things which the State does not find it possible to provide. In
this manner the colony not only serves as a means of helping those living in it
but adds to the comfort and pleasure of those not so fortunate. Each colony
has an automobile so that the colonists can go to the Beaches and to other
places of recreation.
You are, undoubtedly, interested to know a little about the type of
colonists. They represent a cross-section of the whole group both as to chrono-
logical and mental age. We have six colonies of the pre-school kindergarten
type. Here, children from the ages of five to ten years are instructed. These
arc in the city and here the child may grow up with the noise and bustle of
the city about him and become accustomed to its activities. If, later, he gets
back to his city home he finds himself well adjusted to that type of life. There
are colonies for the pre-adolescent for training in domestic, agricultural and
industrial work. Here they have part-time formal schooling. However, at
about fourteen years of age we usually move them either to their homes, to
other institutions for placement, or to colonies where definite agricultural or
domestic project work fits them for Working Parole. The lower grades find
a definite place doing the work which requires less training and intelligence
and they are pretty generally distributed throughout the whole system. Quite
naturally these colonies take on distinct individualities reflecting the person
and capacity of the man and wife in charge. In this way about twelve hundred
patients find an environment inducive to their development.
We find a great many boys coming to us around the age of ten who,
undoubtedly, will become unstable and delinquent. It is our effort here to
train these boys but with as little chance of institutionalization as possible. The
colony offers a rather exceptional opportunity for this and in many instances
it is possible to guide them through to foster homes and better social adjust-
ment. Of a thousand boys of this type placed out in the last six years in foster
or working homes, only three have given serious trouble while directly under
?ur supervision.
