The Development of Social Work
================================

in
By E. G. SOMERVILLE
Twenty-five years is but a brief span in the age-long history of human
progress. And yet within such a period, one may be fortunate enough to
witness the birth and gradual development of some great movement making
for the common weal. Often its origin is obscure. It may spring simultaneously
from widely different sources, as if they had been quickened by some common
spiritual impulse. Or one nation may make a new beginning and others
follow the example. In either case, as definite results begin to appear, men
see it for what it is?a step nearer the elusive Kingdom of Good.
In relation to health, physical and mental, the last twenty-five years has
witnessed rapid developments. Placing the child in the midst as the most
eloquent expression of good and evil in behaviour and environment, the Child
Welfare movement has set itself to study systematically the causes and effects
of high death rates, of high damage rates in child life, of ineffective response
to physical and mental stimuli, and to consider the influences on the child of
ante-natal life and thought, of environment and of early habits. To-day, a
great mass of information on these subjects has been acquired. But even yet
the end is not in view.
84 MENTAL WELFARE
I have been asked to write this paper as one who has been personally
associated with Child Welfare work in Scotland since its inception. Its
development can, I think, best be expressed by some vivid memories which
present themselves to my mind.
For a short time in Glasgow and for over twenty years in Edinburgh it
has been my privilege to share in the voluntary movements (and for the last
twelve years also in the official movements) which have centred in and around
the child. During this period intensive and extensive developments have taken
place in Clinics, ante-natal and post-natal, in Maternity Services, in Hospitals, in
Homes, in Child Gardens, in Nursery School and Toddlers' Playrooms, in
School Medical Inspection, in the provision of food, in the care of cripples, in
the care of the blind, in the care of the deaf and dumb and, more recently, in
the concentrated care of the feeble-minded.
Local Authorities have been called upon to consider schemes for
combating Tuberculosis, and for dealing with the many problems arising
from the presence of Venereal Diseases. They have been encouraged to carry
out vast building schemes, embodying the latest improvements in sanitation
and in lighting and in heating. They have been urged to provide open spaces,
recreation grounds, opportunities for sport and for the wise employment of
leisure.
Under the Local Government Act of 1929 the Mental Services, formerly
entirely under the care of the General and Local Boards of Control (the latter
embodied in the Parish Council), were placed under the jurisdiction of the
Local Authorities, whether of County or Town.
It fell to me to be elected the first Convenor of the Mental Services Sub-
Committee of the Public Health Committee of the Corporation of Edinburgh
and for two and a half years I have followed with the utmost interest the
development of schemes for the care and treatment of the mentally unbalanced
and of the mentally defective under the care of the Corporation.
Quite early in the study of causes affecting adversely the well-being of
children, it had been recognised that mental instability played a marked part,
far more difficult to solve than problems of physical environment. Confer-
ences were convened in Glasgow, in Dundee and in Edinburgh; Miss Dendy
of Sandlebridge spoke eloquently of the latent capacities for development even
in the feeble-minded; teachers in Special Schools and others pleaded for more
effective After-Care. Already, before the taking over of the responsibilities
by the Local Authority, Edinburgh had moved forward in many directions.
Five Special Schools with an annual enrolment of about 500 had been well
organised. Gogarburn, an Institution for the permanent care of the feeble-
minded, had been founded and plans for future development had been laid.
A voluntary After-Care Committee, working under the Council of Social
Service and recognised by the General Board of Control, had undertaken a
Visitation Scheme and had organised one or two Occupation Centres.
MENTAL WELFARE 85
It remained therefore for the Corporation not so much to originate
schemes as to co-ordinate efforts, to ascertain and fill up any gaps. This co-
ordination was made possible by the Local Government Act of 1929, under
which the three Committees dealing with the problem of the mentally defective,
viz., the Education Committee, the Public Assistance Committee and the
Public Health Committee, were united under one administrative head?the
Town Council.
The most effective co-operation has been established between the Educa-
tion and the Mental Services Committees of the Public Health Committee in
the provision of care for the " ineducables "?those children who, when tested,
were found incapable of being received into Special Schools. Until last year
these children were gathered in small groups and were looked after by the
Care Committee of the Council of Social Service. The efforts then made
undoubtedly led the way to the scheme now in operation, whereby the Educa-
tion Committee provides accommodation, appoints teachers, and selects suit-
able equipment, and the Mental Services Committee meets all expenses. In
this way, at the present moment, over 80 children are collected from different
parts of the City and are transferred by bus to a Centre outside of the City
proper where they are given suitable training and are made happy and healthy
by the exercise of such faculties as they possess. The results are astonishingly
good and fill the minds of parents and visitors alike with wonder and gratifica-
tion. " All Edinburgh should see this! " one of the mothers exclaimed as she
stood looking at her own and other children obedient, self-controlled, enjoying
their Christmas dinner.
Edinburgh is very fortunate in having as Mental Expert, under the
Medical Officer of Health, Dr. McAlister, the Medical Superintendent of
Rangour Mental Hospital. Under his guidance, further steps towards co-opera-
tion have been taken. A Mental Clinic has been opened in the centre of the
City over which Dr. McAlister presides and cases of difficult children and
unstable adults are brought or come for consultation. In connection with the
Sick Children's Hospital, Clinics of the same kind are held by Dr. Charles
McNeill and records of cases seen are sent on to Dr. McAlister, who is also in
direct touch with the examining body of the Education Committee. The
Roman Catholic Community has organised a special Child Study Centre.
Very close co-operation has been established between the Medical Officer of
Health for Child Welfare, the Medical Officer of Health for Venereal
Diseases, and Dr. McAlister. Supreme in authority over all branches of the
work is the Town Council acting under the guidance of its Medical Officer
of Health.
Gogarburn Institution for the permanent care of the feeble-minded is
now able to receive about 300 patients and under the skilled control of Dr.
Bailey is doing excellent work in affording suitable environment, occupation
and also school facilities for these patients. The Corporation has in view, in
the immediate future, provision for the reception of a further 200 inmates.
86 MENTAL WELFARE
One department of care has not yet been organised in Edinburgh,
although attention is concentrated on it at this moment and information from
other centres of organisation is being eagerly sought. Children leave the Special
Schools at 16 years of age. Some, a small percentage in Edinburgh, find
occupation for themselves. These occupations are described as " more or less
satisfactory." The majority, however, remain permanently unemployed. For
these, Industry Centres are essential if the education acquired in the Special
Schools is not to be lost. Could it be proved that the amount of self-support
of which these children are capable would reduce public expenditure on their
maintenance, a scheme for establishing Industry Centres might be accepted
even under the present financial strain. A report on these lines has been asked
for from the Town Clerk, the City Chamberlain and the Medical Officer of
Health.
The scheme for Industry Centres, if adopted, might be under the manage-
ment of a united Care Committee consisting of members of the Education,
Public Health and Public Assistance Committees, with co-opted members
representing the Social Service Care Committee. With such co-ordination, a
wise and successful scheme should be possible of achievement.
In order that the members of the Town Council might be able to realise
the extent of the problem of the feeble-minded in their midst, a census was
recently taken by the Public Assistance Committee and the Care Committee
of the Council of Social Service. The following are some of the figures given
in this Census: ?
#Number of Mental Defectives known either to the Public
Assistance Officer or to Edinburgh Committee for Mental
Welfare ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1020
Of these, 319 are in Institutions?Gogarburn... ... ... 152
Bangour ... ... ... 104
Elsewhere ... ... ... 63
Of the remaining 701?
64 are in urgent need of institutional care
100 are in employment?more or less satisfactory
70 attend Occupation Centre at Slateford
66 having left Special Schools are regarded as suitable for Industry
Centres if such existed
68 in private dwellings paid for by Corporation of Edinburgh
The majority of the remainder are attending Special Schools, while a
few are ineducable defectives who are kept at home.
It is now some months since the Census was taken (in the Spring of 1932)-
Since then Gogarburn has been able to receive many of the cases from Bangour
Population of Edinburgh at last census, 438,998,
MENTAL WELFARE 87
and from some of the other Institutions. The number of defectives in the
Occupation Centre has risen to 82.
The problem is now, therefore, a defined problem and future develop-
ments will have a relation to that knowledge. A yearly Census will keep
information up-to-date.
Deeper still and more necessary for the vision of the future health and
happiness of the human race is the urgency for research into the causation of
mental instability and mental defect. The whole subject is now under the
consideration of a Committee appointed by the Ministry of Health and as a lay
student of social conditions I have been gratified to note that several smaller
pieces of research are being carried out into one or more of the possible causes,
such as: ?consanguinity, venereal diseases, accidents at birth or during in-
fancy, under or over secretion of thyroid glands, wrong diet during pregnancy,
abortions and interference with processes of natural conception, sepsis in
throat, nose, mouth, and so on.
These suggested sources can be, in the main, controlled by the individual
educated conscience and an educated enlightened public. Codes of sex
behaviour, social customs, sanctions, inhibitions, commandments, have not in
any community appeared as arbitrary Laws, but are based on deeply rooted
attempts to reach and to retain the highest possible level of health, physical
and mental, of the various races of Man.
