Human Sterilization: The History of the Sexual Sterilisation Movement
=======================================================================

92 MENTAL WELFARE
Book Reviews CS1 Abstracts
. By J. H.
Landman, Ph.D., J.D., J.S.D. Macmillan
Co. New York. 1932. Price 16/- net.
In the introduction to his book, Dr. Land-
man writes (with becoming modesty) that " It
purports to be a scholarly and scientific treat-
ment of the available data on the subject. The
conclusions are not final, but suggestive. What
the question of cacogenicity, which is the crux
of the entire problem of human sterilization,
requires, is more science than propaganda and
more research than speculation." With the
last sentiment we are in complete agreement.
The book is divided into five parts : ?Part I
deals with Eugenics and American Social
Legislation; Part II, Human Sterilization and
the Courts; Part III, The Biology of Human
Sterilization; Part IV, The Surgery of Human
Sterilization; Part V, Human Sterilization and
Social Policy.
Statistics are furnished concerning the prev-
alence of psychoses, feeble-mindedness and
epilepsy in the United States together with the
statutory and judicial history of the legisla-
tion relating to sterilization.
As to the number of " mentally incompetent
people" in the population of the United States,
the estimate of Popenhoe is quoted, the figure
being nearly 10,000,000, which is roughly one-
eleventh of the total population. The cost of
maintenance is considered and the struggles
for or against sterilization in the different
States are reviewed followed by a statement of
the present legal status; and in this relation
Dr. Landman rightly observes that " The ex-
cesses or the merits of human sterilization in
this country are the results of the propaganda
of the pessimistic Eugenicists," and again,
" Our salvation thus turns on the knowledge,
wisdom and justice of our legislatures." There
is a tendency in so many publications, espec-
ially those from, America, to confuse the issue
through treating the problems of mental
deficiency and insanity as if they were iden-
tical and capable of being solved in a similar
manner. And the problem of the moral defec-
tive (much more difficult) is studiously avoided
by the majority of writers in all countries. It
seems to be forgotten that the insane person
is often possessed of a high degree of intelli-
gence temporarily, or, may be, permanently
masked by his disease.
Dr. Landman is at his best when writing
under the title " A critique of Eugenics," as
in the following passage, " How many of us
realize that at the time of the discovery of
America, the average American now living
had 16,384 ancestors in the one ancestral
generation ! One's ancestors do multiply
rapidly, two parents, four grandparents, eight
great-grandparents, and so on. Hereafter, let
us reserve our boasts of our great ancestors of
14 generations ago, until we know what the
reputation of the other 16,383 were whom
history has failed to record. Many of them
might have been idiots, morons, criminals,
prostitutes and other socially undesirable
people."
And after a trenchant criticism of Eugenics
he adds " Human Sterilization as a social
program requires more scientific evidence. I11
the meantime if human sterilization must be
employed it should be employed cautiously-
The surgical methods of sterilization, vasec-
tomy in the male and salpingectomy (partial
or complete) in the female are described in the
chapter entitled " The Human Sterilization
Operations," and whatever results may be
accepted, the fact remains that the operation
in the female is a much more serious procedure
and it is the sterilization of the female mental
defective which is the greater problem,
speculations concerning the causes and the
consequences of mental deficiency there have
been enough and to spare. Sterilization has
been offered as the remedy and it is to that
great country of America to which we must
look for the results of this human experimen
on a large scale. But when we turn to the
Chapter XII in this book entitled "The Effects
of Human Sterilization," we find this state-
ment : " Though compulsory human steriliza"
tion has been employed for about one-quartef
of a century in the United States and aboil
12,000 or more individuals have already been
coercively sterilized it is strange to declare tha
little is known of the postoperative effects o
salpingectomy and vasectomy " . . . . aga*11
Before very much more is accomplished^ &
applied human Eugenics through sterilizati?
it is necessary to conduct a survey of those
individuals who have been sterilized and ^
turned to society in order to estimate the men
MENTAL WELFARE 93
and demerits of the movement." This is what
every man and every woman wants to know
and it is those who have conducted or have
Watched this experiment in human sterilization
who are capable of affording the requisite in-
formation. But that information is not yet
forthcoming.
We note how carefully Dr. Landman has
copied his medical information; for excision of
the Fallopian tube is referred to as " fallec-
tomy" being printed with a small /. The word
Fallopian is derived from the great anatomist
Fallopius who first described the tubes that
bear his name, but the word " fallectomy "
deserved to be strangled at birth.
There is need for an investigation on scien-
tific lines into the physical results of steriliza-
tion, but it must be carried out by experts, for
the haphazard opinions of patients, of relatives
?r of friends, recorded by lay writers with the
conclusions based upon them, cannot be re-
garded as a serious contribution to our know-
ledge.
Dr. Landman sums up by stating that
Human Sterilization is not by any means the
solution of the problem of the feeble-minded
and the mentally diseased. Instead, it creates
new problems," and further, " Segregation
Would do all that sterilization would do in pre-
senting the propagation of these social unfits
out in addition remove the many dangers to
society which would arise from their freedom."
The book concludes with a chapter on the
-Problems in the administration of the human
sterilization laws.
An extensive Bibliography is added and ar-
ranged to follow each chapter, but in a book of
this character it would have been better to have
KiVen merely what is termed in America, "the
vv?rth-while " of the literature.
Dr. Landman has written a book which is
?t value because it will enable those who read
t to develop a sense of proportion on the much-
reoated question of human sterilization. It
ls so easy to fall a prey to the wiles of the
enthusiastic propagandist who has made a
' tudy of the traps in which to catch the un-
ary and the misinformed, and who is ever
ijeady to offer tempting bait in the shape of
antastic statements and doubtful statistics.
n this book the subject has been treated in a
^aim and judicial manner and when it is read
?ni cover to cover the verdict that the im-
partial reader feels impelled to give is that the
efficacy of human sterilization as a means of
racial betterment is not proven.
F. J. McC.
Neurology-Psychiatry. By Peter Bassoe,
M.D., and Franklin G. Ebaugh, A.B., M.D.
The Year Book Publishers, Inc. Chicago.
1932. (British Agents : H. K. Lewis & Co.)
In his preface Dr. Bassoe says that it is his
desire to make this book a critical digest
rather than a more or less haphazard collection
of abstracts. With such miscellaneous material
this object is not easy of attainment, but a
large measure of success may well be claimed.
An index of the wide scope of the biblio-
graphy may be found in the fact that nearly
550 separate authors are quoted or referred to
on different subjects.
As a survey of recent observation and re-
search it is comprehensive and useful?espec-
ially in reference to the treatment of such
common maladies as Epilepsy and Syphilitic
diseases. The views expressed are sometimes
provocative, due to the present indeterminate
state of our knowledge.
The book is clearly not intended for be-
ginners and assumes an acquaintance with the
groundwork of nervous and mental disorders
on which to impose the superstructure it pro-
vides. It should prove of valuable assistance
to those whose interest and work lie in the
branches of science from which the title is
derived.
R.W.
Board of Control : England and Wales.
Eighteenth Annual Report. H.M Stationery
Office. Part I. 2/- net.
The Eighteenth Annual Report of the Board
of Control records the results of the first year
of the operation of the Mental Treatment Act,
1930. After making allowance for the ex-
ceptional difficulties in working a new Act, the
shortage of institutional accommodation, and
the financial crisis of the State, the experience
of the year confirms the belief that the Mental
Treatment Act will ultimately be recognised
as marking an epoch in the treatment of mental
disorders.
94
MENTAL WELFARE
Ninety-eight Out-Patient Clinics have been
established, sixty-one being in connection with
general hospitals. In certain rural areas spec-
ial arrangements have been made to meet the
needs of patients in out-lying districts. It is
suggested that in similar areas application
might be made to the Local Education Author-
ities with a view to utilising the School Clinics
for this purpose.
Voluntary In-Patient Treatment and Tempor-
ary Treatment.
In the case of private patients the number
of voluntary and temporary patients exceeded
those under certificate.
Of the total direct admissions into all forms
of care:?84% were admitted under Order;
14% were received as Voluntary Patients; and
2% were received as Temporary Patients.
It is suggested that certain certified patients
who have greatly improved but are likely to
require prolonged institutional treatment
could in future be graded as voluntary patients
with decided gain to their sense of self-
respect. The number of admissions of tem-
porary patients under Section 5 of the Mental
Treatment Act has been disappointingly small.
Many non-volitional cases have been sent in
under certificate when use could have been
made of the new provision.
Accommodation.
The whole question of accommodation both
for cases of mental disorder and for mental
defectives is serious and it is evident that the
growing overcrowding of Mental Hospitals is
largely due to the absence of accommodation
elsewhere for mental defectives.
An investigation of 449 mental defectives in
two Mental Hospitals resulted in the following
classification : ?
Suitable for removal to a Colony ... 173
Suitable for removal to a Public Assist-
ance Institution   ... ... 61
Should remain in the Mental Hospitals 72
As the cost of a Colony Bed for defectives
is about ?300 and the estimated cost of a
Mental Hospital Bed is ?500, considerable
economy would be effected by the removal of
suitable defectives to Colonies.
Ascertainment of Mental Defectives.
Under this heading and elsewhere, attention
is drawn to the serious results of retarded
ascertainment, especially in the case of violent
and dangerous defectives and those who are
charged with offences. The ratios of ascertain-
ment vary from 7.23 to 0.23 per 1,000 of the
population, the total number reported by
Local Authorities for the year being 97,310,
an increase of 11,347.
Community Care.
In view of the shortage of institutional ac-
commodation defectives must be dealt with by
improved methods of community care. Great
importance is attached to a judicious use of
Licence, experience having shown that the
risks can be minimised if good judgment and
systematic care are exercised. Of 152 on licence
from a large Certified Institution only 6 were
returned, 4 as being unsuitable and 2 for bad
behaviour.
The selection of Guardians under Guardian-
ship Schemes presents considerable difficulty
and their selection and instruction should forrn
a definite part of every Local Authoritys
Mental Deficiency service. The increase ?t
Guardianship cases for the year is 315, the
total being 2,147.
There are sometimes limitations to the suit-
ability of parents as Guardians, the tendency
of some being to regard the allowance aS
simply Poor Law Relief and others accepti*1^
the allowance and denying the existence ?t
mental deficiency in the child.
There are now 182 Occupation Centres func'
tioning, 45 being conducted by Local Author-
ities and 137 by Voluntary Associations. Ho11}0
Teaching is being systematically organised 111
four areas, Middlesex, Suffolk, Gloucester-
shire loint Board, and Wiltshire.
Marriage of Defectives.
The number reported for the year is
The figures are probably under the actua
ones, as ascertainment is still incompl^^'
Nevertheless, the marriages reported for
year confirms the Board in the opinion
legislative action should be taken to preve*1
the marriage of defectives who have bee
placed under Order.
Mental Defectives and Crime.
Three hundred and six mentally defect1^
offenders were dealt with under the ^e?ty
Deficiency Acts. One hundred and thtf >
three offences were of a serious nature. \ ^
incidence of crime among the 306 defectrv^
reached its highest point between the ages ?.
14 and 21, after which it steadily decrease
MENTAL WELFARE
95
Eighty-two per cent, of the cases came to the
knowledge of the Local Authorities after the
commission of some offence and sixty-three of
the cases had already been in some form of
institutional care. Although from the informa-
tion recorded about many of these 63 cases the
defect must have been recognisable in child-
hood, it appears to have been undetected or to
have been regarded as no bar to discharge.
M.D.
