Education of the Backward Child
=================================

:Type: Book Reviews & Abstracts
:Author: David Kennedy-Fraser, M.A., B.Sc.,
F.R.S.E. Published by University of Lon-
don Press, Ltd. Price 6/-.

In spite of the fact that we have had Special
Schools for mentally retarded children for forty
years, and that for the last decade at least,
considerable interest has been taken in the
problems presented by the dull and backward
group, yet till now we have had only one Eng-
lish book purporting to give some guidance
regarding the methods of educating such child-
ren. Here at last we have a second?and it is
of Scottish origin ! Miss Bridie's book was
published in 1917 and the time has been long
overdue for a fresh and thorough treatment of
the subject in the light of modern develop-
ments in educational theory and practice. Mr.
Kennedy-Fraser, in his dual position as psy-
chologist to the Glasgow Education Authority
and lecturer in charge of the training of
teachers for Special Schools in Scotland, has
had unique opportunities for the collection of
material for such a work.

The methods outlined in this book are for
" backward " children, this group to include
the type of children usually dealt with in
Special Schools, as well as those of a slightly
higher grade. The use of technical terms has
been avoided in order to help the lay reader
" with no'previous experience of psychology."
We have no objections to such people reading
the book but we sincerely hope they will not
undertake the difficult task of educating back-
ward children, even after having read this
book!

The earlier chapters on " What is the Back-
ward Child? " and " The Diagnosis of Back-
wardness," deal with the use of the Binet
Simon and standardised scholastic tests in the
selection of backward children. The I.Q., the
E.Q., and the A.Q. are discussed and sug-
gestions are given as to other lines of investi-
gation desirable. In his treatment of the sub-
ject of " School Reorganisation," the author
pleads for special provision for backward child-
ren while they are still young, and repudiates
the suggestion that they are better when taught
along with children of average ability. In
place of the recommendations of the Wood
Committee with regard to the " larger educa-
tional unit," which is not favoured, Mr. Fraser
suggests " Another type of grouping would
seem to be much more practical, as follows:
take all the children up to 60 I.Q. as a group
to be handled in some form of Occupation
Centre with slightly more of the three R's in-
cluded than at present for a maximum 50
I.Q., and then apply the technique which has
by now been worked out in the best Special
Schools, to the remainder of the retarded group
from 60 to 85 I.Q. In large schools this might
be done in a special department within the
school, and in smaller schools centralisation
from three or four neighbouring schools might
provide large enough groups to be dealt with
economically and efficiently."

Not all of us, however, have such implicit
faith in the reliability of the Binet Simon Test
findings as to make the dividing line at I.Q. 60.
We must remember that on any re-test we may
expect a difference of as much as four points
either way, and further that it is not at all un-
usual to get an increase of quite six to ten
points accompanying a period of marked in1'
provement in health and the provision of more
appropriate education and general care. Mr-
Fraser himself gives an instance later in the
book of a case where the I.Q. increased frofn
70 to 83 following removal of tonsils and,
may assume, improved physical condition.

It is therefore essential to allow for a mar'
ginal group at the lower as well as at the upPer
level. It would be quite unsafe to make the
lower borderline as high as I.Q. 60. Many case5
with I.Q. as low as 50 have to be kept undef
very careful observation before being c?n'
sidered for exclusion from the Special Schools-
Again, we must, too, give full recognition [?
the fact that the Binet Simon Test rating 15
affected to the extent of over 50% by schofc5'
tic attainments,* and those children who ha^
a special disability in reading are severe^
handicapped. For this reason as well as t?
others, the use of a scale of Performance Tes
is advisable. It is found that quite a pr?P?r^
tion of children with the Binet Simon I-Q* 0
below 60 make a much higher score, compar^
tively speaking, when dealing with < 110
linguistic problems, and some of these child1".^
are more likely to succeed when placed out
* Burt's Mental and Scholastic Tests, p. 183.
the industrial world than the verbalists who
niake higher scores in tests of the Binet Simon
type. While, therefore, we realise the help that
the Binet Simon Scale can give us in the selec-
tion of backward children, we should at the
same time recognise its limitations, and the
dangers of any too slavish adherence to the
*-Q. as a basis for classification.

In a later section of the book the author sug-
gests the use of the Porteus Maze Tests to give
the teacher some indication of the capacity of
the children to profit from the various forms
?f handwork. These tests are quickly and
easily administered but better tests of the
Performance " type have more recently be-
come available.

Following up his grouping of the very
backward children as outlined in the passage
Quoted above, Mr. Kennedy-Fraser makes sug-
gestions as to the organisation of such a special
department taking children of I.Q. 60 to 85.
Either the lowest 10% or the lowest 15% may
J^e relegated to the special classes in groups of
.0 Pupils per teacher, there being a chronolog-
lcal age range of 2 or 3 years among the child-
ren. Considering the wide range of intelligence
^ Well as of age, the size of the class is larger
nan one would have thought advisable, being
greater than we have at present in the Special
' chools both in Scotland and in England. One
^?tes that the leaving age for all the children
Irj, the group is assumed to be 14, so that much
?t what is advocated in Chapter XIII could
ttot be carried out. There the author advises
ne retention of backward children at school
they are 16, but it is difficult to envisage
ls as possible of execution where the special
asses are part of the organisation of an Ele-
mentary School.

^he author has many hints to offer teachers
j Warding organisation of the class so as to
eal with pupils of different types and capac-
^ es> and also with regard to the methods of
v^aching the 3 R's. The results of various in-
Vnations, especially in America, are brought
> bin easy reach of the class-teacher here,
ba i attempt is made to develop a theoretical
b c Sr?und; that the author has considered
ca the scope of the present volume. A
hel -1 study the chapters on method will
itn ^ ^experienced teachers to tackle their
ab e(liate problems and it will certainly bring
aH-^t a more thoughtful and sympathetic
U(le to the individual backward children.
It is a book that should be read by all teachers
in Elementary and especially in Rural Schools.
The author has wide experience of teachers,
their problems and their little weaknesses. The
latter he deals with in a frank but always
kindly and refreshing manner. His aim has
been on the one hand to ensure that the back-
ward child will enjoy school as much as the
clever child, and on the other to point out what
an interesting task lies before the teacher of a
backward class.

E.L.S.R.
The Insanity Plea. By Edward Huntington
Williams, M.D. Baltimore. The Williams &
Wilkins Company. 1931. Pp. xii + 170.
Price 11/6 net.

The author of this book has had great ex-
perience in medico-legal cases. He contends
for an alteration in the present legal procedure
in cases when insanity is an issue. This ques-
tion has two sides, civil and criminal.

As regards the civil side, the book deals
primarily with the procedure in California. In
that State a patient in a mental hospital has
the legal right to have the question of his de-
tention determined by a jury. Some curious
results of this are described. In one instance,
a patient whose mental derangement is said to
have been patent, was found " not insane " by
a jury, because a medical witness had expressed
the opinion that the patient was incurable. The
jury was unwilling to incur the responsibility
of sentencing a man to what was likely to be
detention for life. As might be expected,
when a similar case next occurred, the medical
witness was careful to give a more hopeful
prognosis.

In criminal matters the criteria for the estab-
lishment of " irresponsibility " employed in
America do not differ materially from those in
use in this country, and they are open to the
same objections. The author deals with var-
ious difficult problems which may arise, for
example in epilepsy and other conditions which
may produce loss of memory. He also con-
siders the possibility of malingering. He states
that " hundreds of innocent amnesic persons
have been punished unjustly, and hundreds of
guilty malingerers have escaped punishment
by alleging amnesia." Such may be the ex-
perience in America. It is not so in this coun-
try, where the general opinion among those
best qualified to judge is that our present rules
of law, whatever may be their theoretical im-
perfections, work fairly and justly in practice.
Why is there this difference? We believe that
our superior position, in this particular, is due
to a definite distinction in procedure. In
America the customary plan is to engage, by
the prosecution and the defence respectively,
two rival sets of expert witnesses. The evi-
dence of these witnesses is treated as hostile by
the opposite side, and the resulting cross-ex-
amination gives rise to most unedifying dis-
putes. In this country the evidence of the
prison medical officer is always regarded as
absolutely impartial, and, in the vast majority
of cases, his opinion is accepted by the jury.
The book should do something to bring
before the public how much mental abnormal-
ities may act as causative factors in the pro-
duction of delinquency. A number of striking
medico-legal cases are described graphically
and dramatically. The plea, with which we
entirely agree, is made that any plan for the
reduction of crime must contain a provision for
the scientific study of individual offenders.
But such individual study will have little
effect, unless it is accompanied by the logical
consequence, individualization of treatment.

M.H.S.
Minds in Arrear : Some Practical Aspects of
Mental Deficiency. By E. B. Sherlock,
M.D., B.Sc., London., Barrister-at-Law.
London. Bailliere, Tindall & Cox. 1932.
Price 5/- net.

This book, according to its author, does not
attempt to give an exhaustive account of men-
tal deficiency nor is it designed to serve merely
as an addition to the various text-books, in-
tended for specialists, which are now available.
Its appeal is rather to the increasing number
of ordinary citizens who display an intelligent
interest in the subject without having been
brought into very intimate relation with it.
The form which the book has assumed ap-
pears to be that which is most suitable to the
task essayed. There is, first, a preliminary
survey of the nature of mental deficiency, and
then an attempt is made in Chapter III to de-
fine it in terms of mind, but as one cannot
clearly visualize a defective mind until one has
a definite conception of what is meant by
" mind," Chapter II is devoted to some of the
views of modern psychology which, the author
avers, is a jungle, and if one desires to arrive
anywhere, one must make a track through it
to get there. The track which the author has
made indicates that modern views of the nature
of mind are largely mechanistic. Even though
mind has elements outside the domain of
physics and chemistry, so large a part of its
activity is due to reflexes requiring nothing
beyond the existence of a sensitive and respon-
sive material that the direct influence of the
environment may be accepted as its chief
determinant of behaviour.

This psychological track leads the author
inevitably to the fourth and final chapter of his
book, where the " practical applications " ?*
the theme are considered. Thus the reader
learns to realize that such development as a
defective mind is capable of achieving may he
controlled so that its general direction does not
diverge from approximately normal lines, even
though the progress made falls far short of the
normal termination of those lines. The policy
indicated is one of training and guidance*
directed by such knowledge of mental struc-
ture as psychology can supply and by a clear
perception of the end to be attained. What i-s
that end, and how may its attainment be en-
sured ? f

Dr Sherlock contends that a sound system 0
social relations must be based upon an eqmv?'
lence of rights and duties. If this principle 1?
applied to the mentally defective, considere
as individuals, it follows that the scientific
of dealing with them is to require of the^
whatever services they can render as a set-o^
to the burden they impose. The part V^.Cn
by institutional treatment in this connect!0
will be that of fitting the defective, by ^nea^{
of technical instruction and the implanting
moral principles, to become, as far as PosS^at
self-supporting. Experience has shown tn
such development can take place. Much of \
world's work is of a kind requiring the e%erCX^
of only a minimum amount of intelligence, a t
this work defectives are not only able
anxious to attempt.

The communal employment of defect!
gives rise to its own special problems.
Sherlock considers some of these and the <^
culties in connection with them.
difficulties he believes may be obviated to s >
extent by the use of hostels; additional ^ c.
ance could be afforded by bringing the de ^
tive into touch with one or other or
benevolent organizations, such as the Baden-
Powell Groups, the Y.M. and Y.W.C.A.'s, and
py utilizing the services of the voluntary assoc-
^tions devoted to mental welfare. He discusses
?ther methods of communal care, and regrets
that while there is probably sufficient work of
a Useful character available for all defectives
who can work, circumstances should prevent
their being given opportunities of doing so. He
asks whether it is possible to discover a more
favourable way of dealing with the problem,
tie considers certain popular alternatives. The
lethal chamber, he believes, would be ineffec-
*lve, sterilization impracticable, and satisfac-
tory
segregation too expensive. His book, in
:act, is a reasoned plea for the better utilization
the community of the mentally defective
and it deserves every success in its endeavour
9 convert the ordinary citizen to this point of
view.

H. Frieze Stephens.
Children We Teach. By Susan Isaacs,
M.A., D.Sc. University of London Press.
1932. 3/6 net.
. ' My aim is to help the teacher to renew his
j^sight into the needs of children he deals with.
y lifting his eyes from the immediate practical
^oncerns of the classroom, and borrowing the
1Slon of the psychologist from time to time,
le teacher can often gain fresh interest in his
t uPils as human beings, and increase his own
jyactical resources and adaptability." This is
e aim which Dr Isaacs so successfully ac-
5>rnpiishes in her little book " The Children
W? Teach."
-the word " renew " is particularly signifi-
nt. pOSition of the elementary school
. acher is a difficult one. She begins her teach-
^ exPerience with certain ideals before her;
i at any rate, a determination not to fall
? a groove. She finds militated against her,
^e or all of the following factors; a reaction-
y ?r short-sighted Education Committee; the
ST) ^^Pathetic attitude adopted by some in-
fix Ci -S' a dogmatic headmaster or mistress; a
ac C time-table; and a rigid law of promotion
age?rC^ng to chronological rather than mental
Sll ' If her personality is strong enough to
1(j>unt these difficulties, the size of her class
? . isolation of her position may yet blind
,1Ilsight into the needs of the children she
s with. She is then apt to become like the
teacher of the backward class in which, as Dr.
Isaacs says, each child was confronted with the
mangled remains of one primrose, pin-eyed or
thrum-eyed, as the case might be. She is sus-
picions, and even resentful of the psychologist,
who appears to her to demand the impossible.
To all teachers in this position, and there are
many of them, this book should particularly
commend itself. The style is easy and pleas-
ant to read; the meaning is never obscured by
the technical phraseology of the psychologist.
If every department were to possess a copy of
this vigorous and stimulating work, I feel sure
that there would be a tremendous impetus
given to the readjustment of our values, which
is fundamental to all progress in education.
Finally, how much more exciting our lives and
work as teachers would be if we were doing a
little real psychological research of our own !
E.L.C.
