Mental Deficiency Practice
===========================

70 MENTAL WELFARE
Book Reviews *82 Abstracts
. By F. C.
Shrubsall and A. C. Williams. University of
London Press, Ltd. Pp. 352. 12/6 net.
This manual, which deals with the clinical
and administrative aspects of the subject, is
a valuable addition to the growing literature
on mental deficiency. It will be especially
welcomed by those medical officers of local
authorities who are concerned with the certi-
fication of defectives under the Education and
Mental Deficiency Acts. An excellent sum-
mary is given of the various clinical types en-
countered and advice is given as to the best
method of approach to defectives of different
ages and varying types. Many workers in the
field will approve of the London modification
of the Binet tests (which is set out in full) and
the newly-fledged certifying officer more par-
ticularly will find the advice given concerning
the mode of application of the tests very help-
ful. The advantage of a serial scale which can
be readily adapted for use with blind defec-
tives, and also for the repeated examinations
of sighted defectives, will be apparent to all
engaged in this work. A timely warning is
given as to the limitation of mental tests in the
diagnosis of mental deficiency, and the danger
of assessing scholastic attainments without
reference to the physical, pedagogic and en-
vironmental handicaps, with which the child
may have had to contend, is wisely stressed.
Administrative procedure in relation to the
disposal of defectives is succinctly but ade-
quately outlined. The merits of co-operation
between the Local Education Authority and
the statutory Mental Deficiency Committee
are mentioned, but, while no doubt co-opera-
tion is the best that can be hoped for in many
areas, itis nevertheless true that the completely
co-ordinated Public Health Units which now
exist in many provincial areas provide for a
much more efficient measure of continuous
care than any system based on co-operation.
Under co-ordinated conditions the complete
dossier of information about an individual case
is passed from one section of a department to
another as circumstances warrant, and medical
examinations and social investigations are cut
down to a minimum. It should be remembered
that Health Visitors in the course of their
routine visits to homes for various purposes
possess unrivalled opportunities for ascertain*
ing defectives under the age of seven years,
and in many areas such sources of information
are being utilised to the full.
A series of completed specimen forms for use
in connection with mental deficiency is given
at the end of the book, and these should prove
of considerable value for reference purposes-
Every local authority dealing with mental
defectives should have at least one copy ?*
Shrubsall and Williams' " Mental Deficiency
Practice " for the guidance of its officers.
The Maniac : A Realistic Study of Madness
from the Maniac's Point of View. Watts
& Co., London. 1932. Price 7/6.
This account of an attack of insanity that
lasted five weeks was written in 1909 in the
months immediately after the attack. It haS
been republished with a few additional notes
in the hope that with the greater interest m
insanity that now prevails, better use may be
made of the material presented by the author*
who was an unmarried woman of 35 and a
journalist when her attack began.
The author is convinced that from first to
last every word spoken by the " voices " t0
her and by her in reply, is reproduced ^
accurately as if taken down by a shorthan
reporter and that every emotion and though
of which she was conscious during the attac
remained fixed on her memory as if brande
thereon. .
The result is a coherent and vivid acco>nn
of ecstatic conversations with "Ray Hall,' f
artist whom she admired in her normal I1
but was not acquainted with, of her seducti0
by fiends and of her almost constant torture J
them, and of innumerable painful deaths ea
one more horrible than the last. As she beg
to improve, the first to go were her delusi0
that she had been seduced by a fiend and ^
about to have a fiend child. The " voices
sisted but later they began to sound as bel
inside her head rather than as proceeding j* -
without and they said what she had be
thinking whereas before they had said
which were often contrary to her own thong
and opinions. The " voices " decreased ^
volume of sound and in rapidity. Instea .
being faster than thought they were^ as ^
as thought. Then they lagged behind a
ultimately disappeared.
MENTAL WELFARE 71
The author contends that insanity is the
result of a severance of the Ego from the
Physical body and from the brain which con-
tinues to function automatically and aimlessly
While the real Ego is far away. The lunatic is
actually out of his mind. She is convinced
that delusions and activities observed in her
by
nurses and doctor were at no time in her
consciousness and although her doctor con-
versed with her during every day of her illness
for at least one hour and generally two, in only
three or four occasions did his conversation
reach her consciousness.
The psychosis seems to have been a
benign stupor " or possibly a katatonic
episode. It was certainly not Mania and the
Word " maniac " is here used merely as a
synonym for " lunatic." It is a pity that we
a_re told so little of the context of the psycho-
sis, the situation that provoked it; and of the
Patient's pre-morbid personality. She has been
reticent about so many things that mattered
a^d notably about sexual matters which ob-
Vlously played an important part in her dis-
order; but we must remember that the book
Was written before psycho-analysis had
reached the British public. The value of the
book would have been enhanced by the collab-
0l'ation of the doctor who observed the case.
H. Harris.
