Primary and Secondary Amentia
================================

By L. S. PENROSE, M.A., M.D.,
Research Medical Officer, Royal Eastern Counties' Institution
The tradition of classifying all mental defectives into the two categories
of primary and secondary amentia has been very widely known and followed.
Different names have been applied to the two classes in different countries
and by different people but the dichotomy is in each case essentially the same,
the fundamental idea behind it being that the mental impairment of every
defective is either due to hereditary (germinal) abnormality or else acquired in
the course of the life of the individual either before, during or after birth.
It was not unnatural that the earliest attempts at classifying defectives
employed the same terms which are in general use in medicine and dis-
tinguished between congenital and acquired idiocy. That is to say, they
distinguished between those cases who were affected before birth and those
who acquired a disease afterwards. The position was complicated by certain
French physicians who used the term idiocy to signify congenital and im-
becility to signify acquired defect. In 1877 Ireland C) proposed a grouping
based on pathological considerations and gave the name " genetous idiocy "
to the cases which he considered to be determined by heredity, among which
(x) Idiocy and Imbecility.
58 MENTAL WELFARE
he included mongolism The remaining patients were named under a number
of different headings such as " microcephalic idiocy," " epileptic idiocy," and
" paralytic idiocy."
Tredgold, (2) in 1920, revised this classification, calling those cases
which he deemed to be of hereditary or germinal origin, Primary and the
remainder, Secondary. At the same time he retained the descriptions of the
various different types such as microcephalics, epileptics, mongols, but he left
it to be decided by further analysis whether the patient belonging to any of
these groups was a primary or secondary anient. Fie gave his opinion, how-
ever, that 80% of all cases were primary, but other authorities differ on the
question of the correctness of this figure. The varying estimates depend partly
on the type and grade of cases studied and partly on the theories of the
observer. Where large groups are analysed, the first of these influences will
not apply so much. The estimate of Shrubsall and Williams (") in 10,000
cases was 71% primary. Larsen (4), in a series of 1,000 examinations, gave
the value 76% for what he termed " endogenous " defectives?a group con-
forming closely, by definition, to Tredgold's primary group.
Let us now consider the question from the critical point of view. Imagine
we are faced with the problem of deciding whether a given patient is to be
placed in the group of Primary or Secondary defectives. We are to consider
every relevant fact in the personal and family history and make up our minds
one way or the other. I will illustrate this by describing a case.
There is a female patient in the R.E.C.I., aged 19, who shows a very
characteristic post-encephalitic condition. She is much retarded in all her
actions and in speech. She drags her feet when walking and does not swing
her arms. The face is expressionless and the power of convergence of the
eyes is lost. As far as it can be ascertained, the disease came on at about the
age of 11, after or during an attack of what was diagnosed as mumps at the
time. She subsequently learnt little at school, partly owing to her being
awake at night and sleepy by day. Soon after, her behaviour with men began
to attract attention. After leaving school, she was tried in one or two situations
but was dismissed as incapable. Then she was found to be pregnant and had
a miscarriage. This led to her institutional detention, first as a place-of-safety
case and later on she was certified feeble-minded. Fler mental age, as judged
by the Stanford-Binet scale, is ten years and she scored nine years six months
on the Porteus Maze Tests.
One's first impulse in a case of this kind is to say that it is clearly an
example of purely secondary amentia, if indeed one would call it amentia
at all. But there is another side to the picture. By careful investigation, we
found evidence of mental retardation previous to the attack of encephalitis.
(2) Mental Deficiency, 1st Edition.
(3) Mental Deficiency Practice.
(4) A Neurologic-Etiologic Study. (Acta Psychiatrica et Neurologica, Vol. VI, 1931,
Fac. 1.)
MENTAL WELFARE
59
The mistress of the school she attended up to the age of ten remembered her
well and informed us that she was rather restless and backward in her work,
definitely above the special school standard but two or three years retarded
in some subjects, for example, she was very bad at arithmetic and " altogether
a C child." She further said that, although the child was sensible and like-
able, she seemed a bit naughtier than the other children.
Now it seems clear that this girl was below the normal standard of
intelligence and would have come into the group of dull or backward child-
ren in any circumstances. An organic disease was sufficient to produce mental
deficiency on this foundation, possibly the same disease would have had less
effect on a cleverer or more stable individual. If dullness is due to heritable
factors it seems there must be an element of primary amentia in this case.
Let us look into it further. The parents are healthy, working-class people
and come from average families. The patient, however, is the result of one
of ten pregnancies, two of which were miscarriages. Two children died in
infancy of convulsions and one died of meningitis at the age of fourteen
months. The rest are healthy and of average intelligence. Is it possible now
that there is a familial disposition here to cerebral infection possibly inherited
as a recessive factor? If this were the case we should have to presuppose an
additional cause of the patient's deficiency. Encephalitis lethargica is a
disease which is probably disseminated to a great extent by carriers who are
themselves immune and it is likely that this immunity is, in part, determined
genetically- If this is so, it is impossible to classify post-encephalitics either as
primary or secondary amenta. They must belong to a class which is primary
in the sense of susceptibility which is genetically determined, and secondary
in the sense that the condition would not have come about but for the
accidental presence of the infective agent.
I have described this one case because it shows the difficulty of classifica-
tion fairly freely, but I could have described almost any case in the institution
to illustrate the same difficulty. Very often the more one knows about a case
the more difficult it is to classify it correctly and, usually, to classify patients
as primary aments is equivalent to the assertion that we are completely ignorant
of the cause. It is true that there are certain well-marked examples of heritable
characters which cause mental deficiency. The best established example being
amaurotic family idiocy. It is quite likely that there are a number of commoner
conditions than this which also could be classified as purely primary, but they
have not yet been adequately described. Many, but not by any means all, of
the class of defectives known as the sub-cultural group may turn out to be of
purely hereditary origin: we cannot be sure of these until we have excluded
the possible environmental effects. The class of purely secondary defectives
is not large, but is equally difficult to define. We can never tell for certain
that there is not a hereditary disposition present in infective conditions. In
mongolism and some other definite types we have strong indications that both
hereditary and environmental adverse factors work together to form the final
product.
60 MENTAL WELFARE
It is curious that the belief that all defectives can be divided into the two
groups of primary or secondary or similar classes should be so widely accepted.
If we take a case at random and examine it carefully we are extremely likely
to find that it cannot be put into either category. The only way is to judge,
in each case, the probable effects of heredity and environment, manifested in
various ways, and assess their relative importance.
