Class Handwork in a London School
===================================

10 MENTAL WELFARE
By S. D. ROWE, M.Coll.H.
The average person has very little idea how much intellectual concepts
are dependent upon practical experience, but it is an undoubted fact that the
whole of our intellectual ideas is based on the experience gained by the hand-
ling, placing, and comparing objects from our earliest years. Some people can
dispense with all but the minimum of this training, while others must at all
times conceive ideas on practical terms before being able to understand them.
For the dull and backward, as much as for the lower grades, this " hand-
ling, placing and comparing " is an essential factor in their development, yet
as the Primary School Report points out, " It must not be assumed that hand-
work is in itself a panacea," but should " suit the needs and capacities of each
individual and be chosen to widen the interest, stimulate thinking and bear
closely upon other work." A modern writer says " Work is and must be the
best remedy . . . but only our own work, not any work."
This briefly sums up the basis upon which we planned the manipulative
work for a Special Class which had a roll of something over 30. We had on
the one hand a number of occupations possible in the classroom?cane and
coiled basketry, raffia and textile weaving, chair caning, modelling and
casting, toymaking, bookbinding, and metalwork, and, on the other, a number
of boys who might be led to find an interest in one or more of these. Our
problem lay in fitting the right boy to the right occupation.
The first step in starting this work was " Busy work " for every boy, and
for this we first used card weaving. This was a class exercise in simple
geometry in making circles and hexagons of a given size, dividing, cutting
out the centres, making the holes and threading. In this simple work those
who were quick to grasp the method finished their own cards and were keen
to help the slower boys. Incidentally, a note was made of these for future
reference.
When each boy was ready to start, more data was collected for group work
?those who could use a fret saw, those who belonged to a Scout Troup?in
fact, any clue to individual interest. A toymakers' group was comparatively
easy to form and soon found the right boys. In forming the groups, we had
to study ways and means as our allowance per head was limited. The initial
expense for this group was small and many of the boys preferred to use their
own saw frames. The material?three-ply boxes?appeared to arrive from
nowhere, the boys seemed to find legitimate supplies gratis! A few wanted
to do the usual " fretwork," but soon dropped this for a more useful type of
work. Jigsaw puzzles and calendars were a profitable start and then we began
actual toymaking. Slowly we accumulated a number of working patterns
MENTAL WELFARE n
and from these, by survival of the fittest, we found the most serviceable types.
Probably of all the toys, the horse and cart was the most popular in the making
and in its use. Motor lorries with sawn cotton reels as wheels were almost as
popular, and the boys became interested to see the results of their work in
actual use.
Three points were stressed in the making? (i) the toy must be strong
and properly made, (2) it must be painted and finished like a " shop " toy, and
(3) it should have a real market value.
Linked with this group work naturally followed model making con-
nected with history. A series of models illustrating early carriages and means
of transport were made, including a British war chariot, Saxon and Norman
carts and a horse litter. The same group also produced some realistic Saxon
shields, spears, battle axes and helmets, which, besides making an effective
wall decoration were frequently borrowed by other classes both for history
and art.
Bookbinding followed as another inexpensive group. We made our own
sewing frames and (with assistance) a very effective press with bench screws.
Cardboard, cloth, tape, thread, etc., did not make a great demand upon our
allowance and we rebound a few derelict reading books. Following this, several
books issued in parts (Wells' History of the World, History of Art, etc.) and
paper covered editions of music were attempted with very satisfactory results.
At first, for this work, the difficulty lay in finding the boys who were
really interested in bookbinding and not just curious to try something new.
As, however, we did actual binding (even though of a simple nature) from the
start to the finish, the boys only doing some of the processes and watching the
others, it was possible to find some who would profitably continue. Those
who were keen were not long before they wanted to do more of the processes
and as they had had the opportunity of watching these several times, they felt
they were able to do them successfully. The ambition of most was to bind
a book from start to finish without assistance.
This group in a Special Class will usually be a small one but it is never-
theless for many reasons well worth including. The boys frequently continue
the work after leaving school and sometimes on a profitable basis; one ex-
member of this group volunteered to rebind or otherwise repair some choir
books and music. As he was given 30/- for his work one can only conclude
was regarded as satisfactory.
As a variation of the " Busy Work," we introduced coiled basketry for
the boys who were most expert in the card weaving. This involved no more
expense than the mat making and introduced new problems in making up
Patterns. At first the boys were given their designs on squared paper and in
some cases this led a few to attempt original patterns. We used a cane founda-
tion and for the decoration chose simple units from Wharton James' "Basket-
making."
12 MENTAL WELFARE
A further extension of the " Busy Work " was found in rug-making on
canvas with Turkey and Axminster cuttings. The main object of the " Busy
Work " was to ensure that each boy had some definite piece of work on which
he could proceed with the minimum of supervision so that any particular group
or groups might receive special attention.
We next introduced cane basketry and for this group we found the keenest
applicants were Scouts. A few small articles were taken at first to let the
boys get accustomed to the manipulation of a new material, but the most
popular articles were paper baskets, trays and hot water stands. These were
woven on wooden bases, which were prepared by one or more boys in the
toymaking group. Various shapes were introduced which involved practice
in mechanical drawing and measuring. The preparation of oval trays by
drawing the major and minor axes and using a piece of string always com-
mands great interest, while a kidney shape for bed trays was made partly by
compass work and partly by a template formed by a large tin box. In every
part of the manipulative work we endeavoured to make problems of all kinds
and encouraged the boys to find any ingenious solutions.
As a further interest in this work colour was introduced and we pro-
ceeded to dye our own cane after the boys had been allowed to experiment
with their own suggestion of using red ink! We keot to green, orange and
purple and some of the boys became quite expert in dyeing a batch of weaving
cane or sets of spokes. In weaving, the various strokes as randing, slewing,
pairing, waling, etc., were used both in white and colour to make a pleasing
decorative effect, while the borders were chiefly a three rod plain and a plait.
After the first Scout completed his practical test and passed the " know-
ledge of materials," and was able to wear an unusual badge, the working of
this group was considerably easier as there was the added motive of an im-
mediate honour as an aim, as well as the pleasure in producing an article of
utility.
Closely connected with this group came chair caning. The boys were
considerably interested in the source and preparation of the rattan cane and
the use of the outer shiny surface for chair seating. In starting this I reseated
a chair myself, or rather partly did so, for a few boys soon showed themselves
keen to take up this work and helped to complete it. After examining the
4 way and 6 way, the general opinion was in favour of the latter, both on
the grounds of strength and appearance. This specimen was hardly com-
pleted before several derelicts appeared?one I found had been purchased
for 6d., so that the boy should have his chair!
Before, however, going further with the work, we had six specimen
squares made and drilled. The ist square was threaded for the first step, the
2nd for the first and second steps and so on, while the 6th had the six steps
and two sides bordered. These specimens saved a considerable amount of
time as they served as objects of reference.
Objections, or rather queries, have been raised at various times as to the
MENTAL WELFARE
x3
possible limitations of the educational value when a boy does several of these
chairs. As, however, the person responsible for boring the holes never seems
to have considered their ultimate use, practically every chair presents some new
problem for solution.
Not long since, one boy was anxious to bring up his first essay in chair
caning to compare it with his last?a really well finished job. After he, with
several other critics, had carefully examined both and passed some just though
unflattering comments upon the first attempt, the suggestion was made that
he might renew it. In this connection one was reminded of a remark by
L. P. Jacks?" Every rise in the quality of work that men do is followed swiftly
and inevitably by a rise in the quality of the men who do it."
Textile weaving on small table looms was introduced and found a few
keen weavers and some interested onlookers. In this we kept to a loom of
about 12 to 14 inches wide, which enabled us to weave belts, hat bands, ties,
table runners and scarves. Actually, ties and table runners were the most
popular and several boys discovered a common principle in the making of
a raffia mat, a basket and a tie. This work was introduced solely for further
experience in handling, placing and comparing, but some unexpected results
followed.
One boy was particularly anxious to make a striped tie and after prelim-
inary measurements eventually produced quite a serviceable tie, which he wore
with no little pride. By some fortunate chance he found work with a firm
engaged in making articles in wire. He came back one afternoon to report
that he had been promoted to overalls, and given a rise " because I know how
to weave " ! It was certainly an unexpected result and probably unique, but
it pointed to the value of wide experience even in simple manipulation of
materials.
From our toymaking and repair work came a new group for metal work.
The boys had already assisted in the Manual Centre in the making of a
carpenter's bench and we had a gas point fixed near it for the glue pot needed
both by the toymakers and bookbinders. The equipment at first was private
property, and consisted of very few tools and the boys again found most of
the consumable material, as our demands were on a modest scale. We were
eventually provided with quite a useful equipment which soon discovered the
natural disciples of Tubal Cain !
The first problem and a most pressing one, was that of storage, and this
We solved by making racks and various " gadgets," not merely to keep the
tools in order but also for easy checking. The work actually alternated between
a few set models designed for practice in drawing, cutting, bending, solder-
ing, and riveting, and the boys' own personal problems, as a self closing trap
f?r a pigeon house, making and fitting propeller gear to boats, lamp and
battery holders and similar " gadgets " for miniature electric lighting. Beside
this there grew up a side line of repair work which even attracted boys in other
classes. These usually consisted of small soldering jobs, but this had a very
14 MENTAL WELFARE
lifting effect, especially with a certain type of boy. Quite recently, a request
was received from another department for the construction of a number of
airplanes from " kits " in boxes. The whole set (nearly 30) was handed to
the metalworkers and the first model took a considerable time to complete, but
the amount of concentration and thought put into this was very marked. As
a result, some minor improvements were suggested by the boys. They natur-
ally used the first plane made up and finding a weakness pointed out a small
soldering job on each which proved very effective.
Our principal material was sheet tin and here again one of the boys
discovered a source of supply of large empty tins and suggested that a letter
would help him and " make things better "?which it certainly did.
Beside this more or less definite group work we were usually in demand
for general repair work sometimes brought from home, or through visitors
or connected with one of the departments of the school. The only repair work
refused is that of a type where the boys would have very little, if any, share.
On one occasion four chairs were sent to be re-seated. This turned out
to be a simple upholstery job in which the boys could do the major part. We
made a list of the materials necessary and measured for the amount and these
were purchased locally. All bills, etc., were kept, so that the actual cost of
materials per chair could be calculated. The difference in the old and new
materials were noted and commented upon. We found we had all the nec-
essary tools except a web-stretcher and this one of the boys made from a sketch.
The work proceeded on proper lines arrived at from careful examination of
the damaged chairs and each step was carefully tested both for strength and
neatness. When the final step of placing the rexine covering in position and
fixing the banding was completed, the workers tested their job in a very serious
manner. They felt they had completed some real work and were justly proud
of the result.
One boy had lent a lather disreputable bicycle to another boy and had it
returned with the crank axle broken. Through the squabble over the repair,
the whole matter leaked out, including the fact that it " would cost 3/6 to
mend "?a rather impossible sum for either boy. The cycle was brought to
our workroom, a tin box found for " the bits," and the two concerned pro-
ceeded to dismantle as far as was necessary. A new crank axle was found to
cost 6d. and the replacement of this with the ball races provided a useful prob-
lem. After the repair the frame was thoroughly cleaned, scraped and re-
enamelled, and the owner rode home feeling he really knew something about
bicycles.
Another really big job undertaken was the re-seating of 15 rush bottomed
chairs which were on the school-keeper's inventory. They had passed to the
condition where it was either " repair or condemn." To renew the rush seats
would have proved difficult and rather expensive, yet as the framework was
good it seemed a waste to condemn them. We volunteered to reseat them
with woven sea-grass seats if supplied with the material. This soon appeared
MENTAL WELFARE 15
and a repair group (attacked the job. After stripping one chair we decided to
strip the whole lot before starting the actual repair and so get rid of all the
dusty and broken rushes. These chairs provided a good many little problems
before they were completed and the original small repair group somehow
increased to nearly twice its size!
A few months ago a metal teapot was brought by one of the boys to see
if a new handle could be put on! This actually meant covering the handle
with a non-conductor of heat and so it was used as the centre for a talk
on Science. The teapot had been taken somewhere for repair and the
estimated cost was certainly not small. The amount of material used was
small and after the handle had been covered it was stripped and re-covered
several times for practice. This was the first of this kind of repair, but
by no means the last.
Attache cases needing re-sewing at the edges have introduced the saddler's
stitch; in fact any type of manipulative work has been welcomed, always,
however, on the condition that the bulk of the processes involved can be carried
out by the boys.
The general effect of this type of work on the boys is very marked. Not
only does it give them the practical experience they need, but it goes far to
prevent a fixing of a feeling of inferiority and gives legitimate outlets for
assertiveness. Our scheme is probably like our Time Table?a guide to keep
us within due bounds, but our actual aim is to gain as much experience as
possible to face the world.
One or other of the occupations through which the boys pass will almost
certainly either directly influence their after-school work or provide them with
a spare time hobby. In fact, some cases have shown that the opportunities
given for the practice of various types of hand work have provided the means
for the building of character, the achievement of self-respect and the profitable
use of leisure.
