Nervousness
============

Art. VII.?
Nervousness is one of those quasi-technical terms which are to
be reprobated for their vagueness, but which cannot be got rid
of. We refuse to admit them into strictly scientific nomencla-
ture, but we are not able to ignore their existence. Nervousness
is one of the most obnoxious as well as one of the most commonly
used of these terms. It is most obnoxious, because in its patho-
logical signification?the nervousness of " medical cant" as John-
son would have contemptuously characterized the word?it has
a meaning the very antithesis of the one that legitimately be-
longs to it. Nervousness, the synonym of strength and vigour,
and nervousness, the sj'nonym of feebleness and nervelessness,
clash together most disagreeably; but although we may carp
at this, the word with its latter meaning has an established
place. It is used popularly to convey a notion of the many
functional deviations, psychical, sensory, and motor, which mark
the nervous diathesis, and which do not possess a sufficiently
distinct character to enable us to classify them with precision
under one or other clearly defined form of disease. It serves
also to express similar lesions when they occur consecutive to
many acute and chronic affections. It is, indeed, a verv general
term proper to many symptoms arising from widely' different
sources.
In systematic medicine we do not hesitate to make use of the
parent-word nervous in its simplest signification, to wit, "relating
to the nerves," but the phenomena included commonly under the
term nervousness are scattered abroad in various groups, under
the heads of the different pathological conditions in which they
appear to originate or to be most immediately connected with.
The fitness of this arrangement has been recently questioned
by Dr. L. Boucliut.* He holds that the various symptoms for
which we have no other term of sufficiently wide scope than
* Dc VEtat Nerveux aigu et chronique, ou Nervosisme. Par L. Boucliut, Pro-
fessor agr(5gd a la Faculty de M^decine de Paris. Paris. 1860.
NERVOUSNESS 21#
nervousness, in its popular acceptation, as well as sundry others
significant of functional disturbance of the nervous system, ap-
pertain to a peculiar type of disease which he proposes to name
nervosism, " tire du mot latin nervosus, nerveux, pour faciliter
l'adjonction souvent necessaire de la double epithete aigu ou
chronique."
Dr. Bouchut tells us that he had often been surprised to hear
individuals designated hypochondriacal or hysterical who were
seriously indisposed: men of intelligence who did not exaggerate
their sufferings, and who exhibited no signs of disorder in their
hypochondria; delicate women who were tormented by the ge-
neral state of their nervous system, and yet who were not erotic
and had no uterine disturbance. It seemed to him, therefore,
that a revision of the different groups of the neuroses, which
would obviate these practical inconveniences, would be useful to
medicine. He has endeavoured to effect this. " Guided," he
writes, " by the conscientious and attentive study of the sick, I
have been thus led to frame, at the expense of many affections,
and especially of hysteria and hypochondriasis, a general neu-
rosis characterized like those named by the federation of a certain
number of nervous disorders of movement, sense, intelligence,
and the principal functions." To his own observations Dr. Bou-
chut has added others furnished to him by his confreres, and
many which be has culled from the works of Esquirol, Pinel,
Cliomel, and others; and sundry maladies described by them and
still known as certain forms of dyspepsia, gastralgia, mental
aberration, general paralysis, delirium, &c., on account of the
principal phenomena accompanying the disorders, he finds to be
but secondary symptoms of the more complex general disorder
of the nervous system, which he has selected and set apart.
Again: " the multiform and proteiform nervous contingencies
which accompany many nosohsemias or blood changes, and espe-
cially chlorosis, which Professor Bouillaud has described with rare
precision; certain convalescences, some chronic maladies, and
particularly chronic syphilis, which are nearly always exclusively
investigated as a consequence of ansemia, without its being con-
sidered that this alteration of the blood is as often the result as
the cause of the evilDr. Bouchut considers these facts " in
a different fashion, because they enter into the category of those
that he proposes to study, and he is glad to profit by them."
The curious process of eclecticism here set forth, naturally
provokes our curiosity to know somewhat more of the manner
in which it was carried into effect. But in this respect we are in
a great measure doomed to disappointment, for Dr. Bouchut deals
with the subject of his treatise as a well established fact, assuming
the truth of his position in the very first sentence, and thenceforth
220 NEKVOUSNESS.
marshalling definition, division, history, causes (predisposing and
determining), symptoms, progress, duration, terminations, varieties,
complications, and so forth, with charming precision, leaving the
reader to discover, by his own ingenuity chiefly, the reasons why
such and such results should take their place in systematic
medicine.
The question is, however, one of sufficient interest to warrant
us in endeavouring to ascertain if there be aught of value, and
if so what, in Dr. Bouchut's generalization. In attempting this
we shall adopt the order of exposition which he himself has had
recourse to.
Dr. Bouchut defines nervosism in the following manner :?
" Nervosism is a general neurosis, febrile, or apyretic, characterized
by an association, more or less numerous, of variable functional dis-
orders, continued or intermittent, of sensibility, intelligence, movement,
and of the chief organic instruments (des principaux appareils or-
ganiques).
" These disorders are purely nervous, but they may lead to a belief
in the existence of very different organic maladies in the organs of
which the function is deranged."?(p. 1.)
It is not often that definitions aid us much in comprehending
the nature and character of a disease, consequently, if Dr. Bou-
chut fails at the onset to give us any clear conception of what he
means by nervosism, it is but just to him to imagine that this
may possibly arise from his having trusted himself to the
treacherous brevity of a definition. It is unfortunate, however,
that immediately after the definition we are called upon to admit
that the disease so described is found under two forms, one of
which, chronic nervosism, is said to be familiar to physicians under
other names; the other of which, acute nervosism, has hitherto
been neglected. The acute malady is always accompanied with
fever, is infinitely rarer than the chronic one, and rapidly induces
the gravest disorders: the chronic malady endures months or
years, and when very aggravated may give rise to marasmus and
consumption.
Having premised thus much, Dr. Bouchut proceeds to write
the history of the disorder, and here we first begin to gain some
feeble light as to what he actually aims to teach us.
He tells us that all nervous individuals are not necessarily
hysterical or hypochondriacal, as there is too great a tendency
to believe from certain writings of Galen, Sydenham, Sprengk,
Pomme, &c. The authorities named are a little ancient, certainly,
but let this pass. There is another morbid state, we learn, " in
which the nervous element plays equally the principal part under
a different form, and which can be clearly distinguished by a
greater or less number of disorders of intelligence, sensibility,
NERVOUSNESS. 221
movement, and the chief organic functions, without any appre-
ciable structural alteration of the tissues."?(p. 3.) This is the
neurosis that Dr. Bouchut desires to signalize, and which merits
to be the subject of special study.
Its existence has been recognised by previous writers, under
various names, as for example, nervous cachexy, marasmus,
nervous state, nervous fever, and vapours. It has been con-
founded with hysteria and hypochondriasis, after the manner of
Sydenham, and it constitutes the nevropathy of Maloom Fleming;
the liystericisme of Louyer Villermay; the nevropathie aigue
cerebro-pneumogastrique of Girard; the nevrospasme of Brachet;
the nevropathie proteiforme of Cerise; the nervous diathesis of
many writers, &c. All these terms Dr. Bouchut regards as being
objectionable from their tendency to localize the affection, and
incommodious from their length; hence he substitutes the soli-
tary word nervosism.
Nervosism, however, expresses something more than any of the
terms given, taken singly. These are synonyms of different forms
of the disorder, rather than of the disorder itself. For this is now
seen as an acute affection running a rapid course, and having a
serious ending; now it is most justly designated as a diathesis;
while anon the proposition of Mead with regard to hypochon-
driasis aptly fits it: Non unam sedem habet, sed morbus totius
corporis est. " It is," writes Dr. Bouchut, " the most complex
nervous malady that can be produced, and it is not surprising
that, in its numerous forms, it has escaped the synthesis of pa-
thologists."? (p. 4.)
Dr. Bouchut conceives that he has fettered this Proteus Mor-
bidus, and that to his questioning unobscure answers have been
returned. And truly, if this should prove to be the case, he will
have achieved no mean feat; but we fear that the fetters are of
sand, and that the oracular responses of the changeable deity are
themselves but illusions. Let us glance at the disease as Dr.
Bouchut depicts it:?
" Confounded even now with hysteria or with hypochondriasis by
all those who systematically term thus the nervous ills observed in
woman, man, and even the infant, often with chronic gastritis, and with
gastralgia, with epilepsy, mental alienation, dyspepsia, organic maladies
of the brain, of the spinal marrow, of the heart, &c., &c.; nevertheless
it is very different from these maladies. It approaches to and removes
afar off from at one and the same time the neuroses and certain organic
diseases. We encounter there paralysis, contractions, tonic and clonic
convulsions, tremblings, spasms, fainting-fits, syncope, neuralgias,
visceralgias, disorders of the intelligence and the organs of sense, such
as sensorial illusions or hallucinations, simple or hectic fever; and it
is but the mode of apparition, development, and succession of these
morbid phenomena which reveals to us their true nature. In this
NO. XVIII.?NEW SERIES. Q
222 NERVOUSNESS.
respect they merit the attention of physicians, who will doubtless
recognise a very common malady, which is often a source of the greatest
embarrassment to them in practice."?(p. 5.)
We have every respect for Dr. Bouchut, but does not this last
sentence give to nervosism the character of being a word, and
nothing more, provoking us to exclaim, with M. Jourdain, " Par
ma foi, il y a plus de quarante ans que je dis de la prose, sans
que j'en susse rien; et je vous suis le plus oblig^ du monde de
in'avoir appris cela?"
Among ancient writers no one appears, to Dr. Bouchut, to have
described clearly and precisely nervosism, except Hippocrates.
He touched upon the subject incidentally, but unfortunately this
earliest recognition of the affection was " etouffees" by the chi-
merical hypotheses of Galen upon hypochondriasis. Dr. Bou-
chut recognises nervosism in the description which Hippocrates
gives of the nervous disorders accompanying inanition, seminal
emissions, and gastralgia. Notwithstanding, however, Dr. Bou-
chut's dictum, that nervosism was " seen imperfectly and sum-
marily described by Hippocrates," we cannot say, with Geronte,
in Le Mfdecin malgre lui, " Puisque Hippocrate le dit, il le
fautfaire;" neither can we admit that since Hippocrates' time
the nervous ailments he described under the circumstances named,
have been "confounded with different morbid, and, according to
some symptoms, nearly similar states."
" His numerous examples," writes Dr. Bouchut, " have always been
classed in a vicious fashion, and designated by inappropriate names in
relation with certain reigning ideas. It would be a curious study to
make, that of the influence of words upon the things that they repre-
sent, and of the evil effects of a bad denomination upon the progress of
science. There is not a physician who has not observed examples of a
general nervous malady, entirely distinct from hypochondriasis and from
hysteria; but for want of a word, every one confounds the first of
these morbid states with the two following, or still more wrongly,
with gastritis, gastralgia, chlorosis, ansemia, diseases of the heart,
or spinal marrow, according to the ideas in vogue at the moment."?
(p. 10.)
We shall presently see how Dr. Bouchut's suggestive remarks
on vicious designations and their influence, may usefully be
brought to bear in testing the merits of his present work.
Robert Whytt was, according to Dr. Bouchut, the first person
who attempted to separate nervousness from hysteria and hypo-
chondriasis. Whytt wrote:?
" Persons liable to perturbations of the nerves, some of which de-
serve the name of nervous much better than others, may be distin-
guished into three classes."
NERVOUSNESS. 223
And a little beyond :?
. " The complaints of the first of the above classes may be called
Mmply nervous ; those of the second, in compliance with custom, may
be said to be hysteric ; and those of the third hypochondriac?(p. 14.)
Now Dr. Boucliut asserts that " the efforts of Robert Whytt
have unhappily remained unfruitful, in this sense at least that
they have not served as a rule to nosograpliy." The reservation
ls just, for we presume that Dr. Boucliut would hardly state,
that the division adopted by Whytt is not the one practically in
Use among physicians, as well in France as in England. And
whereas hysteria and hypochondriasis are the only two of the
three classes into which Whytt divides the nervous perturbations
to which he refers, that present any constant positive characte-
ristics, tliey alone have been promoted to a position in our noso-
graphies. Why the class specially called nervous should have
heen excluded, and whether it should now receive a fitting place,
will be better seen when we have proceeded somewhat further
With our examination of Dr. Bouchut's treatise.
The predisposing and occasional causes of nervousness are
next treated by Dr. Bouchut at considerable length. Age, sex,
menstruation, pregnancy, suckling, uterine maladies, &c., the
nervous temperament, heritage, original or acquired feebleness,
education, the passions, watcbings, excess of work, venereal ex-
cesses, convalescence from acute and chronic maladies, anaemia,
hydrohaemia, and chlorosis, all receive due notice under these
heads. It is not needful that we should track Dr. Bouchut's re-
marks over this ground, but we may cull a few sentences here
and there which will serve to throw additional light upon bis
opinions. He tells us that " there are few acute and especially
chronic maladies, in which the nervous state does not primarily
or secondarily play an important part." We also learn that?
"the nervous temperament which predisposes the organism to
the different known disorders of the organs of innervation, favours
more than any other cause the development of the morbid state
of which he speaks. It seems in truth that the multiplicity of
morbid phenomena of the nervous state are more in relation with
the geueral constitution of the subject than the appearance of
convulsions or of essential paralyses, for example."?(p. 25.)
Further we are told that?
" The majority of chronic diseases, and especially those of the in-
testine and of the stomach, sometimes also of the uterus, can give
birth to acute or chronic nervosism. Indeed, although this state
may be primitive, it is much oftener secondary., and it depends very
frequently upon a material somatic lesion, of which the sympathetic or
reflex action is manifested by vague disorders, mobile and multiple, in
the nervous system."?(p. 31.)
Q 2
224 NERVOUSNESS.
Again, Dr. Boucliut sums up his remarks upon the occasional
and predisposing causes of nervosism, by saying:?
" Finally : although the numerous causes of acute or chronic rheu-
matism are very varied in their nature and appearance, very different
the one from the other, since we find natural or acquired feebleness by
thS side of the predisposing influence of age, of heritage, of chagrins,
of passions of every kind, of convalescence, of haemorrhage, or a
chronic malady, they are all held together more or less by a common
bond, which is the diminution of the quantity or of the quality of the
total mass of the blood, and the decrease of one or other of its ele-
ments, particularly of its globules. There is nearly always at the
bottom of nervosism primitively or secondarily, a modification more or
less considerable of the blood, and of the organic crasis."?(p. 32.)
These quotations, although they deal with very familiar matters,
do not, however, yet enable us to form any very definite ideas of
what nervosism consists in. We have now, however, arrived at
the point where Dr. Bouchut introduces the symptoms of the dis-
order, and may consequently hope to see our way more clearly to
the notion lie wishes to convey.
And first of the symptoms of acute nervosism.
This, it appears, is a very rare disease. It is ushered in by
malaise, accompanied by feebleness, loss of appetite, and disgust
of food, sometimes also by ptyalism, nausea and aqueous vomit-
ings, obstinate constipation, and general irritability with fever.
The patient's strength is exhausted, and he is compelled to keep
his bed. Some cannot raise the head from the pillow without
fear of faintness or syncope. Odours, noises, and light are sup-
ported with difficulty. The senses, becoming very excitable and
morbidly sensitive, occasion suffei'ing when exercised, or give rise
to numerous sensorial illusions, especially at an advanced period
of the disease. Then wasting and alteration of the lineaments
become conspicuous, the tongue is blanched, the vomitings con-
tinue, and the constipation persists, as well as the febrile slate
characterized by acceleration of the pulse and heat of the skin.
Next, very grave neuralgic and cerebral accidents supervene;
general or partial pains in the head or in the limbs, delirium at
first transitory, then continued, enfeeblement of the organs of
the senses, singular hallucinations, drowsiness, coma, rigidity of
the muscles, convulsions, and in the end death after two or three
months of unheard-of sufferings. In fatal cases the most scrupu-
lous examination fails to discover any appreciable structural
alteration in the principal organs.
In this general description of acute nervosism we have followed
Dr. Bouchut's account almost textually. But this will be further
elucidated by copying one of the cases which he quotes in illus-
tration of the affection. We take the first recorded :?
NERVOUSNESS. 22o
" A lady, about forty years of age, mother of a family, wife of a
member of the Academy of Sciences, was, at the climacteric period,
enfeebled by profuse uterine hemorrhages.
"In the winter of 1846, as the sequel of slight bronchitis which
Necessitated repose and regimen, this lady, who was extremely impres-
sionable, did not recover her appetite, and continued to be feverish.
An extreme irritability, bizarre ideas, very acute sensitiveness of the
eyes to the light of day, hyperesthesia of the ears and of the skin
Upon the limbs, neuralgic pains of the head, sleeplessness, nocturnal
alarms, and considerable muscular debility, caused by amyosthenia,
Were observed.
"The patient wasted visibly, and she could not take anything,
being disgusted even with drinks. She was fatigued by an abundant
and mucous ptyalism. There was neither vomiting nor alvine evacua-
tion. The skin was warm, and the pulse, small and frequent, beat 120
times in the minute.
" This state of things persisted one month. It was now December,
and although bouillon was not digested, I ordered a cutlet, after an
immersion in water at fifteen degrees, and a forced promenade of ten
minutes duration in the street at a time of terrible snow. I prescribed
also a daily slight dose of sub-carbonate of iron.
" This medication succeeded very well, and every day was signalled
by a new amelioration in the increase of strength and of embonpoint,
and in the diminution of nervous excitability.
" Nevertheless, four months of hydro-therapeutic treatment, of the
use of ferruginous preparations, and lastly a sojourn in the campagne
des Moulineux, near Paris, were required in order completely to restore
the patient."?(pp. 54, 55.)
Dr. Boucliut next describes seriatim, and at length, tlie different
symptoms observed during the progress of the so-called acute
ttervosism ; but these do not aid us much to a clearer knowledge
?f the affection. He then proceeds to discuss the chronic form
of the disease.
This, we are told, is infinitely more common than the acute
?ne, and " is found at every step in civil practice, there being few
Women of the world who do not present some symptoms of it,
without being on this account completely ill."?(p. 92.) Dr.
Bouchut proceeds:?
"It presents infinite degrees like other diseases, and just in the same
manner that we may observe many symptoms of scrofuHsm, lympha-
tic, and podagn'sm, &c., &c., without having either scrofula or gout
as a well-defined malady, we observe among a great number of persons
habitual nervous troubles which announce the diathesis, without still
specifying the chronic nervous state which may be developed, somewhat
later, with great intensity. Nothing is so common as the first degree
?f the malady, a true exaggeration of the nervous temperament; but
when this previous disposition is aggravated under the influence of
the moral or physical causes of which I have spoken, the nervous phe-
226 NERVOUSNESS.
nomena are multiplied, and become more violent as well as generalized
(se generalisant), the functional disorders, at first easily governed on
account of their slight importance, become intolerable, and the whole
of the perturbed organization becomes the theatre of numerous, varied,
and often very grave accidents.
" The manifestations of the diathesis are multiplied to infinity, and
the functions of the general or special sensibility, of intelligence, move-
ment, of respiration, circulation, digestion, of the secretions singly or
simultaneously disordered, give rise to a great number of symptoms
highly characteristic of the disease."?(p. 92.)
The very various psychical and physical symptoms thus re-
ferred to are too familiarly known under the designation nervous,
in its widest sense, to require recapitulation. It is needful, how-
ever, to note that they may occur primarily, to wit, " distinct from
all natural visceral complication, or secondarily, that is to say, pro-
voked by an acute or chronic, a tubercular, epithelial, or can-
cerous nosorganie, the symptoms being very nearly similar,
except the presence of some phenomena intimately bound to the
anterior morbid state."?(p. 93.)
In a malady manifested by so many and such varied symp-
toms, it may be surmised that the simple division into an acute and
chronic, and again into a primitive or secondary affection, will
hardly suffice to give a complete idea of its character, and the
different forms it may assume, determined by the affections with
which it is linked, or by the predominance of certain symptoms.
Thus in the course of pregnancy and of convalescence, under
the influence of chlorosis and gastro-intestinal maladies, nervosism
exhibits interesting peculiarities which cannot be neglected.
The same is also true when certain nervous disorders predomi-
nate ; and Dr. Bouchut suggests, interrogatively, the propriety
of adopting the following subdivisions of the affection :?
1. Cerebral nervosism, characterized by vertigo, giddiness,
severe pain in the head, partial or general paralysis, sensorial
illusions and hallucinations. This form readily simulates apo-
plexy and diseases of the brain.
2. Spinal nervosism, accompanied by disorder of the sensibi-
lity and motility of the pelvic members, simulating disease of the
spine.
3. Cardiac nervosism, determined by the constant presence of
palpitations or faintings, and very frequently regarded as an
organic affection of the heart.
4. Laryngeal nervosism, in which considerable cough or aphonia
is observed, and which is sometimes considered as the commence-
ment of phthisis.
5. Gastric nervosism, chiefly indicated by dyspepsia, heart-
NERVOUSNESS. 227
hum, moderate or uncontrollable vomiting, &c., long considered
ns a form of gastritis, and treated as such.
6. Uterine nervosism, signalized by lumbar and inguinal pains,
by sensation of weight in the perinseum, and by leucorrhoea, in-
dependent of any structural lesion, but which is apt to be re-
garded as chronic metritis.
~? Cutaneous nervosism, in which the predominant phenomenon
observed is liyperaesthesia of the skin.
8. Spasmodic nervosism, giving rise to spasms in a great num-
ber of tissues and organs.
9- Paralytic nervosism, distinguished by general or partial abo-
lition of movement and of sensibility in the muscles of the mem-
bers, or in the sensory organs.
10. Painful nervosism ? nervosisme douloureux?including
temporal, maxillary, occipital, auricular, intercostal neuralgia,
&c., a variety corresponding with the neuralgic affections of most
Medical writers.
Dr. Boucliut adds that the propriety of accepting these subdi-
visions is doubtful in the actual state of science, and that to re-
solve the question further studies will be necessary. But the
suggestions are of interest from the light which they throw upon
the signification which Dr. Boucliut would have us attach to the
Word nervosism.
We pass over the chapters which treat of the complications
and pathological anatomy of the affection, as these aid us but
little in acquiring a knowledge of it, and we come next to its
diagnosis.
Many diseases, Dr. Bouchut tells us, may be confounded with
Nervosism in its acute or chronic state, either by their primary
symptoms or those which are occasioned secondarily by a com-
plication. Among the diseases that may thus be misinterpreted
ai*e, hysteria, hypochondriasis, monomania, dementia, dyspepsia,
9&stralgia, constitutional syphilis, &c. We shall confine our-
selves solely to the discrimination of the three affections, hysteria,
hypochondriasis, and insanity, from nervosism.
Hysteria and chronic nervosism are two diseases, Dr. Bouchut
states, equally common among females, and which have several
symptoms in common. Nevertheless, hysteria is an essentially
convulsive neurosis, in which tears, spasms, convulsions, and loss
?f knowledge of a peculiar character, play the principal part;
whilst in nervosism faintings are exceedingly rare, as well as con-
vulsive attacks resembling eclampsia, and which are not always
accompanied by unconsciousness. Hysteria gives rise to a sen-
sation as of a ball rising in the throat, a phenomenon unknown
ia nervosism. Hysteria occurs in apyretic paroxysms at greater
228 NERVOUSNESS.
or less intervals; nervosism as a persistent disorder, sometimes
with fever irregularly intermittent, sometimes without fever when
the disease is not very intense. Hysteria never suspends nu-
trition, whilst nervosism may arrest it and occasion marasmus.
Both affections, however, manifest in common certain disturb-
ances of intelligence, motion, general or special sensibility and
of the secretory organs. Delirium, agitating dreams, hallucina-
tions, sensorial illusions, paralysis of the muscles, or of the
organs of sense, liypersesthesia, or angesthesia of the skin, intense
neuralgia, superficial or deep-seated, clear and abundant urine,
&c., are observed in both diseases, according to their form and
the intensity of the morbid condition.
Hypochondriasis is particularly characterized by the constant
pre-occupation of the patient with real or imaginary sufferings,
and never exists in an acute state. The melancholy and sadness,
the fear of death from indeterminate sufferings, whether profound
or not, which are observed in this disease are never witnessed
in the same degree in chronic nervosism, and the neuralgic pains
which occur in the latter affection are of a severer character than
those which happen in the former. Delirium, sensorial illusions,
very rarely supervene in hypochondriasis, and never convulsions,
muscular rigidity, or paralysis; never swoonings, nor fever, nor
marasmus ; but both affections have alike dyspepsia, constipation,
shortness of breath, palpitations of the heart and arteries, and
general loss of strength. " The development by an acute state
followed by a chronic condition, the presence of fever and the
intensity of the pains and of the principal nervous phenomena, are
the most important differential characters of the two neuroses."
We have adhered almost literally to Dr. Bouchut's account of
the diagnosis of hysteria and hypochondriasis; we must, how-
ever, give a still more faithful rendering of his remarks on the
diagnosis of insanity. He writes :?
" Many forms of insanity, monomania, for example, may be easily
confounded with acute or chronic nervosism, because they reproduce
some of its most important symptoms. Without speaking of acute
febrile delirium which every one now separates from mental aliena-
tion, there is in certain diseases a partial monomaniacal delirium,
characterized among some patients by a tendency to suicide, among
others by hallucinations or sensorial illusions of the touch, sight,
taste, hearing, or smell, followed by unreasonable acts which are
sometimes hardly to be distinguished from insanity. It is prin-
cipally by their rapid progress and short duration that the nature
of the accidents of nervosism can be recognised. In reality, the
monomaniacal madman has all the appearances of health, and is but
rarely feverish; his digestion is generally good, and he does not mani-
fest either disorder of sensibility or of movement. All the indis-
position is confined to the disorder of the faculties and under-
NERVOUSNESS. 229
standing; it-has a chronic progress, and the remainder of the organiza-
tion takes no part in it. In acute or chronic nervosism, on the con-
trary > the intellectual disturbance is entirely secondary, transitory and
c?nsecutive to grave functional disorders of all the organs ; it is indeed
an epiphenomenon in the middle of a morbid state already well de-
nned."?(pp. 269-70.)
Dr. Bouchut treats duly of the prognosis, nature, and treat-
ment of nervosism in the three terminal chapters of his work, but
^e gain little additional light from them upon the nature of the
Supposed affection. One remark, however, touching the connec-
tion of nervosism with blood-changes, may be quoted with ad-
vantage from the penultimate chapter:?
"Nervosism is not necessarily accompanied by alteration of the
Wood, and when this exists, it is not alwaj's similar, since chlorotic,
gouty, syphilitic, or herpectic nosohsemia, &c., may be the point of de-
parture. Moreover, anfemia, which is so often regarded as the absolute
cause of the nervous state, or nervosism, has not this importance, be-
pause it is not always present at the beginning of the symptoms, and
most cases it is a secondary element, or an effect of the principal
malady."?(p. 207.)
We think now that we have written sufficient to put our
readers in a position to form a tolerably definite judgment of the
signification which should be attached to the term Nervosism,
and of the value of the generalization which that word ex-
presses. It is evident that Dr. Bouchut includes under the term
all the so-called nervous symptoms which are not included under
the expressions hysteria and hypochondriasis in their most re-
stricted sense. But it is a little difficult to conceive why these
affections should have been excluded from the generalization.
Dr. Bouchut, we presume, uses the term nervous much in the
same way as Whytt himself, who after remarking that all diseases
may in some sense be termed nervous, writes :?" However those
disorders may peculiarly deserve the name of nervous, which on
account of an unusual delicacy, or unnatural state of the nerves,
are produced by causes which, in people of sound constitution,
would either have no such effects, or at least in a much less
degree. '* Dr. Cullen has a comment upon this observation of
Whytt's which is worthy of quotation. He writes :?
" Dr. Whytt, who has treated this subject (the General Pathology
of the Nervous System) ex professo, observes the difficulty there is in
limiting the subject, as all diseases may, in a certain sense, be called
affections of the nerves. Every preternatural state, either of sense or
motion, depends upon the nervous system, so that the nerves are more
or less concerned in every disease; and this title might consequently
* Observations on the Nature, Causes, and Cure of those Disorders which are comr
monly called Nervous, Hypochondriac, or Hysteric. By Robert Whytt, M.D.
Collected Works. Edin. 1768, p. 529,
230 NERVOUSNESS.
comprehend the whole of diseases. But some diseases are mors
strictly termed nervous, and some limits have been tacitly assigned or
conceived in the minds of physicians. Those diseases, the symptoms
of which appear only or chiefly in the nervous system itself, which
appear purely in the functions of sense and motion, and in which the
sanguiferous system is not necessarily or is only occasionally affected,
such may be called more strictly nervous diseases; so that the whole
of the febrile diseases, however much they may be said to consist in
affections of the nervous system, are, by this limitation, excluded."
Now this is really the sense in which the term Nervous is still
used by physicians, consequently hysteria and hypochondriasis
are rightly included under the general head of nervous diseases.
Hence admitting nervosism as a legitimate generalization, it
would be more consistent with the spirit of the generalization to
add the two affections to nervosism, regarding them as forms of
that disease, and designating them hysterical and hypochon-
driacal nervosism.
"Of two things one," writes Dr. Bouchut, "either hysteria and
hypochondriasis are different neuroses, or they are similar. If they be
similar, which I do not believe, nervosism need not be studied apart;
but if on the contrary, the two diseases are distinct, it is needful to
admit that there is a particular form of neurosis, a species of nervous
diathesis or nervosism which should not be confounded with them."?
(p. 290.)
Suppose, however, that hysteria and hypochondriasis are two
different forms of manifestation of one and the same diathesis?
using that word in the sense ordinarily received ? Dr. Bouchut's
dilemma entirely overlooks this supposition, which, singular to
say, is the one most generally indulged in, and the one adopted
by Whytt himself, to whom Dr. Bouchut refers with such great
respect. Whytt tells us that, in treating of nervous disorders,
he shall confine himself?
" Chiefly to those complaints which proceed, in a great measure,
from a weak or unnatural constitution of the nerves ; and of this kind,
I presume, are most of those symptoms which physicians have com-
monly distinguished by the names of flatulent, spasmodic, hypochon-
driac, or hysteric.
" As the sagacious Sydenham has justly observed, that the shapes of
protseus, or the colours of the chameleon, are not more numerous and
inconstant than the variations of the hypochondriac and hysteric
disease; so those morbid symptoms which have been commonly called
nervous, are so many, so various, and so irregular, that it would be
extremely hard either rightly to describe or fully to enumerate them.
They imitate the symptoms of almost all other diseases; and, indeed,
there are few chronic distempers with which they are not more or less
blended or intermixed. Hence it is that the late Dr. Mead says of
NERVOUSNESS. 231
the hypochondriac affection, JVon an am sedem liabet, morbus totius cor-
poris est."*
Then Dr. Whytt proceeds to enumerate the chief of the many
varied symptoms which characterize nervous disorders, and he
writes :?
" Patients after having been long afflicted with many of these
symptoms (for all of them never happen to any one person), sometimes
fall into melancholy, madness, the black jaundice, a dropsy, tympany,
phthisis pulinonalis, palsy, apoplexy, or some other fatal distemper.
Some patients who are liable to the above complaints, some of which
deserve the name of nervous much better than others, may be distin-
guished into three classes.
" 1. Such as, though usually in good health, are yet, on account of
an uncommon delicacy of their nervous system, apt to be often affected
with violent tremors, palpitations, faintings, and convulsive fits, from
fear, grief, surprise, or other passions ; and from whatever greatly
irritates or disagreeably affects any of the more sensible parts of the
body.
"2. Such as, besides being liable to the above disorders from the same
causes [suffer from hysterical symptoms properly so called].
" 3. Such as, from a less delicate feeling or mobility of their nervous
system in general, are scarce ever affected with violent palpitations,
faintings, or convulsive motions, from fear, grief, surprise, or other
passions; but, on account of a disordered state of the nerves of the
stomach and bowels, are seldom free from complaints of indigestion,
belching, flatulence, want of appetite, or too great craving, costiveness,
or looseness, flushings, giddiness, oppression, or faintness about the
praecordia, low spirits, disagreeable thoughts, watching, or disturbed
sleep, &c.
" The complaints of the first class may be called simply nervous;
those of the second, in compliance with custom, may be said to be
hysteric ; and those of the third, hypochondriac."+
And, again, he writes of hysteria and hypochondriasis :?
" Whether these two distempers be considered as the same or dis-
tinct, since the symptoms of both are so much akin, we shall consider
them under the general character of nervous."\
Here then we have Whytt regarding hysteria and hypochon-
driasis as different forms of manifestation of a general nervous
state, while to the indications of that state, not of an hysteric
or hypochondriac character, he proposes, for convenience sake,
to speak of as nervous par excellence. This mode of viewing
these affections has been retained to the present time, and the
intimate mode in which the three different forms are linked
the one to the other, explains how it has happened that the
domains of hysteria and hypochondriasis have been so undefined,
* Op. cit., p. 530. + Op. cit., pp. 532-33.
+ Op. cit., p. 534.
232 NERVOUSNESS.
and also how individuals who have given their special attention to
the one or other form of disease, have often contrived to include in
its manifestations many symptoms not peculiar to it. There can
be no doubt, however, of the propriety of the substantive terms
hysteria and hypochondriasis. Typical forms of these affections
are by no means of uncommon occurrence. But do the symptoms
to which Whvtt restricted the term nervous ever occur in so
definite a form, that we may with fitness give to the whole of them
a substantive name as Dr. Bouchut proposes ?
The word nervosism which he suggests for such a purpose, nearly
coincides in meaning with that of our popular substantive ner-
vousness, and would be most accurately rendered by that word.
But the necessary vagueness of use of the latter word would be
exceeded by that of the former one, because it certainly includes
a greater variety of symptoms. If we except, for the moment,
Dr. Bouchut's subdivision acute nervosism, we cannot lay hold
of a single group of symptoms which he details under the head
chronic nervosism which is not better described by the simple
and accustomed epithet nervous. This adjective expresses a ge-
neral fact, and the word, on its face, neither implies nor conveys
an idea of more accurate knowledge of the phenomena that it
refers to than we possess. But if we put in place of it a substan-
tive, as for example, nervosism, we at once imply a well-defined
affection, which is not warranted by the symptoms. We should,
indeed, convey the appearance of knowledge, when the reality is
far from us.
It may be said, however, that in the acute nervosism of Dr.
Bouchut, we find a clearly marked acute affection. We have
quoted the first instance cited by Dr. Bouchut, and leave it to
our readers to judge of its value as supporting a proposition for
the recognition of a new and " very rare" form of disease.
Dr. Bouchut's observations on the* diagnosis of nervosism
partake too clearly of the method of selection which has governed
liis generalization to be of any value. Does terming the tran-
sitory insanity, which is occasionally observed in persons of a
highly nervous diathesis, become any the less insanity by being
termed nervosism ? Does observation teach us that hysteria is
trenchantly defined by the hysterical paroxysm; or that the absence,
under given circumstances, of fever, wasting, and nervous acci-
dents commonly so called, is essential to constitute a case of
hypochondriasis? Dr. Bouchut certainly deserves no small credit
for the ingenuity with which he has, as he phrases it, " at the
expense of many nervous affections," constituted a new form of
disease out of old material; but the work is not the less a work
of ingenuity rather than of observation. We demur to any such
method of improving our nosological arrangements unless it can
MOREL ON MENTAL DISORDERS. 233
be clearly shown that it might aid as a stepping-stone to further
research. Dr. Bouchut's work cannot be looked upon in such
a light. To accept his generalization would be to adopt an ex-
pression calculated to cast a false light upon a class of pheno-
mena, tlian which we know nothing that presents so interesting
a field for, and which so well repays accurate observation and
research.
It may be thought that we are giving more attention to Dr.
Bouchut's work than is necessary, but truly to some persons
newly-invented technical words have an irresistible charm, as if
they possessed an occult property. Dr. Bouchut has well sug-
gested, as we have already seen, the harmful influence which words
exert at times upon science, and we wish, as far as in us lies, to
guard his new word nervosism, from having like injurious results.
We do not think that our neighbours require the word, and for
those among ourselves who are not content to clothe their ideas
concerning the phenomena of which we have been writing, in
language which would neither fall short of nor exceed the know-
ledge they possess of them, the time-honoured word nervousness
ought to suffice.
