Pinel: A Biographical Study
============================

XJ
aet. v.-
?
By his Nephew, Dr. CASIMIR PINEL.
(Trantlatedfrom the French.)
Pinel* from his earliest years evinced signs of precocious intel-
ligence, and astonished his masters by his aptitude, carrying
away all the prizes for which he competed. He received his pre-
liminary education at the college of Lavaur, and the town soon
became acquainted with the brilliant capacities of the young
Philippe. Castellane, the Bishop of the diocese, used all his efforts
to induce him to adopt the ecclesiastical profession. He did so,
and putting on the cassock, studied theology with a zeal inspired
by a loving and fervent piety. He devoured, so to speak, the
fathers of the Church, and drew from their works, from the sacred
writings, and above all from the Gospel, those true principles of
Christianity from which, alas ! so many deviate. He acquired in
a few years a very extensive acquaintance with these subjects, and
he was able in his turn to teach his fellow-students, who thus-
became at the same time his pupils.
Pinel frequently joined his family circlet from which he was
only separated by a distance of fifteen kilometres ; he walked
this distance with great rapidity ; his constitution was strong,
robust, and vigorous; he was short in stature, but his figure was
well proportioned; his head was well developed, his forehead
large, high, uncovered, and prominent; he had black hair, pierc-
ing eyes, an aquiline nose, a rounded chin, and a small mouth ;
his smile was kind and affable; his physiognomy, which was-
stamped with benevolence and goodness, exhibited in early life
character, reflection, and maturity ; his whole personal appear-
ance, his manners, his language, his deportment, his reserved and
austere behaviour, inspired submission and respect; he was never
treated with familiarity by any of his four brothers or his sister.
Though full of kindness, affection, and solicitude, he awed them
* Born April 20th, 1745.
+ At the town of Saint-Paul-Capdejoux, arrondissenient of Lavaur.
PINEL: A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY. 185
by liis gravity and a tone somewhat magisterial, but at the same
time always indulgent. During the day, he assembled them for
lessons, and before retiring to rest he presided at family prayer,
which he conducted with grave attention. He was scarcely twelve
years old when he lost his mother,* whose death caused him the
deepest grief.
He followed the chase occasionally with his father,f who was a
skilful sportsman, but his sensitive soul was pained at the sight
of the game which he wounded or killed, and which he regarded
afterwards with regret: accordingly the chase soon became but a
means of abandoning himself the more easily to his favourite
pursuit, namely, study. Taking his gun for appearance sake, he
would at one time plunge into the tangled and solitary woods of
the neighbourhood, at others he would ramble about the fertile
O 7 t
and beautiful meadows of the Agout, or gaining the top of one or
the adjacent hills which form a natural amphitheatre, planted
with all kinds of fruit trees, vines, mulberry trees, and maize, he
would contemplate with admiration the ravishing prospect of the
valley stretching at his feet, and to the east at a distance of forty
kilometres the chain of mountains which unites the Pyrenees to
the Alps. Bat if Pinel took a gun, he also took books, and
when he arrived at a retired spot he would lay down his weapon,
and abandoning himself to study would forget the chase for hours
together. His favourite authors were in the first instance Virgil
and Horace, and later Cicero, Pliny, and Tacitus,?works which
he continued to read with pleasure nearly eighty years after.
About the age of twenty-two, and not twenty-seven, as stated
by Cuvier, he quitted Lavaur, and renounced the idea of entering
the Church. He then repaired to Toulouse, where he studied
mathematics with intense ardour. In this science, which he was
soon able to teach, he made great progress. My father has often
related to me, how that lodging with him in a very modest apart-
ment, he was witness of his zeal for study. Very frequently on
awaking in the morning he found my uncle where he left him the
evening before on retiring to rest, that is to say, meditating with
his elbows on the table and his hands supporting his head.
At this time he delivered lectures in philosophy and sustained
a thesis on this branch of knowledge, of which the title sufficiently
reveals the serious predilections of his mind. It was " On the
Exactitude which the Study of Mathematics gives to the Judg-
ment in its Application to the Sciences." (De la liectitude que
I'Etude de Mathematiques imprime an jugement dans son Appli-
cation aux Sciences.) It is reported that about the same period
he was a competitor at the floral games, and was crowned.
In a short time he entered a rich and honourable family, and
* A very pious woman. "t* A physician and surgeon.
186 EINEL; A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY.
undertook the education of two of the sons, of whom one after-
wards followed the career of the magistracy and the other that of
political finance. At the same time he walked the hospitals and
attended the course of the School of Medicine at Toulouse. He
there passed a brilliant examination, and took the degree of
doctor in the month of December, 1773. ?
In the beginning of 1774, after residing some years in this
town, thirsting for more extensive knowledge, he set out for the
celebrated University of Montpellier, which had just previously
lost an illustrious member in Boissier de Sauvages, and where
the merit of Barthez was commencing to make itself felt.
There, as at Toulouse, he entered a highly respected family, as
tutor to the son of the house, who afterwards became an officer of
great genius and merit. Cuvier is wrong in stating that he opened
an establishment at Montpellier as a means of livelihood. The
time which his tutorship left at his disposal was employed in
perfecting his knowledge of the ancient languages, in attending
courses of medicine, natural history, and chemistry, and in com-
posing for aspirants for the doctorate theses winch were models
of correct and elegant latiuity. lie selected from choice questions
relating to hygiene, a branch of medicine for which he had great
partiality.
In this town Pinel made the acquaintance of a young man of
fervid imagination, but restless and impatient temperament, who
had attempted various branches of literature, but whose labours
had till then been fruitless. Pinel was the means of leading him
back to more positive ideas by giving him lessons in mathematics,
and inducing him to read and study together with himself the
works of Hippocrates, Plutarch, and Montaigne, and to attend the
courses of medicine and the cognate sciences. From this period,
they formed an attachment to one another which was never
weakened by either time or distance. This lellow-student and
pupil, subsequently attaining under the Consulate and first
Empire the highest dignities and the most eminent scientific
honours, was the illustrious Cbaptal, Comte de Chanteloup, who
ever maintained a grateful recollection of the lessons and counsel
of his friend.
At the same epoch, Pinel, who, as I have already stated, took
the degree of doctor at Toulouse, attained the same honourable
rank at Montpellier. He attached himself to a young English
student, and they taught one another the English aud French
languages. It is related that leaving Montpellier for Paris about
the commencement of 1778, and not 1772, as has been frequently
stated in other biographical notices, they were stopped on the
road for. want of passports, the simplicity with which they travelled
PINEL: A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY. 187
being such as to inspire little confidence in the local authorities
with whom they came in contact.
They were allowed, however, after some explanations to con-
tinue their route. Forty-three years afterwards Pinel's companion,,
who in the interval had risen to eminence as a physician in his
own country, visited France and presented his family to the author
?f the Nosographie.
Pinel carried letters of introduction to Cousin, which he pre-
sented on arrival. This great geometer, struck with Pinel's
extensive mathematical attainments, was eager to procure him
pupils, whose well-remunerated lessons assured him an honourable
independence, and put it in his power to give himself to the study
of literature, science, and, above all, of medicine.
It happened by chance that in the same house writh Pinel there
resided a very diligent young student towards whom he experienced
an active sympathy, which the latter frankly returned; a strict
find lasting friendship was the result, and this friend of my uncle
Was the excellent Desfontaines, who afterwards became Professor
of Botany at the Jardin des Plantes and Member of the Institute.
In a short time Pinel's position became still more independent,
and he was able to dispense with the income derived from his
mathematical pupils; from this time he attended the hospitals
niore assiduously, resorted frequently to the libraries and
academies, translated for the press, wrote for several scientific
periodicals, particularly the Journal cle Paris, in which he pub-
lished numerous articles on medicine, physics, and philosophy,
obtaining at the same time a small but select medical practice.
Towards the close of 1782, he obtained the editorship of the
Gazette de Sante, in which he published a part of his treatise
on hygiene. In 1784 he translated from the English, Cullen's
" Institutions of Medicine." For this translation he was paid,
as lie informs us, 1000 francs. It appeared in 178-5, and not
1784, as elsewhere stated.
In the course of his philosophical and mathematical studies,
Pinel had naturally been led to consider the works of Borelli,
which he greatly admired. It is well known that the Neapolitan
physician displayed great talent, often successfully, in endeavour-
ing to apply the laws of statics and mechanics to physiology.
The French physician composed two memoirs, the one relating to
partial motions of the extremities, which he read before the Royal
Society of Montpellier in 1777 ; the other to motions of the entire
body, which he intended to have read before the Academy of
Sciences at Paris. They formed a portion of the articles on
surgery, comparative anatomy, and zoology, which he published
in the periodicals before alluded to. In 1785 and 1780 he com-
188 PINEL: A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY.
municated to the Academy of Sciences memoirs on various dis-
locations, extracts of which were reproduced in the scientific
journals of the day. In 1780 he published in the Journal de
Physique an article on original defects of the genital organs, and
the apparent or real characteristics of hermaphrodites, founded on
a case which came under his own notice. He subsequently wrote
for the same journal three other memoirs: the first on the struc-
tural formation of the elephant's head; the second on the retrac-
tility of the claws of certain carnivorous animals; and the third on
the mode of preparing the skins of quadrupeds and birds. In
1788 he edited a new edition of Baglivi with notes and commen-
*taries. In 1789-91 an abridgment of the "Philosophical Trans-
actions" was published, and Pinel out of fourteen volumes trans-
lated three himself?one on chemistry, another on anatomy, and a
third on medicine and surgery. He also worked upon an additional
volume devoted to materia medica and pharmacy, About 1793
he made an interesting note on an ossification of the brain, which
was exhibited at the Academy of Sciences in 1753 by Baron, and
which had been preserved by Deyeux.
In 1783 the melancholy loss of a friend, who fell into a state
of mania from an excessive enthusiasm for glory, coupled with
insufficient means to contest it, directed his attention to the study
of mental alienation, and as he himself afterwards stated in his
" Memoir on the Moral Treatment of Insanity" (Memoire sur le
Traitement Moral de la Folic), and in his " Medico-Philosophical
Treatise" (Traite medico-philosophique), his admiration for the
judicious precepts of the ancients with regard to this malady was
increased; and from this period he commenced a series of obser-
vations in a lunatic asylum (Maison de Santa Belhomme), which
lie 'pursued during Jive years, on mania and the application of
moral remedies to the disease. At this period Pinel commenced
the publication in the Gazette de Sante of articles relating to
' nervous and mental disorders. In J 788 he communicated to the
Royal Society of Medicine a work on the distinctive features of
the various kinds of mania and the modes of treatment, which
was the result of his observations at Belhomme and of his pri-
vate practice: in 1789, he published in the same Journal a note
entitled, " Observations on the moral regimen best calculated to
restore the wandering reason in certain cases of mania" (Ob-
servations sur le regime moral qui est le plus propre a retablir,
dans certains cas, la raison egaree des maniaques). tie also
wrote for the Journal Gratuit de Sante in 1 790 a memoir full of
interest, entitled, "Medical Reflections on the Monastic Life"
(Reflexions Medicalcs sur I'Etat Monastique), where he related a
remarkable case of erotic melancholy cured by garden labour and
baths. In the early months of 1791 he inserted in Fourcrov's
PINEL: A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY. 183
Journal, called La Medecine eclairee par les Sciences Physiques,
several articles on melancholic suicide; on tlie 30th August,
1791, the Royal Society of Medicine offered a prize for an essay
" On the most e fficacious means of treating invalids who become
insane before old age." Pinel sent in a memoir which received
honourable mention on the 28th August, 1792, and which caused
the judges charged with its examination, of whom Thouret was
one, to form a high opinion of the author ; to this work was
appended the motto from Celsus, " Gerere se pro cujusque
natura necessarium."
Cabanis, Cousin, and Thouret, friends of Pinel, were about
this time placed at the head of the Board charged with the ad-
ministration of the publio hospitals, some of which and amongst
others Bicetre, were then in a deplorable state. They were well
acquainted with his merit and the attention he had already paid
to the subject of insanity ; they thought he was the only man in
France, as Pariset says, capable of remedying the evils and dis-
orders which prevailed in the lunacy department; they therefore
hastened to appoint him chief physician of that hospital. '
It was during the troubles of the Revolution, a memorable but
sanguinary epoch of our history, that this appointment was
made. Biographers are not quite agreed as to the precise period.
Some say it was in the commencement, others that it was
towards the close of the year 1792. From several passages in
the Traite Medico-Philosophique one might infer that Pinel was
already at Bicetre in 1792: thus he gives an account of the mas-
sacres of the month of September, and relates a highly dramatic
episode relating to this subject. It appears evident from what he
says that he was on the spot at this time. In another part of the
same book he expresses himself thus : " My observations were
resumed at Bicetre on my nomination during the first year of the
Revolution." By Revolution should be understood the Republic.
In the Nosograpliie he says: "My appointment to the post of
Chief Physician of the Infirmary of Bicetre about the first year
of the Republic." Again, in another place he writes : " The
Hospital of Bicetre confided to my charge, under the title of
Chief Physician, during the years II. and III. of the Republican
era, opened out to me a clear stage on which to follow out those re-
searches commenced at Paris some years previously." The letters
in my possession written in February, July, and November,
1792, and in January, 1793, contain no reference to his sojourn
at Bicetre ; on the other hand, the register of the hospital fixes
the 25th August, 1793, as the date of his appointment, and that of
his installation in the early part of September. This date agrees
with the close of the first year of the Republic. After this it
must be taken that it was in the latter end of 1793, and not 1792,
NO. XVIII.?NEW SERIES. O
190 PINEL: A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY.
that Pinel presented himself at the Hotel de Ville in order to
obtain authority from the Commune to loose the fetters of the
lunatics at Bicetre, since Couthon, who presided over this assem-
bly, had retired from the scene of politics in the latter half of the
year 1792, and did not make his re-appearance until January,
1793; besides, it was probably the revolutionary tribunal ap-
pointed on the 10th August of this year which is here in
question.
It is of little importance, however, whether Pinel was ap-
pointed in 1792 or in 1793 ; that which it concerns us to know
and to remember, and which constitutes one of his greatest
claims before posterity, is that a short time after his installation
at Bicetre he partially realized those ideas of reform which he
had conceived, and already applied on a smaller scale, and that by
so doing he radically altered the lot of the insane. This reform
it is?as great philosophically considered as medically?which,
continued and consummated by Esquirol and M. Ferrus, has
wholly transformed the asylums, for the reception of lunatics.
In our days we can scarcely form any idea of the then de-
plorable condition of these houses. If we picture to ourselves low,
damp, and infected dungeons, without light or air, fitly desig-
nated by the name of cells, containing a wretched stump-bed, or
a rotten straw mattress laid on the stone floor; if we imagine
human beings, naked or covered with rags, nearly always
furious, chained, and shut up in these places of desolation and
misery, real tombs which they never left but for their last resting-
place ; if we conceive ferocious keepers chosen from amongst con-
victs, treating these beings as brute beasts, making use of the most
barbarous expedients, overwhelming them with injuries, mocking
them with insulting jibes, mercilessly beating or waging with
them terrible and often sanguinary struggles, throwing down
before them disgusting and insufficient nourishment, leaving them
without water even to quench their thirst, or clothing to protect
them from the cold of winter, and exposing them in this sad con-
dition for the amusement of curious visitors; if we imagine, I say,
these unhappy beings believed to be incurable, abandoned by their
families, deprived of medical care, pale, ghastly, and haggard,
stagnating in their own dejections, groaning under the weight of
irons which lacerated their limbs, emaciated by repeated blood-
letting, excited by their horrible sufferings, and the inhuman
treatment to which they were subjected, we shall then have a
very incomplete idea of the frightful state of lunatic asylums in
general, and of Bicetre in particular, at this epoch.
Pinel's compassionate heart was grieved by the spectacle, and
the aspect of the unhappy patients, in some of whom perhaps
the light of reason was not altogether lost without hope of re-
PINEL: A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY. 191
covery. Like a new Messiah he undertook the work of regene-
ration and deliverance to which Providence had called him : in
him kindness and gentleness, pity and humanity, justice and phi-
lanthropy, philosophy and science, made their entry into this
habitation of misfortune and despair.
Pinel found Pussin, an uneducated but trustworthy man, super-
intendent at Bicetre, who understood his ideas, and seconded
liis views of reform. He forgot, as he says, that a doctor's
cap had never adorned Pussin's head, and he had numerous inter-
views with this subordinate, in order to become acquainted with
the antecedents of his patients, and frequent conversations with
those of them who were able to understand him ; he studied
their character, soothed the self-love of some, promised to satisfy
their reasonable requests, combated with complacency and kind-
ness, or when needed with firmness, the delirious ideas of
others, endeavoured to secure the confidence of all. He gave
them hopes of an ameliorated lot, and of even returning to their
families if they would but follow his advice and not give them-
selves up to their extravagant and disordered notions. When he
felt certain that his influence and ascendancy over them was
established on a sufficient basis, he undertook to relieve them of
their chains, and to allow them to leave their sombre and un-
healthy habitations; granting them in the first instance a limited
degree of liberty within the precincts of their respective divi-
sions. The Government of that day was jealous, and Pinel was
watched and suspected. It was therefore with difficulty, and
only after repeated requests, that he obtained authority to strike
off the fetters of the insane. So distrustful were the rulers of
France at this period that they saw, even in the liberation of
lunatics, the slaves of ignorance and barbarity, an act which
might be favourable to aristocracy, and dangerous to Republican
institutions.
The celebrated Couthon, who presided over the formidable
Commune of Paris when Pinel applied for this authority, went
over to Bicetre the next day, in order to satisfy himself that the
request concealed no project inimical to the democratic govern1
ment. When he saw the lunatics whom Pinel wished to release
from their fetters, he turned to him and said, " Are you mad
yourself, that you wish to set at liberty these ferocious beasts ?
" No," replied Pinel, with simplicity and firmness, " for 1 am
certain that these unfortunates are only thus violent and so ex-
travagant because they are chained. I am convinced that when
they are so no longer they will compose themselves, and may, per-
haps, again become reasonable." "Do as you like, was Couthon s
answer as he left.
From this moment Pinel set to work, and the next day he
o 2
192 Pinel: a biogkaphical study.
removed the chains from fifty lunatics, and from thirty more some
days after. It is this scene, so beautiful and admirable for its
science and humanity, which does so much honour to Pinel, and
of which his family are so justly proud, that the Academy of
Medicine has sought to commemorate by a picture which orna-
ments the hall in which their meetings are held.
In those days, however, the most praiseworthy actions were
often misinterpreted, and malevolence, ignorance, or political
fanaticism sometimes exposed them in an odious light. It was
spread abroad that Pinel had released the lunatics from their
fetters with bad intentions, and under this pretext, a furious mob
one day brought him a la lanterne. Chevinge, an old soldier of
the French guards, rescued him out of their hands, and thus
saved his life. This man was one of those lunatics liberated
by Pinel, afterwards cured, and ultimately taken into his ser-
vice.
The reforms wrought by Pinel from a medical and philanthropic
point of view, excited immense interest in all civilized countries,
and from that time they have gradually spread themselves amidst
the applause of generous and enlightened minds. At the same
time it must not be forgotten that the ideas pervading all minds
were in favour of amelioration, that the philosophy of the eigh-
teenth century tended to bring them to light, that they were
entertained even by the authorities of the day, and that for ten
years opportunity had been sought to introduce them into lunatic
asylums.
Attempts of this kind had been partially made in various
countries, and some physicians, particularly in the hospitals
under their care, had endeavoured to change the abominable sys-
tem then pursued towards the insane. Thus, the patients belong-
ing to the hospital at Saragossa, in Spain, had for long enjoyed
a certain amount of liberty, and manual labour was also employed
there with advantage. This asylum, which was open for the
reception of patients of all countries and all religions, bore as
its motto, Urbis et Orbis. In some asylums also in Holland,
Belgium, Savoy, England, and France, efforts were made to
mitigate the lot of this unhappy class. But what were all these
imperfect and timid attempts, these incomplete schemes, this re-
turn towards the precepts of the ancients, which Pinel had extolled
and put in practice ten years before his appointment to Bicetre,
as compared with the radical reform based on the most rational
principles of medicine and philosophy, stamped with the true
spirit of Christianity, to which a grateful posterity has attached
the name of the French Psycopathist ?
After researches extending over a period of four years, both
at Bicetre and the Salpetriere, of which he had become chief phy-
PINEL: A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY. 193
sician, Pinel published his conclusions in the Memoires de la So-
ciety Medicate d'Emidation for the years V. and VI. These works,
together with those he had written before his appointment to
Bicetre, formed the groundwork of the first edition of his " Medico-
Philosophical Treatise upon Insanity" (Traite Medico-Philoso-
phique sur I'Alienation Mentale) in the year IX (1800). He subse-
quently completed them by further observations and more extended
applications in a second edition published in 1809.
It is impossible to contest the originality, the high merit, and
the great importance of this didactic work, which has rendered im-
mense service in popularizing Pinel's doctrines. When this
Treatise appeared, there were no works in mental science service-
able as guides in such matters. The few English books printed
m the last quarter of the eighteenth century, such as those of
Arnold, Crichton, Ferriar, Haslam, Perfect, &c., possessed but
a moderate degree of interest, presented vague and insufficient
precepts, and contained no really elevated medical views capable
of directing the physician in the deplorably chaotic state of the
lunatic asylums of the day. Those which had been edited in
Germany and Italy, without excepting even the works of Locher,
of Greding, of Langermann, of Chiarugi, possess no greater
merit. Dr. Daquin published at Chambery about the middle of
1791, and again in 1804, a work entitled De la Philosophie de la
Folic, which has remained almost unknown, and is not even men-
tioned by the majority of psycopathists and biographers. This
book, although full of generous and philanthropic sentiment and
commendable on many accounts, is, nevertheless, destitute of
learning, science, and any special ideas; it is written in an incorrect
style, and contains a host of erroneous propositions, such as
those relating to suicide, the curability of insanity, the venereal
desires of the insane, the influence of the moon, &c. His classi-
fication of mental disorders will not bear the slightest examina-
tion. In the second edition, dedicated to Pinel, he did not
profit by the progress made in medical science ; he limited himself
to the praise and exaltation of the Traite Medico -JPhilosopliique.
The following is an extract from the dedication :?
" I addressed the first edition of tliis work to Humanity, because the
subject appeared to make it a duty that I should do so; but to-day
I fulfil one, to me much more satisfactory, and much more appropriate
to the matter, in dedicating this second edition to you, because I see
in you that rare virtue personified. Your work on mania displays at
?nce the generous sentiments of a refined mind, and the fertility of
genius. We find in it a sympathizing feeling for the woes of others,
beside the salutary resources of the art of relieving them."
No one, and Daquin less than any, ever contested with Pinel
the honour which he acquired by the reforms made at Bicetre.;
194! PINEL: A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY.
for some years, however, attempts have been made not exactly
to tarnish its glory, that would be difficult, but to lessen it by
sharing it with Daquin, on the pretence that to the latter belongs
the priority of reform in the treatment of the insane. I believe
that I have in another place (see my note on the reform in the
treatment of lunatics, 1854, and my letters in the Journal des
Connaissances Meclicales of Dr. Caffe, 1858,) shown the real
value of these pretensions, and that Daquin's medical fellow-
citizen who raised them, and the two other gentlemen who sup-
ported his opinion, had not sufficiently studied the question, and
were not acquainted with Pinel's labours. They made the mis-
take of confounding two different and distinct things : the priority
of ideas on the moral treatment which Pinel never ceased in his
writings to trace back to the ancients, Aretseus, Celsus, and Cselius
Aurelianus; and the application and realization of these ideas,
which could only be accomplished with advantage on a wTide field,
such as Bicetre or the Salpetriere, whence they might spread
their salutary influence through the whole world.
On a mere comparison of the dates of publication of the
Traite de la Philosopliie de la Folie and the Traite Medico-Phi-
losophique, and without taking account of anything Pinel had
done before his appointment to Bicetre, it has been contended
that Daquin preceded Pinel in the reformed treatment of the
insane ; that he enunciated novel ideas; that they were new and
bold, considering the time when they were promulgated; that he
ought to be regarded as the inventor of the moral treatment;
that his ideas were the fertile germ of the great reforms accom-
plished by Pinel, Esquirol, Conolly, and Leuret; that he, first of
all, indicated and attempted that system to which Pinel attached
his name. It is impossible that any one who has taken the
trouble to study the history of medical psychology, and who
knows anything of the labours of Pinel, should admit such pro-
positions, after an attentive perusal of Daquin's book. In fact,
this author has enunciated no new idea, and one might quote from
other writers a host of passages in which what he has written is
more formally and more scientifically expressed. It may be seen
even that his philanthropical notions are but the pale reflection
and a repetition of what had been said before. He inaugurated
no reform, he did not remove the chains, for he does not even
suggest such a thing, and at his death, twenty-five years after he
wrote, the lunatics at Chambery were in the state in which he
found them. None of the improvements which he proposed, or
of the desires and hopes which he expressed, had been either at-
tempted or realized.
Daquin limited himself to the permission granted to a few of
his patients to walk individually in an enclosure or orchard be-
PINEL: A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY. 195
longing to the asylum, where he acknowledged that it was im-
possible to leave them because they destroyed the fruit. Their
lot moved him with pity, he procured them some alleviations, and
was sorry he could do no more, nevertheless it is wished to cite
his good intentions, emanating from a generous but powerless
disposition, his abortive and unproductive attempts, as an inno-
vation and even the inauguration of reform. I ask every impar-
tial man what there is in common between these, Daquin's imper-
fect and all but unknown acts, and those of Pinel, so fertile in
the happiest results.
I feel it my duty to say one word as to Pinel's silence with re-
spect to Daquin, upon which stress has been laid by those who
are unable to reply to the objections founded upon facts and
dates. They have gone so far as to pretend that he acted under
the influence of rivalry and jealousy. Such insinuations cannot
affect Pinel, whose morality and scientific probity are above these
retrospective attacks directed against his memory, and if they
should create astonishment it would be because they proceed from
the pens of honourable men who, in exhuming Daquin's un-
known work, have attempted to make him a reputation at Pinel's
expense.
It seems to me that Pinel's silence may be easily accounted for,
and one would naturally suppose either that the Traite de la
Philosophic de la Folie was unknown to him ; or, as appears to
me most probable, he had forgotten it in the midst of his nume-
rous occupations.
However this may be, I think he was perfectly right to main-
tain silence, for the flattering compliments of Daquin did not
oblige him to speak his mind upon the book, in which there was
much to criticise. The second edition was but a paraphrase of
the first, and in no way on a level with the state of science.
The author had not profited by the eminent labours of the French
psychologist, and the latter therefore had great reason to com-
plain.
France had produced no work treating ex professo of insanity.
In the last twenty years of the century there appeared?1st, a
document full of interest, edited under orders of the Government,
by Colomhier and Doublet (1785) ; 2nd, some Ideas by Tenon
(1788); 3rd, a work by Iberti, on the Lunatic Asylum at Sara-
gossa; 4th, a Report read before the National Assembly by La-
rochefoucauld (1791); 5th, some Thoughts by Cabanis (1793) ;
6th, an account of the Lunatic Asylum at Amsterdam, by Thouin
(179G); 7th, some Letters in the Bibliotheque Britannique, on a
New Establishment for the Cure of the Insane, by Dr. Larive
(1798) ; and lastly, the Articles and Memoirs of Pinel, of which
J have spoken (1784?1 798).
196 PINEL: A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY.
It was under these circumstances, then, that the Traite Medico-
Philosojphique sur I'Alienation Mentale was published.
The grand plan of the work which Pinel proposed to himself,
and which he so worthily accomplished, may he shortly summed
up as follows:?To give an historical sketch on the subject of
mental disorders; to discuss the value of the works which treat
of them ; to classify these disorders under four principal divisions,
of which one, Melancholy, presents itself under two different forms
depending upon moral oppression or expansion; to submit a selec-
tion of observations; to throw light on the most frequent causes ;
to explain the great importance of the original disposition of the
different passions, &c., in their etiological relations, and the
utility of psychological knowledge ; to determine the somatic and
psychical characters of each genus ; to describe and make known,
in the first place, that species of mental alienation consisting
rather in the perversion of the affective faculties, the instincts,
the desires, of the moral sense, than in the lesion of the intellec-
tual faculties, which may be or may appear to be intact; to de-
velop the medico-legal doctrines which proceed from the existence
of those sometimes transitory exhibitions of mania without deli-
rium, moral insanity and instinctive monomania; to demonstrate
to the judges that numbers of persons brought before them as
culpable, and convicted as criminals, are but madmen; to snatch
unhappy sufferers from the scaffold or the galley, thus opening
out to modern psychologists a new career which they were des-
tined to run, with advantage to justice and humanity ; to indi-
cate general rules for the distribution of asylums; to establish
general precepts that ought to be followed in the physical and
moral treatment of the insane ; to make apparent the utility and
necessity for manual labour and isolation; to reprobate with
energy the use of all violent means; to draw up statistical tables;
to undermine ancient prejudices by force of logic and science; to
overturn the worm-eaten edifice erected by ignorance, barbarity, and
inhumanity; and not contenting himself with merely giving pre-
cepts and advice, to apply and realize them at the expense some-
times of his health, his repose, and his liberty; and finally to
culminate in general considerations, abounding with philosophical
and medical ideas of the deepest interest.
I admit that Pinel's classification was defective, and that it re-
quired modifications already made, partly by Esquirol and M.
Ferrus, his pupils and his learned and worthy followers; but it
is nevertheless the basis of all those which have been proposed
up to this day.
Granting that Pinel has at times confounded dementia and
idiocy; that he has classed mania accompanied with partial de-
lirium under the head of mania without delirium; that with
PIXEL : A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY. 197
respect to some forms and species of madness, the seat of disease,
and pathological anatomy, his work leaves somewhat to be de-
sired, it must still be acknowledged that he has traced with a sure,
vigorous, and practised hand, all that relates to the moral and
physical regime, and that little has since been added upon this
point.
Pinel's book is more than a mere medical work; it is full of
philosophical views, and of moral precepts and doctrines which
day be as useful to the physician as to those whose occupation
concerns psychology, education, legislation, justice, and political
administration. Pariset, indeed, has not thought it too much to
say that it ought to be the manual of physicians and rulers.
Pinel's system of moral therapeutics is not merely based on
the most enlightened science and the most consummate expe-
rience, but also on the purest virtues, the truest and noblest sen-
timents, such as justice, kindness, goodness, and charity. It
may also be said that it will ever be in all places and in all time,
as it is to-day, that part of mental medicine which is the most
true, the most positive, and the least contestable.
The first edition of the " Philosophical Nosography" (Noso?
graphie Philosophique) appeared in 1798, and the sixth was pub-
lished in 1818.
I have no need to state here, for every physician is aware of
the immense medical revolution caused by the appearance of the
Nosographie, which for twenty years was the sole guide both of
students and physicians, as well in France as in foreign countries;
I will only say that this work forms the crowning point of the
author's reputation.
Dupuytren has erroneously stated that the Nosographie gained
the decennial prize; it appears from what Pariset has written,
that Halle, who was the referee named by the commission issued
on this subject, declined to pronounce between the competitors,
Corvisart and Pinel, who were both his friends. But it is easy
to see, from his remarkable report, that the comparison was alto-
gether in favour of Pinel. Could it be otherwise ? The one
work was limited to a description of the disorders of the organs
of circulation ; the other embraced the whole subject of internal
pathology. On the one side was a study of narrow extent, re-
stricted research, and limited observation on tbe maladies of the
heart and great vessels: on the other, an attempt to establish a
new doctrine, to create a new classification, to examine important
works, to effect a philosophical analysis of a subject involved in
labyrinthine intricacy; to give order, method, and simplicity to
a science which numerous and different theories and systems had
rendered more and more obscure, unintelligible, and uncertain;
above all, to combat the exclusive pretensions of solidism and
198 pinel: a biogeaphical study.
humorism; to recall the science of medicine, by incessant efforts,
to the true principles traced by Hippocrates. Such, in a few
words, is the difference between the works of Corvisart and Pinel,
and which Halle displayed with so much talent.
Pinel also published a "Treatise upon Clinical Medicine"
(Traite snr la Medecine Clinique), which went through three
editions between 1802 and 1815 ; and he wrote for the Encyclopedic
Methodique, for the Dictionnaire des Sciences Medicales, and
for Transactions of the Institute. It should not be forgotten
that it is to these reflections or to the observations made by Pinel
upon Inflammation, in 1791, that the " Treatise on Membranes"
{Traite des Membranes) owes its birth, and that a spark of his
genius, as Dupuytren says, lighted that of Bichat.
On the formation of the Ecole de Sante, in 1794, Pinel was
called to the chair of Hygiene conjointly with Halle, and after-
wards to that of Internal Pathology, on the death of Doublet, in
1 795, which he continued to hold when the Faculte de Medecine
was instituted. He was nominated a member of the Institute in
1803, in the Zoological section; Chevalier of the Legion of
Honour at the institution of that order; consulting physician to
the Emperor in 1805; Chevalier de St. Michael in 1818; hono-
rary member of the Academy of Medicine at its formation ; and
he was one of the eleven professors who witnessed the dissolution
of the Faculte de Medecine under the ordinance of 1822.
Pariset and Cuvier have represented Pinel as in most wretched
circumstances during the first year of his residence at Paris: this
is an error disproved by my uncle's own letters. Cuvier also pre-
tends that he fell into a state of melancholy in consequence of
his penury, and that he would have lapsed into despair but for
his friend Savary, who revived his courage and procured him
some distractions: this story has no more foundation than an-
other he relates, when he says that the only means he had of
providing for his necessities was to take a situation in a lunatic
asylum. Pinel never resided at the Belhomme Asylum, of which
he was merely the physician. It is a well-ascertained fact that
on his arrival at Paris he obtained, through Cousin's introduction,
as I have already stated, pupils in mathematics, whose fees amply
sufficed for his simple and modest wants; his correspondence
leaves no room for doubt upon this head.
Pinel was acquainted with nearly all the men of that day who
were in any way celebrated either in literature or science, and
amongst others with DAlembert, Condorcet, Halle, Lavoisier,
Berthollet, Labillardiere, Daubenton, Savary, Fourcroy, Thouret,
Cabanis, Roussel, &c.; and he was intimate with several of them.
The two last-named introduced him to the choice and witty circle
PIXEL: A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY. 199-
of Madame Helvetius, who presided over her reunions with a
grace and amiability which added greatly to their charms.
Pinel's timidity and modesty were such as often to paralyse his
resources, especially before strangers; he also expressed himself
with difficulty, and was unable to arrange and classify his nu-
merous ideas with sufficient rapidity, so that he exhibited a kind
of embarrassment and reserve which caused him to be ill appre-
ciated by those not familiar with him. It is related that on being
presented by his friend, Desfontaines, to Lemonnier, physician
to Louis XVI., with a view to his being appointed physician to
the King's aunts, he was scarcely able to say a word, and that he
stood dumb before the princesses, who formed a very low opinion
of his merit, and declined his services.
Pinel competed three times for the chair of Docteur-regent de la
Faculte, and was each time defeated; about the year 1784, he,
offered himself again, having as he thought a better chance of
success. By accident or ill-luck, it turned out that his com-
petitor was a man he had known at Montpellier, and who there
applied to him to prepare his thesis. Quickly perceiving that the
man was extremely ignorant, he chose a subject most likely to
accord with his aptitude, and composed a thesis for him on equi-
tation, judging that as an old gendarme he might be able to
sustain it without much difficulty; the result was that the can-
didate was received with great applause. Emboldened by this
success, he presented himself at Paris to contest the chair of
Docteur-regent. He was tall of stature, his delivery was fluent
and sonorous, his assurance imperturbable, his learning con-
temptible. Pinel was under the average height, his air was
timorous and embarrassed, his voice feeble, his diction toilsome ;
it need scarcely be added that the sometime gendarme carried the
day, and the future author of the Nosograpliie was nowhere. But
the vexation of his rejection in favour of a fool full of fatuous
pride was easily consoled, and he could afterwards join his friends
in their amusement at the tact and appreciation of his judges,
demonstrating algebraically the chances sometimes afforded by
competition to candidates possessing little beyond a tenacious
memory and an audacious and vain confidence.
Pinel had a tender and sensitive soul; he loved the grand, the
beautiful, and the sublime ; he always retained a taste for poetry,
which he cultivated in his youth; he was a passionate admirer
of the chefs dJoeuvre of antiquity ; he was deeply moved by the
perusal and often the mere recollection of certain narratives
related by poets or historians, and he identified himself at times
with their verse. It is said that walking in the country one day
with his friend Savary, the learned traveller, their conversation
200 PINEL: A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY.
turned on poetry and love, and the misfortunes they entailed
when allowed to overpower the reason. The history of the un-
fortunate Sappho naturally presented itself to their minds, and
in recalling and repeating it to one another, they began to talk
of the talents, the poetical enthusiasm, the amorous exaltation,
the despair and cruel end of the celebrated Lesbian whom they
agreed in considering worthy of a better lot, notwithstanding her
excesses. It would appear that the story moved them to tears,
and that after a moment's repose they found it necessary to seek
distraction in conversing on a less sorrowful subject.
Pinel was a great admirer of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and
Pariset relates that as soon as he arrived at Paris, he hastened to
visit, with his friend Chaptal, the tomb of the illustrious philo-
sopher then recently dead. It is asserted that he was so deeply
affected by this visit that he passed five days and five nights
without sleep ; but it is not pretended that he was prevented from
giving his lessons as usual.
It was to the house of a Madame Yernet, a relative of the
great painter, that Pinel and Boyer conducted and there secreted
their friend Condorcet. This excellent woman lived during the
revolution at No. 22, in the Rue Servandoni, where she received
boarders; she gladly admitted the illustrious outlaw on the re-
commendation, not of two young gentlemen, as M. Louis Blanc
states, but of two serious men of mature age, the one being
about thirty-five, the other fifty, whose courageous devotion
served, alas ! but to prolong for a few months the life of the
unfortunate Girondist. I had an opportunity of meeting at my
uncle's, when young, Condorcet's widow and also Madame Yernet,
who then resided at Yerrieres. The first was a woman of su-
perior mind, the other was remarkable for her kindly disposition.
With or without reason, physicians in general have the
character of being somewhat unbelieving and not very religious.
The friends and contemporaries of Cabanis had mostly a repu-
tation for atheism : but Pinel, while highly valuing his friend-
ship and admiring his talent, was far from partaking of all his
ideas, and he could say with the man of old?Amicus Plato,
sed magis arnica Veritas. He possessed a mind too elevated
to permit of his seeing in nature a mere fortuitous arrange-
ment of matter; he believed, on the contrary, with sensible
men and the majority of philosophers that a Supreme Being
presided and presides over the marvels of the universe as
also of our destiny; he sought not to penetrate that which
is impenetrable, or to explain that which is inexplicable;
he bowed humbly before the infinite, a subject which can-
not be discussed without exposing the mind to doubts little
likely to console it. Without being an active Catholic, he
PINEL: A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY. 201
possessed tliat religious turn of mind which, favouring the study
of the natural sciences, and breathing a morality at once
mild, persuasive, and tolerant, is the enemy of fanaticism and
superstition, the sublime morality of the ancient philosophy, and,
above all, of the Gospel. One day the celebrated astronomer
Lalande met Pinel and said to him, " I am preparing a new
edition of the Dictionary of Atheists, in which I have devoted an
article to you." The latter replied, "And I am about to publish
my Treatise on Madness, in which I will reserve a place for you."
Pinel was remarkable for his extreme benevolence and kind-
ness; he was incapable of the slightest jealousy or envy towards
his professional brethren, to whom he ever rendered full and entire
justice; he may at times have omitted to notice their labours, but
he never did so with any blameable intention ; his criticisms were
always fair and allowable. He never, under any circumstances,
replied to his very few opponents, nor did he permit his pupils to
do so. Castel and Baumes, more especially the latter, criticised the
Nosographie with little decency, but he took no offence and made
no reply. When his old pupil, the learned author of La Doctrine
Physiologique, attacked him violently and in terms unworthy of
a physician who desired to respect himself, he shrugged his
shoulders smilingly and asked if it were possible to maintain a
system so exclusive, repelled alike by observation and sound
sense. " Let him talk," said he, " time will do justice between us."
Pinel might easily have obtained, like most of his friends, a
high political position, either under the republican or the imperial
government; but he was too honest and honourable to solicit,
much less to intrigue; his love of independence always caused
him to reject propositions made to him with this object. His
scientific honours were gained solely by his personal merit.
When it was proposed to nominate the chief physician to the
Emperor, two men of great learning but of totally different
characters were suggested; namely, Corvisart and Pinel. Between
these two eminent professors, rivals in glory and science, but
always reciprocally regarding and esteeming one another as
colleagues, the balance remained for some time undecided. I
have reason to know, having heard it at my uncle's from one well
informed, that Marshal Lannes, a friend of Corvisart, caused it
to incline in his favour.
Pinel might have been promoted to the hospital at Charenton,
where the appointment of chief physician was much better re-
munerated than that which he held: it was offered to him, and
he refused it, preferring to remain with the poor patients of the
Salpetriere.
My uncle was very extensively engaged, as consulting phy-
sician ; papers for advice were addressed to him from all parts of
202 pinel: a biographical study.
the world, and people came from all countries to seek his counsel.
He might have acquired a considerable fortune, and have left
great wealth to his heirs; hut to this was opposed his benefi-
cence, his generosity, and his extreme confidence, which was
often most unworthily abused; his purse was ever open to
the unfortunate. But though he was unable to bequeath to his
sons great riches, he left them a patrimony of much more worth
in a great name and the example of a well-spent life, fraught with
virtue and without reproach.
When the dissolution of the Faculte de Medecine, and his own
dispossession was announced to him, which violated the stability
of the professorial office, he made no complaint, and simply
asked what provision had been made for instruction. After having
heard the names of the new professors, he added, " What will be-
come of medicine ?" Some one remarked that he had a right to a
retiring pension. " No, no," he replied, " I want nothing ; it is
my colleague . . . who should have it."
Notwithstanding his modesty, Pinel was not without a certain
legitimate pride. I remember that about 1820 he showed me
with some satisfaction a letter which he had just received from
Russia, and which was addressed, "Au Docteur Pinel, en
France."
He was much pleased with his appointment to the position of
consulting physician to Napoleon; he writes in one of his letters
of 4 Floreal, year XIII. :??
" I have just received a new mark of confidence from the Govern-
ment, having been nominated one of the consulting physicians to the
Emperor belore his departure for Italy. This appointment is the more
agreeable to me, since it does not involve any active service. My am-
bition was fulfilled some time ago, and is so now with much greater
reason. I am especially pleased that my appointments do not prevent
me enjoying a few days' repose from time to time in the seclusion of
country life."
In one of his letters also he mentions with pleasure his deco-
ration with the order of Saint Michael, on the occasion of the
Due d'Angouleme's visit to the Salpetriere.
He related to me also, about the same period, that Napoleon
addressed him when he was received at the Institute after his
return from Elba, and inquired if lunatics were on the increase.
" I replied no ; but I thought to myself," said he, with a mis-
chievous smile " that the superior geniuses, the illustrious and
ambitious conquerors, were not perhaps without a spark of
madness." ,
In 1802 Pinel purchased a country house between Etampes
and Arpajon ; he paid down for it, he says, in one of his letters,
00,000 francs. He went to Torfou every Saturday to rest from
PINEL: A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY. 203
the fatigues of tlie week until Monday, or rather that he might
study there with greater freedom, where he had a second well-
chosen library. It was in this country house, simple but well
situated and very agreeable, that he received his friends and dis-
ciples. For a long time Mayor of Torfou, he accepted with
gratification the homage gladly offered to him at certain periods
of the year, particularly at the annual fete of the place. The
poor of the neighbourhood found in him a benefactor whose
counsel was never sought in vain.
Pinel was gifted with an excellent constitution, and a well-poised
mind ; and thanks to a sober life and freedom from all excesses,
he nearly always enjoyed good health. But in 1793 a typhoid
fever which he caught in his attendance upon the prisoners at
Bicetre, amongst whom it was very prevalent, brought him to the
verge of the grave. He took pleasure in recounting that he
mainly owed his restoration to small, often-repeated doses of old
Arbois wine, and from a grateful remembrance of this fact, he
always had this wine in his cellar, and sometimes on his table.
There was that, says M. Bricheteau, in his manner and ap-
pearance which at once set at ease those whom the reputation of
the celebrated physician brought to his consulting room ; no man
was ever more accessible even at the time of his greatest renown
and his innumerable engagements.
His countenance was grave, his forehead furrowed with
wrinkles, his look as of old was mild, affable, and intellectual.
"Looking on him," says Dupuytren, "one might imagine he
beheld one of the sages of Greece."
During the latter years of his life he spent some portion of each
day in gardening, either in the garden of the Salpetriere, or at his
own country house.
Pinel lost his first wife about 1812, and married again in 1815.
His second wife was an excellent lady, who was sincerely attached
to him, and bestowed upon him all the care and solicitude which
he needed. His family certainly owe to her the prolongation of
my uncle's life, and his sons are no less indebted to her for the
preservation of the fortune which he had acquired. When the
infirmities consequent upon advanced age, and a first slight
attack of apoplexy in 1820 led to his retirement from active life,
my aunt never more left him for an instant; she lavished upon
him every succour and attention, and every proof of affectionate
devotion and conjugal love. When the arbitrary ordinance of
Corbiere was promulgated, by which, when near eighty years of
age, lie wras left with an income insufficient to maintain his house-
hold on the modest footing in which he lived, his venerable wife
hid from him their straitened position, and did all in her power to
prevent his noticing it; she changed none of her husband's habits,
1204 pinel: a biographical studt.
but, on the other hand, denied herself in order that she might
have it in her power to comply with them. I have myself
witnessed this noble conduct, and I am happy to be able to render
this homage to the memory of a woman who was devoted and
generous not only towards her husband's sons but also towards
all his relations.
From 1820 to 1826, Pinel had several other apoplectic attacks
which were followed by partial paralysis. The first seizure left
but few traces, but those which followed enfeebled and changed his
physical organization. During the last two years of his life he
resided almost exclusively in the country. A few friends visited
him occasionally, and he was glad to see them and very sensible
of their kind attentions.
It is generally believed that the last years of Pinel's life were
passed in a species of infancy or intellectual weakness ; this is an
error, as I might prove by the testimony of his intimate friends
who visited him to the last. Without possessing all the activity
and energy of his formerly brilliant intellect, he nevertheless pre-
served the integrity of his judgment, the delicacy of his wit, his
power of appreciation, and his medical tact; but he was not
always able to express his thoughts as he would have wished : he
was conscious of this difficulty and of the morbid causes to which
it was due. At the same time when he was able to overcome this
embarrassment of speech he expressed his ideas with brevity and
clearness. He was ordinarily silent, and appeared absorbed in
his reflections or incapable of attention; but, on the contrary, he
lost nothing of what passed around him. His visitors were there-
fore at times astonished at the fitness and justice of his laconic
and sensible remarks.
M. Ferrus has often told me, and has repeated to me within the
last few days facts which he witnessed, and which confirm what
I here state. The following is one of the most remarkable.
One day during the last year of Pinel's life a young girl who had
had a fall was brought to his house in the country, and com-
plained of severe pain in the inferior part of one of the forearms.
Some physicians who were present, and amongst others
Messieurs Eostan, Ferrus, and Pinel, jun., after having carefully
examined the child, were unable to discover any injury; at the
same time as motion was very painful and the patient complained
of great suffering, my uncle who had not appeared to have taken
any interest in the matter, approached and said to his friends,
" The child is very young ; examine the inferior part of the
radius, there is probably a separation of the epiphysis." A new
examination immediately proved the justice of Pinel's diagnosis.
On the 15tli October, 1826, he returned to Paris in good
health, and without anything to denote his approaching end
bain's psychology. 205
During the night of the 21st he was taken with violent shivering,
which was the prelude of pneumonia, under which he succumbed
on the third day, notwithstanding all the attentions of his wife,
his sons, and the physicians who had been called in.
An immense crowd accompanied his remains to the cemetery
of Pere la Chaise, where Dr. Rostan, hi3 old pupil and friend,
pronounced with emotion over his tomb a few feeling and elo-
quent words. Most of the physicians of Paris made it a duty to
assist at his funeral, and all the learned bodies of which he was a
member sent deputations. It was very touching also to see in
the procession a considerable number of old women from the
Salpetriere, "vho came to pay a last tribute to him who for more
than thirty years had been their physician, father, and benefactor.
