On The Reform Of Lunatic Asylums
==================================

THE JOURNAL
OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND
MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
JULY 1, 1860.
/
Art. IBY J. PARIGOT, M.D.,
Honorary Professor in the University, and Member of the Committee of Inspectors of Lunatic
Asylums of the arrondissement of Brussels, &c.
(Written expressly for this Journal.)
" We should like to see the experiment tried in some new district of producing
in its integrity the Belgian system."?Quarterly Review, 1857.
A wide difference of opinion exists amongst alienist physicians
of the present day in reference to two essential points in the
treatment of the insane. These points relate to the most favourable conditions under which we can place lunatics with a view to
their cure, and to the mode in which the public bounty shall in
future be applied in providing for the treatment of such patients
?supposing it to be necessary that they should all be confined,
and that the localities prepared, at great expense, for their reception, are still insufficient in number.
Hence aiises a question of reform all the more important
because it requires, in several respects, a complete renovation of
our ideas on the treatment of insanity. It must be confessed that
up to the present time we have been barbarous enough to punish
the insane like criminals, to exclude them from society, to place
them on a level by law with ferocious and mischievous animals
and, in line, to abandon them to their fate. A denial of justice
such as this, which has been patent for ages, can only be remedied
* In giving a prominent position to the able and interesting comrnumWmn
which Dr Parigot has favoured us, we wish it clearly to be un?0od that
jlissent entirely from the conclusions which the learned Beknan uhvsioSn1
arrived at respecting the asylum system of treating the insane. The result* ^ If?
so-called " free-air ' system at Gheel, no doubt furnish most valuable hi J!
towards the solution of the important question of the best method of nr vr
additional accommodation for lunatics; and we would refer to a m J
this system, suggested by the Scotch Commissioners in Lunacy in thiSo""1 ?f
Annual Report, and detailed in a subsequent page of this Journal ? Ed
NO. XIX.?NEW SERIES. U
278 ON THE REFORM OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
by the civilization of manners; let us hope then that our eyes
may be opened with reference to this point in the moral history
of humanity, at the very earliest possible moment.
It will not suffice to improve our asylums, to attend to their
hygiene, and to render the lot of the insane more bearable; we
must cure as quickly as possible the curable (as the Father of
Medicine enjoined), and we must not put the incurable to needless
pain.
Unhappily the actual state of things gives rise to great difficulties, for at the same time that the growth of a miserable and
ignorant population causes mental disorders to increase, it everywhere results that considerable capital is sunk both in public and
private speculation for lodging and taking charge of the insane.
But is it necessary that we should delay our search for a
remedy, which we know to be needed, until by an excess of
misery and the results of our own carelessness, the eyes of the
public are opened ?
For more than fifty years the countries most advanced in what
may be called plastic civilization?that which has taught us to
construct and to manufacture, but finds us still desiring somewhat, which on being applied to the science of humanity, shall
best develope the mind and the heart?these countries, we say,
as well in Europe as America, have founded vast asylums for
the insane, sometimes indeed so gigantic that the imagination
stands aghast in contemplating them. " What a mass of misery
they must contain, and still they are not of sufficient magnitude !"
??such are the words that then escape from our lips.
To what a pitch of industrial elevation have we attained, when
our most effective mode of succouring the afflicted forcibly leads
us to banish them from our sight! There are, indeed, many
amongst us who hold that if society sought and desired to direct
the education of all to a humanising and religious end, insanity
would fare less hardly in the midst of the difficulties of social
life ; but so long as we are content to seek palliatives in order to
render the effects of our neglect less sensible, we must expect
difficulties which science can foresee, though it is without the
means of combating them with advantage.
In the present day we build asylums everywhere ; masonry is
the fashion ; every province in Belgium, every county in England,
and every department in France, it is said, should possess this
proof of our solicitude. Physicians of reputation and officials of
high rank recommend the measure. This we might expect,
for these very honourable men, habituated to magisterial functions,
find nothing of greater efficacy to meet every contingency, and the
horizon of their ideas appears to be bounded by a desire to possess
greater asylums for the restraint of madness. But as we already
r
ON THE REFORM OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 279
have hospitals for every corporeal infirmity, and as we conlcl not
immure all that are afflicted, since the incumbrance would at once
imperil the public health and the funds at our disposal, the
question regarding the reform of our asylums has naturally become the order of the day, and so will remain until a satisfactory
solution be arrived at.
More than thirty years ago physicians of high repute, such as
Esquirol, and Moreau of Tours, convinced of the necessity of
continuing the reforms commenced before their day, proposed
measures, the practicability of which they were led to appreciate,
in examining and relating the experience of a Belgian village, in
a locality lost, so to speak, in the steppes of Campine, in the
province of Antwerp. Since that date, the organization of the
colony having been more closely examined, it has been asserted
that, by following the example of the Gheeloise peasants, unhoped
for advantages might be attained in the treatment of lunacy, such
as the acceleration and augmentation in number of the cures, the
diminution of expense, the removal of that species of disgust or
reprobation with which insanity is most commonly regarded, and
the attainment of a twofold action of benevolence and mutual
moralization between the patients and those who attend upon
them.
If all this be possible, why is the establishment of similar
institutions in other countries still delayed ?
We will state frankly what are our ideas upon this subject.
In the first place, we may consider as the most perfect asylum
models in existence, those establishments where but a small
number of patients are admitted, maintained by men of high
scientific reputation and undoubted probity. In return for fees
proportioned to their reputation and the fortunes of their clients,
these physicians offer the most consummate science, the most
assiduous care, town and country houses, suitable and sufficient
domestic arrangements, and, above all, a family life. Accomplishing their duties towards humanity, these distinguished men
naturally see no reason to renounce their system. Other
physicians, equally to be respected for their science and their
zeal, placed at the head of large public or private establishments,
which have been well kept and honourably administered, also
very naturally defend their domestic hearth, the asylum, which is
in some sort their patrimony, since it has very commonly been
transmitted to them by their ancestors. Moreover, it would be
unreasonable to expect that every one should feel himself equally
called upon or disposed to imitate the self-devotion and personal
sacrifice of those physicians who strive for reform against their
own interests. But, finally, there lives under shelter of the reputation of the conscientious men of whom we have spoken, the
U 2
280 ON THE REFORM OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
mass of speculators and traffickers in madness who, in countries
where there are laws for the protection of the insane, only do
what is strictly required in order to escape blame, yet who in
everything else, or on favourable occasions, only seek to retain
captive unfortunate beings whom, most frequently, unnatural
relations, from disgraceful motives, wish to get rid of.
It is true that in the abandonment and neglect of the insane
we must recognise shades and gradations: the patient is no
longer beaten nor injured ; he has all that is indispensable, and
sometimes the passers-by are imposed upon by the sound of
music, dancing, fetes, and entertainments of various kinds; but
if we go to the bottom of these appearances, we often find they
proceed from a wish to render the aspect of a prison less disagreeable, while the desire to cure is either altogether absent or
but lightly appreciated. In the face of such inveterate evils, it
will be easily understood that a reform which is to change the
whole face of things will have to suffer delay; but in sounding
the evil the conviction forces itself upon the mind that the desired
victory will ultimately be achieved.
There are then two chief obstacles to success,?particular interests coalescing against the public good, and a general indifference of public opinion towards the malady, notwithstanding that
it so often attacks men distinguished in all branches of intellectual
activity, those whose sensibility is too strongly developed, and
again those who have fallen victims, from physical or moral
causes, to the vices of society,?all of whom deserve our pity.
In the midst of these circumstances opposite opinions have
been formed. There are those on the one hand who would reform
the public asylums by transforming them into free-air colonies
or at least in modifying them so as to unite at once the advantages of an asylum with those of a colony ; there are those on the
other hand who maintain proposals for purely local amelioration.
The system at present in vogue consists in secluding the lunatic
in an asylum, where, according to the nature of the case, he is
either placed in a barred cell or in one of the divisions of
patients; in rare and exceptional cases he is allowed to go out
under the guardianship of a keeper. This method, miscalled
curative, is based upon moral and physical restraint, and is still
counselled by very estimable men : the patient is compelled to
live in a new world nearly approaching to that of a convent.
Such asylums in Catholic countries are very often directed by
religious corporations, to whom the undertaking has been entrusted. Assuming then that under this system the mercantile
idea is placed in the second rank, and that the requirements of
the system are satisfied, still the accumulation of patients is an
obstacle in the way of good treatment. But besides this, a contempt of science, and personal interest, insensibly lead to the same
ON THE REFORM OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 281
result. How can we expect that a physician, to whom is denied
pecuniary means and the time necessary to profound study,
should maintain the unequal conflict ? Again, governors and
officials, and even ministers of State, are sometimes of opinion
that no reliance is to be placed upon psychical medicine.
Amongst all these powerful personages, those who belong to, or
are under the influence of, the clergy, think that moral medication
is but a dependency of devotion. Were this indeed the case, the
religious habit should be the best remedy. Lastly, as a general
rule, it is considered good management to get any kind of a
physician to undertake the care of hundreds of patients at a low
remuneration. Such being the system, saving the exceptions
which we have referred to, one can understand without difficulty
why cures are rare and asylums so well filled.
The reform system proposes on the contrary a complete medical
treatment,?that is to say, it embraces all the means, moral and
physical, which address our double nature. Its sole object is to
return the patient to his family as cured. For this it requires the
devoted attention of a competent physician, for the latter will
never consider his patients as incurables whom he is at liberty to
abandon to nature ; he studies and strives for their interest to the
last; nothing is indifferent to him. Under this system also all
the ordinary circumstances are changed ; in order to avoid complications a free space is required, each patient is permitted a
degree of personal liberty, and with this view he is placed in
the midst of a special society created for him. The attentions
generally confided to domestics are replaced by those of a family,
whose mission is to render inoffensive a man sometimes furious,
and, in consequence, deprived of moral liberty and a knowledge
of his acts. It is, so to speak, by a moral tour cle force before the
eyes of those who can only recognise brute matter, that this system
commences a medication of the man afflicted, as Lord Byron says,
from on high.
It will be readily understood that no importance attaches to
the name of a system having this end, and which may be adapted
to countries of different climates and manners; but as this system
is practised in the country and rejects restraint, it has received
the name of the free-air treatment (traitement a air libre). It
may be carried out by one or more families in combination, by a
village or a colony, without losing its special character. All is
to be attained by kindness, not by intimidation or violence.
Nothing should be allowed to oppress the individuality of the
patient, the spring of intellectual life which, once broken, involves
the loss of the individual. The capacity for amelioration and
cure by the aid of science is to be taken as inherent in the moral
and physical conditions of the patient. No one can be ignorant
that the efforts of the man of art must be stronger than "the evil
282 ON THE REFORM OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
which he combats; neither must we forget the labour necessary
to trace the origin and seat of evil, to foresee its phases and to
determine its treatment; or the time and patience required for
these examinations of the patient; nor, on the other hand, the
satisfaction of the physician when his labour ends in a happy result.
If we should be asked where this system is completely adopted,
we should be compelled to reply that the Gheeloise Colony
approaches the ideal without attaining it; but we hope that, with
the concurrence of its present chief physician, the reforms commenced there ten years ago will be continued until they be
realized.
Finally, it appears to us that the question of reform is so
urgent that the non-medical public ought also to be consulted
upon the subject. Res sua agitur; independently of its direct
interest in the matter, the public can very well judge of the
practical bearings of the subject, as, for example, which system is
the simpler and the less painful; bearing witness at the same
time to that which effects the quickest cures.
In the elucidations which we offer in this paper, we shall
endeavour to be as impartial as possible ; and although it be
written in favour of reform, and owes its birth to a controversy
raised against us in Germany and in England, we have been
moved by a sole regard for the interest of truth.
I. After what has been stated above, it will be easily foreseen
that those physicians who are in favour of restraint will contend,
that a house in which life is subject every instant to rule and
discipline, becomes in some sort an instrument of cure, and they
will hasten to add that, according to the celebrated Esquirol, it is
the most powerful therapeutical agent in the hands of an able
jjhysician. It would not be difficult to refute this assertion, so
far as it is absolute and general ; but it is sufficient to say that it
proceeds less from a scientific theory than from an idea of
perfection, which is habitually attached to a conventual and
religious life. The secular clergy, not restricted to this mode of
existence, are from this point of view irregular: many men
consider, therefore, that monastic life leads to perfection; they
think that the passions, which according to them are the sole
sources of madness, may be more easily controlled in this species
of cloister-life. It may certainly produce very marked effect upon
some minds, but we must not forget the effect due to seclusion
and removal from the family circle. There is nothing, however,
surprising in the fact that a physician such as Esquirol, well
versed in mental therapeutics, knew how to turn to advantage this
moral commotion by instituting a rational treatment, to which most
commonly the patient or his family were opposed. But it is not
this which, in aid of their cause, the advocates of restraint find it
necessary to maintain ; taking their stand upon the letter of the
ON THE REFORM OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 283
aphorism, they pretend that the walls surrounding an asylum
possess some mysterious therapeutical action, and they allege, as
has been recently stated with reference to an architectural competition for the plan of an asylum near Madrid, that curative
methods* are intimately connected with architectural arrangements, so much that one might more surely arrive at the construction of a good hospital for lunatics by studying the latter rather
than in perfecting the former; hut this is to maintain that the
material distribution of the asylum has some secret relation to
maladies of the mind ; it is passing from phrenological organology
to still greater absurdity,?its imitation in the divisions and subdivisions of quarters, as if there were intellectual madmen,
sentimental madmen, and instinctive madmen. Hence proceeds
the sophism that the treatment of insanity is capable of assistance
from classification. It is impossible; classification serves at
best but to render life more endurable to the prisoner, and that
is all; the psychopathist worthy of the name rarely finds himself
obliged to use as a therapeutic measure the wearisome and
painful expedient of four walls.
Thousands of plans have been produced in the search for the
x of this much desired classification ; all the asylums in Europe
have been visited and studied by a mass of travelling psycbopathists in search of its traces and therapeutic signification, amidst
all possible combinations of straight lines and curves; labour in
vain, no one has yet discovered the relation between bricks and
thought. Psychiatry has nothing to hope for from classification ;
as a matter of administration it is well to divide the patients into
boarders and paupers, turbulents, semi-turbulents, and idiots.
But the registers of the administration have no columns reserved
for sufferings real or imaginary (the physicians alone know and
are able to estimate these), and provided that order reigns, and
a physician visits twice a day the halls, warming-places (cliauffoirs),
or workshops, it is considered that all has been done that can be
to obtain the cure of the insane.
The time approaches when such exaggerations will be abandoned ; it will ultimately be understood that isolation ought not
to be confounded with imprisonment; true it is that we must separate the patient from the circumstances which have led to or have
witnessed the commencement of his madness, but it is clear as
the day that this advantage is obtained as easily by removing the
patient as by causing him to be shut up. In the free-air system,
the patient adapts himself to the change more easily, he accepts
the pretexts invented for it; the head of the family with whom
he is placed, treating him well, the salutary effect of isolation is
obtained without violence, and above all without risk of exciting
a patient who has need of repose.
* Des articles d' alienes en Espagne. Paris. 1859.
284' ON THE REFORM OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
The partisans of restraint have, at various times, attempted to
make it appear, that personal liberty is both hurtful to the
patients and fatal to those by whom they are surrounded, and that
the conditions which permit it involve so much peril and danger
of abuse, as to render it desirable that the only colony which
furnishes the example of it, should disappear as soon as possible.
Happily these insinuations have no foundation. This is apparent, for the least potent of the influences which are looked upon
as noxious, having been in action for many centuries, would have
destroyed root and branch the very Glieel which we find, on the
contrary, to be most flourishing at the present time. The system
is good, and what proves this is that, notwithstanding the inherent
defects of the colony, as originating from the spontaneous commiseration of ignorant peasants, who themselves are the object of
speculations of every kind, this method of receiving patients into
their houses for a trifling emolument has been advantageous to all
parties. Gheel, moreover, has borne up against certain ameliorations which have diminished the number of boarders there. In
consequence of a regulation imposed by the State, on the suggestion of a commission, the colony has been deprived of all lunatics
suspected, on whatever ground, to have suicidal, homicidal, or
dangerous propensities. All the insane coming within these categories have been sent into closed asylums.
The partisans of reform, on the contrary, hold that isolation
from the world and its activity is always mischievous, when the
excitement of active life does not exceed certain limits. If a restless patient be shut up, all salutary diversion is prevented, and he
is subjected to a fatal internal excitation. If he is restrained by
a strait-jacket, or bound fast, the unfortunate thus condemned
to immobility, undergoes the most atrocious torture ; and, finally,
shut up with his equals, the constant contact with madness (as
we shall subsequently show), adds fresh anguish to his position.
Under such circumstances, the phases of the disease most favourable to its cure cannot but pass by rapidly, and the affection
quickly degenerates into an irremediable chronic state. This we
believe to be one of the most active causes in encumbering asylums.
So far wre have stated the arguments of two extreme parties; it
is only just to mention the opinion of men who may be considered
the eclectics of psychiatry. They lay down as a principle, that
the application of any system whatever should depend on the
nature of the mental disorders to be treated ; thus it is necessary,
say they, that we make up our minds to restrain the furious, the
melancholies of perverse sentiments, idiots of criminal or scandalous tendency, &c. On the other hand, although they adopt
cellular confinement, they permit it only for a very short time ;
lastly, they agree that restraint, whether mechanical or moral,
debases the patient in his own eyes, and they think that recourse
ON THE REFORM OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 285
should rarely be had to it. The English system of non-restraint
probably owes its origin to a repugnance to violent means.
Although difficult in its application, it may be said to have
succeeded at Hanwell, where more than a thousand patients
dwell together in peace; the same system has been adopted at
Meerenberg, near Haarlem, in Holland, and is maintained with
advantage. At the same time we must not forget that nonrestraint is only possible under most paternal control. I would
say further that it must often permit evils which it cannot
prevent without greater inconvenience : the family is too great;
it is necessary in an asylum to consider the mass and to neglect
the individual; this is not the case in a private house which the
chief can direct without difficulty. Non-restraint in an asylum
requires also on the part of the servants and superintendents an
uncommon amount of knowledge respecting the characters and
actions which are peculiar to madness; it demands very great
prudence in order to foresee and avert catastrophes imminent
at every instant in such an organization. The government of
these asylums is for this reason always somewhat oppressive.
Finally, notwithstanding precautions, some victims have expiated
their temerity in the midst of lunatics afflicted with a perversion
of the will, and detained against their protestations in what they
call their prison ; indeed it will be allowed that there is a kind of
antithesis in giving liberty to a number of lunatics, forcibly
kept together within restricted limits.
It appears to us that non-restraint under the old system is the
negation of a physical evil, the name indicates this ; whilst in a
more advanced stage it becomes, as applied in a family, the affirmation of a moral well-being which permits madness to be dealt
with like any other malady. The English have made one more
step from the noil-restraint towards the free-air system, viz.,
the cottage system, in which the patient is placed in a villa or
cottage, dependent upon an asylum, and either isolated in a park
or standing in its own enclosure. If I wrere to define this
method, I should say that it is the free-air system, less the family
life and the medical organization of a colony. In England,
criticism has not been wanting when it was seen that this system
consisted in the isolation of a patient under one or more keepers,
with an accidental visit from a physician; but it is evident that
the reform has only one more step to make to establish itself
definitely in a country where the practical view of everything is
eminently developed.
II. Actuated by a very praiseworthy feeling, Dr Roller, one of
the most distinguished savants in Germany, senior physician to
the lllenau asylum, in the Grand Duchy of Baden, lately proposed a modification of the " free-air" system. In an article in
the Allgemeine Zeitsclirift fur Psychiatrie, and on the occasion of
286 ON THE REFORM OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
a bibliographic review of a memoir of Gheel, by M. Duval of
Paris, inserted in the Revue cles deux Moncles, be observes that
the existence of a free colony, dating several centuries back,
contains in itself the proof of its rationality. Thus it is clear
that a large number of lunatics, united in a village, have no need
of an enclosed asylum ; that the patients are more capable of
enjoying their liberty than many people think, and that they may
live sociably without danger. M. Roller asks if this example
ought to be lost. Why not apply it, he says, to the solution of
the problem which the increase of population imposes upon
public aid? According to M. Roller's, plan, the incurables
being placed in the neighbourhood of an asylum, would at least
allow of the admission of fresh cases; and these last would then
be able to receive the attendance necessary to their cure, during
the stage when it could be effected. In fact, there exists no
sadder evil (England and Germany complain) than the overcroivding of an hospital or asylum. In this case, the establishment of
colonies having become a necessity, let the asylum be central, let
it be the therapeutic centre, which every one will approve of; the
name matters nothing, and the method proposed is perfectly
acceptable.
If M. Roller had paid Gheel a visit, instead of contenting
himself with descriptions and reports, perhaps his opinion of the
value of this colony would have been different. Thus, this distinguished man thinks there is an opposition between ideas and
facts in the words "liberty" and "chains;" he thinks that the
assassination of innocent persons, and the pregnancy of female
lunatics, form a sad reverse to the medal, while they do not go
to prove the excellence of the principle of liberty for lunatics.
There are some men, the importance of whose opinion is too
considerable for us not to seek to rectify it when it is based
upon facts imperfectly appreciated; so we think that, on behalf of
free colonies and of Gheel, we ought to point out to M. Roller
that, if faults have been remarked by ourselves on the subject of
the colony, it was with the hope of putting an end to abuses
which attach to the best things, and not for the sake of criticising
an excellent principle. Can one suppose that circumstances so
rare that we might almost pass them over, are to taint a whole
population and annihilate the good which it does ? Gheel has
existed for generations ; would it be an exaggeration to suppose
that the colony has assembled several hundreds of thousands of
invalids ? Certainly not. Up to the present time the archives
report two crimes against the life of the individual; has crime
never been committed in a closed asylum ?
We are far from hiding the disgust with which the rape of a
female lunatic inspires us (whether committed with or without
her consent, is of no consequence?it is a crime), but, among four
ON THE REFORM OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 287
hundred or five hundred women, there are some hysterical patients
who manage to elude vigilance even in an enclosed asylum, mucli
more in a colony; and at Gheel, this crime is certainly very rare.
With regard to the irons, chains, and fetters, it is necessary to
know what they mean, and then many people would say that the
names are more terrible than the things themselves. The question is merely to find a means of preventing a sudden start on the
part of restless idiots or maniacs, who might lose themselves in
the fields ; besides, we are thus rid of the necessity of imprisoning
patients; a fetter consists of a small chain, uniting two kinds of
bracelets made of iron plates covered with leather; it is attached
to the lower part of the leg. We have frequently questioned
cured patients who, when at Gheel, had worn these chains, and
they have all assured us that it is far better to have one's movements cramped in the fields than to wear a strait-waistcoat in a
cell. Besides, when we are willing to pay a keeper sufficiently
well to indemnify him for his loss of time, lie will take charge of
the restless patient, and the chains will disappear.
As to escapes, they are less frequent at Gheel than from enclosed asylums ; statistics prove this.
III. There is scarcely any need to insist upon an inspection of
the financial side of the question at issue between the asylum
conservatives and the partisans of reform, for there is a law of
economy in psychology which says : " There is no treatment more
exjjensive than that which does not cure!'
The public, like government, look for establishments which
charge at the lowest possible rate for the keep of lunatics. True,
little is paid ; but the patient most frequently remains there all
his life; where then is the economy ? We have calculated, for
instance, that for fifty-one years' residence in an asylum an administration had paid more than 14,000 francs for a single lunatic.
Notwithstanding the low charge, the sum is considerable; and if we
were to inquire into what the average would be for three hundred
or four hundred lunatics, the sum would be more considerable still.
The principal question with regard to funds has then for its
basis the medical treatment and its ability to perform a cure. Give
what is requisite to make treatment useful; recompense suitably
the men who are to devote themselves to the cause of humanity;
organize a staff sufficient for a certain number of patients ; and
you will be in a position at the end of the year to judge, by profit
and loss, of the service rendered. Of course, as head of this corps,
a man must be chosen whose reputation is established ; but you
must surround him again with young assistants in order that he
may leave after him a school; this man, eminent in science, must
of necessity, as he grows old, slacken his work; and when he is
lost, it would be a disaster to science and the country that there
should be no one fit to take his place.
288 ON THE REFORM OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
We know that tlie partisans of the old system ask for grand
buildings : but at what cost ? Millions are fixed in bricks and
mortar. If the establishment prospers, it must be enlarged?
here are new difficulties. A German alienist physician lately proposed to construct an asylum, tbe divisions of which separated in
the country should form, so to speak, stations of disease, through
which a patient would successively have to pass before reaching
the end of his troubles.
Indeed, the building of palaces " sorrowfully magnificent,"
as the Lancet says, has already cost many millions in Europe.
Next comes the classification, which requires a repetition of
courts, galleries, doors, windows, &c. Each of these objects has
given rise to the writing of big volumes for their better construction, in order to effectually shut in the patients ; what ingenuity
has it not cost to defy mischief, ennui, and the love of liberty !
We may ask ourselves now what humanity has derived from all
this capital ? Has the cost of all these buildings been repaid by
cures, or rather are these palaces machines for perpetuating folly ?
Clearly, the reform of these abuses would be doubly useful; it
would supply hands for work and for produce; in a colony there
is little need of keepers, scarcely any of documents, and none
whatever of hangers-on; everything should combine without
interruption for the care and comfort of the patient; the patient
himself even finds employment; every kind of work is open to
him, and he repays society by lessening in this way the expense
to which he puts it. An infirmary, containing chiefly bathing
rooms, rooms devoted to surgery and medicine, and a chapel, and
small offices for the use of a whole population, would not probably
equal the cost of an ordinary asylym.
But when an asylum has its complement of patients, and a new
case arrives, what a fix the managers are in! They are as much
embarrassed by this new arrival as if there were no asylum at all.
The case is not so in a colony : a colony has no boundaries ; it
can take in all that offers. When there arrives in a family, a
stranger whom they wish to find room for, they inconvenience
themselves a little, until a suitable lodging can be got ready.
Gheel might take in, without great extra expense, twice its present population.
The expenditure of the principal asylums in Europe has been
estimated at from three to five thousand francs a head for each
inmate. From this point of view, a colony numbering a thousand
lunatics would lead to a saving of 200,000 francs a year, if a
village were used in which each cottage should receive from three
to four patients, without reckoning the keeper's family. The real
advantage which the asylums have over the colonies consists in
the possibility of organizing the work in the former; there are
all the necessary means for compelling each one to work. All
ON THE REFORM OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 289
kinds of things are made there; there are trades of all kinds in
long workshops, and the various duties of the house are shared
by the patients. Now this work has two faults in a therapeutic
point of view?first, it is compulsory, and secondly, it is usually not
done in the open air. If the work is productive to the rulers of the
asylum, the lunatic receives but a small share of the benefit. Hence,
right or wrong, the origin of complaints and recriminations prejudicial to every one ; murder has been known to follow these quarrels.
In a colony, the labour is voluntary, and consequently beneficial.
They work who choose, and on conditions regulated by their
own fancy. The keeper, his wife, or his children, can induce
patients to work better than an overseer, charged with the
execution of an unpleasant discipline. Generally, the price of
the day's work is higher in places situated in towns; the manager
in that case seeks to re-establish the balance according to the
work, which is also paid in proportion.
With regard to the rich, they accept work with much difficulty,
and hence comes a life of inaction, which does them much harm.
Shut up in an asylum, they cost less than if they were in a colony
or looked after by a family, but their chance of recovery is also less.
Nothing is more sad or more pernicious than to deprive people accustomed to all kinds of diversions, of that liberty which has formed
the chief element of their lives. In a colony, the relations and
even the distances of social life are preserved. The level of the
disease does not reach education or fortune, and as we never lose
the innate feeling of ourselves, the moral abasement is not remarked
by the inmates. Of this, Gheel presents numerous examples.
However, it is a pity that for persons possessed of a certain
competence, and for those who are rich, no one has yet thought
seriously of applying the principle of association to found an
establishment destined for the cure of sickness in general. How
many people, for different reasons, are unable to get themselves
suitably treated at home ; often they are at a distance from the
great centres of population where all kinds of help are abundant;
or perhaps economy compels them to apply to men who have not
acquired special knowledge, &c. The principle of association
which has already solved so many difficulties, steps in here
perfectly to answer a general want. A society might offer at a
moderate charge all the possible conditions of recovery. Belgium
can, from its position, concentrate in a few hours the most
eminent science of the countries of France, England, and Germany.
Let us suppose that every month general consultations were held;
would there be a man rich enough to procure himself such a
means of study, discussion, and cure ? With regard to insanity,
there is no reason why it should not be mingled with other
ailments without detection. Three requisites are suggested :?
First, country life in a thinly populated district; second, town
290 ON THE REFORM OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
life near Brussels; third, life at the seaside, of which the pure
and bracing air is so great a help. We are convinced that lunatics
would find in such an association a means of escaping public
notice, and of recovering more speedily than in the most handsome asylum that could ever be designed.
IY. A German alienist physician believed himself called upon
lately to set himself up as champion of the asylums which imprison their inmates. In order probably to make himself agreeable to the crowd of speculators we have spoken of, he thought
it his duty to set to work to demand the suppression or abolition
of Gheel; and why ? He knows scarcely anything of the subject,
and this want of knowledge is evident in the long article he has
edited, and which the Zeitschrift fur Psychiatrie has been pleased
to accept. The best argument he can summon is that Gheel
ought to be a practical criticism upon asylums, such as that of
which he is the head. Now there would be a very simple plan
of clenching the debate upon this point. Let a jury of medical
men, lawyers, and philosophers, all impartial men, be empanelled.
Let them examine the patients of any asylum named, and compare an even number of those furnished by Gheel under the most
unfavourable conditions. The jury should decide upon the
greatest likelihood of recovery, the good appearance, the air of
contentment, and the sum of happiness of each of these patients.
1 would wager all I am worth upon Gheel, and for this reason :
we know that nervous irritation or excitement among lunatics
is principally owing to their often exquisite sensibility, and their
almost invariably exaggerated impressionability. Now, by forcing
these patients to live together in a kind of inn or cloister, you
expose their suffering and delicate natures to innumerable shocks,
to insupportable miseries of association, and perpetual dislikes.
" I am then truly mad, to be condemned to live with such people as
these," cried a despairing monomaniac. To prove what wre say,
go into any lunatics' sitting-room, and you will be struck with the
sight of a fearful assembly of people whose malady consists in
their repeatedly recognising themselves to be everywhere and
always among maniacs. These men and these women, meeting
again and again in different rooms, are dying of ennui; the room
in which they pass the night does not belong to them; and this
sitting-room, this yard, this garden surrounded by walls, form a
kind of cage which they can only leave in an evening to regain
their real abode, at least that abode where they experience only
their own ennui.
Well! we maintain that their aspect will be the evidence of
what they suffer in their minds.
Examine now this other lunatic, who has the enjoyment of
free air and the possession of his own room, his own books,
ON THE REFORM OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 291
liis own tools, Lis own flowers, his own stores, &c., his home
is decorated after his own fashion; there are often inscriptions
or drawings on the wall which disappear only through the instrumentality of the half-yearly whitewashing. This man is
busy in perfecting his dreams: nothing opposes him. He has
fields, woods, or extensive heaths at his command; he angles in
the rivers or canals; he spreads nets for the birds ; in fact, he
does with his time just what he pleases. He is most frequently
only required to reach the keeper's house by the hours of meals;
and if he forgets them, the housekeeper will have his share saved
by the common fire. There is another man who all day long
traces in the sand of the street the history of his thoughts; they
are hieroglyphics of which he alone holds the key. Another finds
in walking some mitigation of his nervousness; he is always
busy, and returns happy to his dwelling. A score of others go
to work with the keeper and his children?the latter are their
brothers, their friends; they share the labour of the weakest.
We ask whether, sanitary treatment being the same, Gheel
would not carry off the prize? We are certain of it, because, of
all human beings, lunatics are those who betray most irresistibly
the emotions they undergo.
Among the most determined anti-reformists, we find Dr.
Stevens, the resident medical superintendent of St. Luke's
Hospital, London. As far as we can recollect, Dr Stevens,
before his visit to Gheel, appeared little prepossessed in favour
of colonies, and criticised even the reports made concerning Gheel
by a very distinguished English physician. In a paper (which
we regret wTe are not personally acquainted with), inserted in the
Asylum Journal, and which is quoted by the "Allgemeine
Zeitschrift," Dr Stevens asserts that my honourable successor,
Dr Bulckens, told him, " that he did not possess any means of
controlling the exorcisms practised in the chapel of St. Dymphna
that if it was in his power to put a stop to them, he should not
think it prudent to do so, because what constitutes the colony is
not medical science, but faith in St. Dymphna; and that if the
saint disappeared, or was neglected, Gheel would have no more
cause to exist."
Nothing would so much confirm Dr Stevens's conclusions as an
assent to them by the Medical Inspector of Gheel, the very man
whose business is the amelioration of the colony, and who performs his duty with the greatest zeal. Unfortunately, however,
Dr Bulckens affirms, and we have no difficulty in believing him,
that he said nothing of the kind. Dr Stevens, doubtless from
want of familiarity with the French language, has evidently misunderstood what was said to him, and even what he saw. At
Gheel no one is exorcised; nothing of the kind has taken place for
292 ON THE REFORM OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
probably a century. Dr Stevens must have confounded exorcism
-with the " nine days of devotion" (neuvaine), which is still,
though rarely, held in one of the chapels.
Ought not a psychopathist, with the facts before him, to give
some better account of what has been termed blind faith and
superstition in a saint??and can one think that it is a "relic of
barbarism" at Gheel to take good care of the infirm ? Do the
premises and consequences bear a logical relation to one another ?
In our opinion, St. Dymphna bears a character entirely different
from other saints who by right are of an intolerant nature. The
" Sainte Campinaire" is simply charitable ; she loves and protects
all the wretched who come for shelter to her spiritual domain.
Ego sum charitas is her motto : hence Jews, Turks, Catholics, or
Protestants of all denominations, find a place in the hearts of the
Gheelites, her priests. Now-a-days, when everything is bartered
for gold, this relic of barbarism is truly extraordinary. To come
to the point; the story of St. Dymphna, moral in its essence,
handed down from generation to generation,?what might be its
origin ? There exists no document or legend dating from the
time at which she must have lived. Might not the oral tradition
of a fact react upon the feeling of a population removed far
from any centre of criticism ? The idea of helping the unhappy
gathered from all sides, has become transformed into the holy
image of a young girl resisting the Passions; she is represented in the act of appealing to Heaven on behalf of the
wretches who surround her : there is nothing in that to irritate an
alienist physician. Neither do we think that Dr Stevens has
any right to suppose that we believe in the mystic virtue of the
creed, while he is ready enough to recognise a christian virtue,
Charity, hidden beneath the story of the daughter of an Irish king,
an obscure individual in a distant era, who attempted the honour
of his child.
Now, in what respect can this legend prejudice medical treatment? It is clear that the saint has deserved well of human
nature; upon this claim, and upon the ground of respect for conviction, ought the medical man at Gheel to affect contempt for
those who wish to have recourse to this reaction of mind over
matter ? The Saint might be abolished: but what have we to
replace her? Psychiatry is quite a new science, and has had to
pass through certain stages of development; incarceration, and
all the violence undergone by lunatics form one of its most cruel
stages, from which we have just escaped. At present we confine
ourselves to the study of the physical man; psychical man is not
yet the order of the day, and the proof is that in no University of
the State, nor even in any book, is the study of the morbid wanderings of the mind inscribed on the programme of the course.
This study, so intimately connected with lesions of the nervous
ON THE REFORM OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 293
centres, with the troubles of general sensibility, and with nervous
diseases, is left to dreamers and psychologists, who, in their
character of medical men, are called in England mad doctors, and
in Germany zotten doctoren. No; St. Dymphna is not yet
superfluous.
Following an article by Dr U. Jessen, in which all the arguments against Gheel are crowned by the idea that this colony is
a disgusting (abschrecken) example of the free-air treatment, we
find that Dr Bucknill, relying upon the observations of Dr.
Stevens, compares Gheel to the small English asylums, which he
calls with reason, " squalid asylums." Apparently the opponents
of our opinion have come to hard words: we will not follow
them over this ground, but we will ask Dr Bucknill in what
respect the colony can be compared to private houses, where
lunatics are maltreated in the grossest manner, while at Gheel what
is admired is the devotion and disinterestedness of the keepers.
The squalid asylums of England, the expenses of which are
scarcely covered by a few rare patients, have this inconvenience,
that persons might be detained there unlawfully: at Gheel, the
lunatic once cured, there is no power on earth capable of making
him stay against his will, and if he wished to live there, the
medical officers of the establishment would not allow it. Let Dr.
Bucknill come and study Gheel, and we are sure he will no longer
say (according to Dr Jessen's article), that "to create a Gheel is
the dream of persons of inexperience, or of weak-minded men."
When colonies are established everywhere, the public will-no
longer be able to suspect medical men (as has happened), even
those whose reputation is best established, of making secret
arrangements with managers of private asylums to detain in them,
criminally, persons of sound mind.
It appears (still following Dr Jessen, of Hornheim, near Kiel)
that Dr Brown, inspector of lunatic asylums in Scotland, has
made certain observations unfavourable to colonies. As Dr.
Jessen reproduces these objections, we will answer the first one,
to wit, that the financial administration of a village, subject to
feudal rights, would prevent the establishment of a colony, by
observing that Government in this country can buy up these
feudal rights without injuring any one's interest, but on the contrary to the advancement of every one's interest, if a colony is
deemed useful. As to the second objection, tliat after all the
expenses incurred for the keep and clothing of the patients, as in
asylums, there would be no profit, we will reply, that this is a
great mistake; for admitting even that the expenditure was the
same (which is not the case, as we have shown), there would
remain a double number of cures to the credit of free air, conjoined with the rejection of useless discomforts for the incurables.
?NO. XIX.?NEW SERIES. X
294 A MEDICAL PSYCHOLOGIST OF
In conclusion, let us remark that all the arguments against free
colonies depend upon our interests or our prejudices. The principle which gives rise to the supposition of their adversaries, that
they cannot exist, is grounded upon a sophism, namely, that there
are no doctors, managers, or keepers, honest and disinterested
enough to do good for its own sake. When people are reduced
to such objections, they must he indeed near defeat.
In France, several medical men admit the possibility of establishing colonies there. Nevertheless, a very distinguished savant
has raised as an objection that the blackcoats in a village (taken
as a sign of depravity), would be an objection to trusting lunatic
females with isolated families : but if there are seven millions
of hectares of uncultivated land, and a few hundreds are taken
for the colony, it would be like choosing the site of a large
establishment: the interest of each family would be the pledge of
its morality. Supposing even that the Eoman or Latin race
were depraved (as is wrongfully asserted), there are in the North
and East .of France populations of Germanic stock who would
suit perfectly.
In Germany and England, the opposition to lunatic colonies is
difficult to understand, for they are merely, as in Belgium, the
reflection of German thought and Anglo-Saxon common sense.
I conclude by repeating my words before the Society of
Medical Science of Brussels, at the convocation of 1st February,
1856:?"I acknowledge, with pain, that the name of Gheel is
not appreciated as it deserves to be. But why so ? In the first
place, you know that the word ? lunatic has in it something repulsive; but if it is unfortunate to be insane, it is still more unfortunate, nay it is even dishonourable, according to the notions of
the present time, to be poor. It is, indeed, the unibn of the two
words, lunacy and poverty, that causes so many to despise Gheel,
whereas, in my estimation, from them arises its glory. Yes, gentlemen, I am convinced that Gheel fulfils a high philanthropic
duty, and that its name will become still more illustrious in the
records of humanity."
I spoke truly, for since then Gheel has given its name and
that of the country to a system which, on account of its
humanity, is called " The Belgian System."
