Popular Physiology? The Nervous System
=======================================

Art. VII.-
Mr. George Henry Lewes is an enthusiastic naturalist and
physiologist, and one of the most brilliant writers of the day on
scientific subjects. He has so happy a gift with the pen that he
charms you even when what he advances is directed in the teeth
of your most settled convictions. He treads without compunc-
tion on your tenderest opinions, and yet compels you to simper
and smile the while. In the last of Mr. Levves's fully published
works, he, for example, as well in the conception as in the execu-
tion of the book, dashes right through old-standing ideas both
of the method and manner of popular instruction. Still the book
is so delightful to read, so full of admirably told information, that
we can heartily sympathize with that great pleasure with which
it has been received on all hands, and we have little doubt
that it will long hold its own as the most popular of popular
works on physiology.
" No scientific subject can be so important to man as that of his own
life," wrote our author in the announcement which heralded his work ;
" no knowledge can be so incessantly appealed to by the incidents of
every day, as the knowledge of the processes by wlncli he lives and acts.
At every moment he is in danger of disobeying laws which, when
disobeyed, may bring years of suffering, decline of powers, premature
decay. Sanitary reformers preach in vain, because they preach to a
public which does not understand the laws of life?laws as rigorous as
those of gravitation or motion. Even the sad experience of others
yields us no lessons, unless we understand the principles involved. If
one man is seen to suffer from vitiated air, another is seen to endure it
without apparent harm ; a third concludes that ' it is all chance,' and
trusts to that chance; had he understood the principle involved, he
would not have been left to chance?his first lesson in swimming
would not have been a shipwreck."
This is an old and familiar story, but not the less true because
familiar. Well did Phineas Fletcher sing in his Purple Island,
or the Isle of Man, and well might Mr. Lewes sing after him :?
* The Physiology of Common Life : By George Henry Lewes. 2 vols. Black-
wood and Sons, 1860. Vol. II., The Nervous System.
POPULAR PHYSIOLOGY.?THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 395
" Hark then, ah, hark ! yon gentle shepherd cried ;
An isle I fain would sing, an island fair,
A place too seldom vievv'd, yet still in view ;
Near as ourselves, yet farthest from our care;
Which we by leaving find, by seeking lost;
A foreign home, a strange, tho' native coast;
Most obvious to all, yet most unknown to most.
" Coeval with the world in her nativity,
Which tho' it now hath pass'd thro' many ages,
And still retain'd a natural proclivity
To ruin, compassed with a thousand rages
Of foemen's spite, which still this island tosses,
Yet ever grows most prosp'rous by her crosses,
By with'ring springing fresh, and rich by often losses.
"Vain men, too fondly wise, who plough the seas,
With dang'rous pains another earth to find;
Adding new worlds to th' old, and scorning ease,
The earth's vast limits daily more unbind!
The aged world, though now it falling shows,
And hastes to set, yet still in dying grows :
Whole lives are spent to win what one death's hour must lose.
# * * * *
" Yet this fair isle, seated so nearly near,
That from our sides, nor place, nor time, may sever;
Though to yourselves yourselves are not more dear,
Yet with strange carelessness you travel never:
Thus while yourselves and native home forgetting,
You search for distant worlds, with needless sweating.
You never find yourselves; so lose ye more by getting."*
No doubt if the general public were possessed of a better
knowledge of the laws of life, they might listen with more respect
to the teaching of sanitary reformers. No doubt the numerous and
distinguished physicians and surgeons were right, who in 1853
presented an opinion to the Government, respecting tuition in
common schools, which terminated thus:?"We are therefore of
opinion that it would greatly tend to prevent sickness, and to
promote soundness of body and mind, were the elements of
physiology, in its application to the preservation of health, made
a part of general education ; and we are convinced that such
instruction may be rendered most interesting to the young, and
may be communicated to them with the utmost facility and pro-
priety in the ordinary schools by properly instructed schoolmasters."
We shall not question this conclusion, but it has always appeared
to us to hold a very similar position to the dogma that in order
* Canto i.
396 POPULAR" PHYSIOLOGY.?THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
to know practical religion it is necessary first to be indoctrinated
in theology, properly so called. Sanitary science is, indeed, a
science which has its own data to build upon. For the expla-
nation of these, both physiological and physical science must be
had recourse to. The certainty of the explanation in the majority
of instances by no means corresponds with the certainty of the
data to be explained. Assuredly, therefore, our teaching should
invariably begin with what is most certain. Now the physiology
actually available in the teaching of sound sanitary rules is
certainly not very extensive, and it always and invariably finds a
legitimate place in the teaching of those rules. To start, there-
fore, from physiology to teach sanitary science, is to endeavour
needlessly to educe practical certainties from speculative un-
certainties ; and to dignify the physiological items which may
be made use of for the explanation, confirmation, and right
appreciation of sanitary facts and rules, whether applicable to
the individual or communities, with the term physiology, is a
misnomer.
We have little doubt that to the profuse and unguarded use of
the phrase physiology to designate the items of that science, which
under the guise of elementary and rudimentary treatises have too
often found their way into our school-rooms and libraries, we are
indebted in no small degree for those pseudo-scientific follies which
have abounded of late. The innocent imbibers of these crude
treatises are but too often puffed up with the vain imagination
that they have laid a solid foundation of physiological information,
and are prepared to dogmatize upon any question which may
arise in reference to man, mental or physical. They have been
furnished with sundry stray tools, it matters not whether good or
bad, and they have not been taught how to use those tools,
but have been led to believe that because they have them in pos-
session, therefore they are qualified to use them. This is the
great vice of the popular teaching of the present day on almost all
scientific subjects.
But sanitary science being, as we assert, a science resting upon
specific data, it is a curious fact that while the importance of making
its principles a portion of the education of the people at large is
being recognised, yet these principles are only taught incidentally,
so to speak, to the very men from whom the public would chiefly
have to learn, that is to say, medical men. With one or two
exceptions, sanitary science is not taught in any of the medical
schools of this country. Moreover, there is not a complete text-
book, or book of any kind, on the subject in the English language*
If we do not err the only specific lectureships on sanitary science
* Dr. Pickford, of Brighton, published the first part of a work on Hygiene in
1858, but the work, so far as we are aware, has not been completed.
POPULAR PHYSIOLOGY.?THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 397
in London are in tlie medical schools of the St. Thomas s
Hospital and of Grosvenor-street. But the attendance upon
the lectures delivered upon this subject is optional to the students.
We would commend ,this strange anomaly in our tuition of
medicine to the members of the National Association for the
Promotion of Social Science. We hold that any attempt to teach
effectively sanitary science to the people will prove abortive,
until medical men, who must, in the majority of instances, be the
chief authorities referred to in doubtful questions, be themselves
disciplined in the science as a science.
But in addition to the importance attached to the popular
teaching of physiology as a means of promoting a knowledge of
sanitary science among the people, it is frequently urged that the
former would contribute, even in common schools, to a better
intellectual training. We doubt this. Dr. Whewell has said that?
" No ideas are suited to become the elements of elementary educa-
tion, till they have not only become perfectly distinct and fixed in the
minds of the leading cultivators of the science to which they belong ;
but till they have been so for some considerable period. The entire
clearness and steadiness of view which is essential to sound science,
must have time to extend itself to a wide circle of disciples. The
views are principles which are detected by the most profound and
acute philosophers ; are soon appropriated by all the most intelligent
and active minds of their own and of the following generations ; and
when this has taken place (and not till then), it is right, by a proper
constitution of our liberal education, to extend a general knowledge of
such principles to all cultivated persons. And it follows, from this
view of the matter, that we are by no means in haste to adopt, into
our course of education, all new discoveries as soon as they are made.
They require some tim^, in order to settle into their proper place and
position in men's minds, and to show themselves under their true
aspects ; and till this is done, we confuse and disturb, rather than
enlighten and unfold, the ideas of learners, by introducing the dis-
coveries into our elementary instruction."*
Agreeing entirely with Dr. Whewell in these opinions, it will
readily be understood that we cannot avoid questioning the bene-
ficial effects of Mr. Lewes's work in an educational point of view,
looking upon that work in the light indicated by himself. He
tells us that its object " differs from all other works on popular
science in its attempt to meet the wants of the student, while
meeting those of the general reader, who is supposed to be wholly
unacquainted with anatomy and physiology." This in the pre-
face. Elsewhere he writes:?"Assuming the position of a
lecturer addressing a miscellaneous audience, he will imagine
that beside the Medical Student there sits an intelligent Artisan,
* Novum Organon Renovatum, p. 178.
898 POPULAR PHYSIOLOGY.?THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.*
beside the Man of Letters sits the Mother of a family ; and he will
endeavour to be intelligible and interesting to all, while repro-
ducing the latest discoveries of European investigators, and the
results of original research." Then, again, Mr. Lewes writes, in
the preface, of the manner of executing the work :?
" In pursuance of this object I have been forced to depart very widely
from the practice of other popular writers, who consider themselves bound
to act as' middle-men' between scientific authorities and the public, and
to expound facts and doctrines as they find them. I could not adopt this
easy and convenient plan. I could not bring myself to publish, on the
authority of respected names, statements which I knew to be false, and
opinions which I believed to be erroneous. After having laboured
earnestly to get at the truth, it would have been disloyal to contribute
in any way to the spread of what I believed to be error. All that I felt
bound to do, was to state impartially the facts and opinions current
among physiologists ; and, when those opinions seemed inadmissible, to
state the reasons for their rejection. There is therefore a great deal of
criticism, and much original matter in this work."
Now the portion of Mr. Lewes's work which most concerns us is
that devoted to the Nervous System, and it is in this portion that
is found, as he correctly observes, " the greatest amount of dis-
sent from correct opinions and it is there that the reader will
have the " greatest difficulty in agreeing with him." So great is
this difficulty on our own part, that we find our objections and
our doubts running tolerably evenly side by side with his peculiar
conclusions, and to do justice to either one or the other it would
be requisite to follow Mr. Lewes's opinions seriatim. This, how-
ever, we need not do, as a few hints will suffice for every useful
purpose.
And first of the nerves : are they conductors only ? and what
do they conduct ? Mr. Lewes writes :?-
" Nerves are very generally likened to telegraphic wires, carrying
messages to and from the centres ; or to the conducting wires of a
galvanic battery. But except as a loose and superficial analogy, this is
not acceptable ; and it is based on a misconception so important, that
we must pause a moment to consider it. The misconception is, that
the centres produce a force which the nerves, as passive conductors,
transmit. The analogy is to the plates of a battery producing the
electricity, which the wires conduct. I think there is ample and deci-
sive evidence to show that the nerves have a force of their own, the
property of their tissue, which is far from being the product of nerve-
centres, and is wholly unlike that produced by the centres."
(Vol. ii., p. 14.)
Further, Mr. Lewes remarks:?
" When the conducting wire is separated from the battery, it loses
at once all galvanic power; it is a bit of wire, and it is nothing more.
All its galvanism came from the battery ; and this it could only con-
POPULAR PHYSIOLOGY.?THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 399
duct, not create. But the nerve, when separated from its centre, still
retains its force ; any irritation of such a nerve will excite that force,
just as the stimulus from its centre would excite it. The battery is
removed, and lo ! the wire is found to be galvanic." (p. 18.)
Now these being Mr. Lewes's notions of galvanic action in a
" conducting wire," his previous remarks admit of some justifica-
tion. But the said notions being by no means such as we have
been accustomed to hold (following Faraday) respecting the trans-
mission of galvanic force, and such as may be presupposed to be
held, and which so far as we know are held, by our leading phy-
siologists, Mr. Lewes's observations do not apply to their opinions,
when they may analogically express the action of a nerve to that
of a so-called " conducting wire." So that when Mr. Lewes
assumes that nerves have a force of their own, which he proposes
to call Neurility (" in the sense of excitability, but without the
misleading suggestions of that word"); and further explains that
" Neurility simply means the property which the nerve-fibre has,
when stimulated, of exciting contraction in a muscle, secretion in
a gland, and sensation in a ganglionic centre we do not see what
we gain either by the new name, or the definition. It seems to us,
that both the one and the other leave the facts which show the
mode of action of nerves, and the expressions which have been
made use of to convey a notion of that mode, just where Mr.
Lewes found them, neither adding to the one, nor making appa-
rent the unfitness of the other.
Mr. Lewes holds that " Sensibility is the property inherent in
ganglionic tissue." Subsequently he writes : " Sensibility is as-
cribed to the ganglionic substance of the brain, or some portion
of the brain, and denied to other masses of ganglionic substance,
absolutely identical in all the fundamental characters. Neverthe-
less, no physiologist, to my knowledge, has been aware of this
violation of a first principle."?(p. 22). Again: " It is simple
logic, therefore, to conclude that there being one common tissue,
there must be one common property, in brain, medulla, and chord,
however various the functions, or uses, to which the property may
in each case be applied. Experiment clearly verifies what logic
thus deductively concludes?namely, that the spinal chord is in all
animals a seat of sensibility; and in some animals the all impor-
tant seat."?(p. 23). It is evident that Mr. Lewes is here using the
term sensibility in a sense very different from most physiologists.
Thus Miiller says of sensibility, " It is only one among several
functions of the nervous system. It would be an abuse of words
to extend this denomination to functions unaccompanied by per-
ception." Now, as this fact of perception is the determining ele-
ment in the chief common, and the more persistently scientific'
use of the word, and has governed the application of the word even
400 POPULAR PHYSIOLOGY.?THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
in its widest metaphorical sense, of what scientific utility can be
the following generalization ? " Sensibility is the property of
ganglionic substance, and however various the uses or functions
which different centres may serve?those of Respiration being very
different from those of facial Expression, and these again from
those of Perception, and so on?the same fundamental character
is found in all "?(p. 24). Thus, then, Mr. Lewes would apply to
the peculiar capacity of action possessed by ganglionic substance
generally a term which it is customary to apply, and which can
be definitely restricted to a definite mode of action of that sub-
stance in certain nervous centres. We cannot conceive that such
an application of a term can add any clearness to our apprehension
of the phenomena, the "fundamental characters" of which are
sought to be generalized; neither can we conceive how a term,
which in its most legitimate sense implies perception, can, without
confusion, be applied scientifically to phenomena which are not
supposed under any circumstances to be accompanied by perception.
Once more ; Mr. Lewes tells us that:?
" One of the principal conclusions to which fact and argument will
direct us in these pages will be, that the brain is only one organ of the
mind, and not by any means the exclusive centre of Consciousness
(p. 4) . . . It will be understood that by the word Mind, we
do not designate the intellectual operations only. If the term were so
restricted, there would be little objection to our calling the brain the
organ of the mind. But the word Mind has a broader and deeper
significance ; it includes all sensation, all volition, and all thought ; it
means the whole psychical life, and this psychical life has no one special
centre any more than the physical life has one special centre;
it belongs to the whole, and animates the whole. The brain is a
part of this whole, a noble part, and its functions are noble ; but
it is only the organ of special mental functions, as the liver and the
lungs are organs of special bodily functions. It is a centre, a great
centre, but not the centre. It is not the exclusive sensorium. Its
absence does not imply the absence of all consciousness, as I shall prove
by experiment. It cannot, therefore, be considered as the organ, but
only as one organ of the mind." (p. 5.)
Here then, as in the ease of the word sensibility, Mind and
Consciousness are used in a sense very different to that in which
they are commonly used. They are made to include phenomena
usually expressed by different terms.
Let us briefly examine an illustration of the application of
this doctrine and that of sensibility. We take it from the section
on the evidence against the sensibility of the spinal chord. Mr.
Lewes admits :?
"That injux*y to the spinal chord wholly or partially destroys the
power of obeying the Brain by voluntaiy movement, and the power of
transmitting sensory impressions to the Brain, in the parts leloio the
POPULAR PHYSIOLOGY.?THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 401
seat of injury; while in those above the seat of injury, sensation and
voluntary motion remain.
" Such is the conclusion rigorously deduced from numerous facts.
I accept it, without reserve. But I shall now prove that it does not in
the least affect the question under discussion, does not throw a shadow
of doubt on the sensational and volitional character of the spinal chord.
That it should ever have been thought to do so admits of easy explana-
tion. Let us disclose the fallacy it involves.
" On the supposition that the whole cerebro-spinal axis is everywhere
the seat of sensibility, it has already been shown that division of this
axis would create two independent centres. In this case we have no
right to suppose that the cerebral segment will be affected by impres-
sions made on the spinal segment; nor, conversely, that impressions
made on the cerebral segment will affect the spinal segment. The
anterior limbs will obey the brain, because they are in organic relation
with it; but the posterior limbs cannot obey the brain alter they have
ceased to be in organic relation with it. This has been fully explained
(p. 249 et seq.)
"Now, when a man has a diseased spinal chord, the seat of injury
causes, for the time at least, a division of the cerebro-spinal axis into
two independent centres. For all purposes of sensation and volition it
is the same as if he were cut in half; his nervous mechanism is cut in
half. How, then, can any cerebral volition be obeyed by his legs ; how
can any impression on his legs be felt by his cerebrum ? As well might
we expect the man whose arm has been amputated, to feel the incisions
of the scalpel, when that limb is conveyed to the dissecting-table, as to
feel in his brain impressions made upon parts wholly divorced from
organic connexion with the brain.
" But, it may be objected, this is the very point urged. The man
himself does not feel the impressions on his limbs when his spine has
been injured; he is as insensible to them as to the dissection of his
amputated arm. Very true. He does not feel it. But if the ampu-
tated arm were to strike the anatomist who began its dissection, if its
fingers were to grasp the scalpel, and push it away, or with the thumb
to rub oft' the acid irritating one of the fingers, I do not see how we
could refuse to admit that the arm felt although the man did not.
And this is the case with the extremities of a man whose spine is injured.
Tliey manifest every indication of sensibility. In the frog they mani-
fest unmistakable volition. It is true that the man himself, when in-
terrogated, declares that he feels nothing; the cerebral segment has
attached to it organs of speech and expressive features, by which its
sensations can be communicated to others ; whereas the spinal segment
has no such means of communicating its sensations ; but those which
it has, it employs. You can ask the cerebral segment a question, which
can be heard, understood, and answered; this is not the case with the
spinal segment; yet if you test its sensibility, the result is unequivocal.
You cannot ask an animal whether it feels, but you can test its sensi-
bility, and that test suffices."
Now, even admitting the correctness of Mr. Lewes's con-
402 POPULAR PHYSIOLOGY.?THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
elusions from his experiments on the effects of section of the
spinal chord of the frog, referred to in the preceding paragraphs,
what advantage can arise from applying, in a scientific sense,
terms of which we can only know and apprehend the significa-
tion as referring to the man in his entirety, to circumstances in
which the terms must hear an entirely different signification ?
Must not such a course inevitably lead to confusion, by widening
illimitably, and, indeed, rendering incongruous, the meaning of
words which at the present time have tolerably well-defined com-
mon acceptations which can be, and are usually, restrained within
strictly scientific bounds ?
There are certain observations of Mr. Mansel's on " an unac-
knowledged anthropomorphism" that pervades our speculations on
consciousness which it may not be inutile to quote here. Mr.
Lewes uses consciousness as an equivalent term to sensibility,
and we have seen how greatly he extends t'ie meaning of the
latter word. The following remarks of Mr. Mansel, on a portion
of Professor Ferrier's theory of Knowing and Being, we think
clearly indicate the inadvisability of such an extension of the sig-
nification of the word consciousness as Mr. Lewes proposes,
and points out the source of much error in the use of that
word. Mr. Mansel writes:?
" Let us try Professor Ferrier's theory in three special instances,
selecting that portion of his axiom, [' Along with whatever any intelli-
gence knows, it must, as the ground or condition of its knowledge,
have some cognizance of itself:'] which, as limited to human conscious-
ness, is unquestionably true.
" 1. Whatever state of consciousness I experience, I must know that
state as mine.
!< 2. Whatever state of consciousness an angel experiences, he must
know that state as his (the angel's).
" 3. Whatever state of consciousness an oyster experiences, he must
know that state as his (the oyster's).
" Are these three statements equally self-evident ? Most people at
first sight would admit the first and second, but doubt about the
third. How do we know, they might ask, that the oyster has an idea
of self at all ? How do we know that he has memory ; that he can
associate one sensation with another, and know himself as the subject
of all ? Why, then, are we most confident about the angel, in whose
case we have no more warrant of experience than in that of the oyster ?
Simply because we can subtract from the sum total of our own con-
sciousness, but cannot add to it. I think of a lower intelligence as a
part only of my own ; and I see that the subtraction may possibly
change the entire result. I think of a higher intelligence as my own,
and something more ; but, this something being totally unknown, I
assume, quite gratuitously, that it will not interfere with the poorest
operations of the remainder. Hence I have no difficulty in anthropo-
morphizing the angel; but I do not find it so easy to anthropomor-
POPULAR PHYSIOLOGY.?THE NERVOUS SYSTEM". 403
phize the oyster. Where my own intelligence is hut a part, I am well
content to reason as if it were the whole; hut where it is the whole, I
am not equally ready to identify it with the part. But I have not
thereby advanced one step in the knowledge of the conditions of other
than human intelligences. I have only made my own intelligence the
representative of all. I have generalized the Ego, and named it Pan:
I have gazed on the image of my own mind, and in the microcosm I
have symbolized the Universe."*
In quoting this psychological fragment, we are running counter
to the canons of criticism which Mr. Lewes has enjoined for his
hook. He holds that the nervous system " must be studied free
from all control on the part of psychologists. If we (the phy-
siologists) do not prescribe conclusions for them, neither must
tliey prescribe conclusions for us." He would, therefore, con-
sider the psychologist "as out of court"?(p. 3). If we have
broken our author's precepts, it lias assuredly been because we
have not been able clearly to recognise the line of demarcation
he would have us heed. But here we terminate our fragmentary
criticism. The illustrations we have given, showing how greatly
we differ from Mr. Lewes in the significations we attach to certain
words of very frequent occurrence in any dissertation of the
nervous system, might have been added to if it were needful.
But we shall not multiply instances. Sufficient has been
said to indicate that our position with regard to several of
Mr. Lewes's views on the nervous system is pretty much that of
the logicians in the celebrated recital of Sawkenbergius :?
"... The logicians stuck much closer to the point before them
than any of the class of the literati; they began and ended with the
word nose ; and had it not been for a petitio principii, which one
of the ablest of them ran his head against in the beginning of the
combat, the whole controversy had been settled at once.
" ? A nose,' argued the logician, ' cannot bleed without blood?
and not only blood, but blood circulating in it to supply the
phenomenon with a succession of drops (a stream being but a
quicker succession of drops, that is included, said he). Now
death,' continued the logician, ' being nothing but the stagnation
of the blood '
" 'I deny the definition. Death is the separation of the soul
from the body,' said his antagonist. ? Then we don't agree upon
our weapons,' said the logician. ' Then there is an end of the
dispute,' replied the antagonist."
The chapters on the nervous system, although of chief interest
to us, barely exceed a third of Mr. Lewes's woi'k, every portion
* Psychology the Test of Moral and Metaphysical Philosophy; an Inaugural
Lecture. By Henry Longueville Mansel, B.D., Reader in Moral and Metaphy-
sical Philosophy, Magdalen College, Oxford. 1855, p. 43.
404 THE CENSUS OF 1861 AND LUNACY.
of which possesses that rare charm which he has the gift of in-
fusing into all his writings. It is very far from requisite that we
should attempt to whet the appetites of our readers by any
samples which might convey a notion of the attractive qualities of
the hook, for the work must be already well known to them. Rarely,
indeed, if common report be true, has a treatise on physiology been
so widely read; rarely have we closed a book which, while em-
bodying so much from which we dissent, has so largely excited
our admiration as the Physiology of Common Life.
