Hysteria in Connexion with Religious Reyiyals
==============================================

Art. II.?
The diagnosis of hysteria, the precise characters which may be
considered pathognomonic of the disease, and the nature of the
affections which may simulate it, are all matters that have lately
been invested with unusual interest and importance, and that
concern a wider circle than the class of purely medical readers.
The recent and still progressive awakening of the religious
feelings of various communities and sects, the " revival," as it is
called, which originated in the north of Ireland, and is now
extending itself widely in this country, has been marked, in many
instances, by certain manifestations of physical disorder, which
have afforded a battle-ground to rival religionists, and an
abundance of materials for argument to persons for the most
part very imperfectly acquainted with the elements of the subject
they undertake to discuss, and the nature of the questions they
venture to decide. The physical phenomena witnessed at Belfast
and elsewhere have been presumptuously ascribed to the gracious
workings of the Holy Spirit; or, on the other hand, to the
HYSTERIA IN CONNEXION WITH RELIGIOUS REVIVALS. 25
operation of Satanic agency, by individuals who have no greater
right than their neighbours to decide upon the presence of either;
or they have been set down as hysteria by those who have never
mastered the simplest elements of medical knowledge. Hence an
angry conflict between disputants whose words can be brought to
the standard of no common measure, and whose anxiety is to
support a foregone conclusion rather than to do service in the
cause of truth.
Upon the very threshold of an attempt to find essential agree-
ment veiled under these verbal differences, we are met by diffi-
culties which arise from a vague and imperfect nomenclature. In
this, as in every other department of inquiry, it is of the first
importance rightly to define the terms employed; and we shall
therefore endeavour to lay down the sense in which we purpose
to use familiar words, and to adhere throughout to one signifi-
cation for them.
By hysteria, then, we mean to denote a morbid condition
produced by some emotion which is denied outlet through its
natural channels of activity. Under such circumstances, the
force engendered may be supposed to accumulate within the
system until sufficiently strong to overcome the active or passive
resistance of the patient to its effects; and then to culminate in
the production of a paroxysm, or hysteric fit, of a severity and
duration proportionate to the original strength of the emotion, or
to the exhaustion resulting from efforts to repress it. The fit
thus excited is liable to be followed by various kinds of functional
exaltation of parts of the nervous system, determined, generally,
by the nature of the exciting cause.
Hysteria, in its simple form, if seen from the commencement,
is scarcely likely to be confounded with any other disorder.
There are cases of true epilepsy, preceded by an aura originating
in a diseased organ, which may simulate the hysteria occasionally
produced by the contemplation of local morbid changes, or rather
by emotions arising out of the existence of such changes; and
there are certain stages in many cases of hysteria which may
resemble other neuroses; but with these exceptions, little calcu-
lated to mislead experienced observers, there are no conditions
liable to be mistaken for hysteria.
It becomes a question, therefore, how this word, and its
adjective, have been strained to embrace so large a portion of
actual pathology ? Probably somewhat in the manner following.
A peculiar mental and bodily temperament, being found by
experience to involve an increased proclivity to hysteria, lias been
called hysterical: much as if the constitutional states predisposing
to insanity were called maniacal.
An irregular or partial exaltation of nervous function being
among the ordinary sequelae of the hysteric paroxysm?such
26 HYSTERIA IN CONNEXION WITH RELIGIOUS REVIVALS.
exaltation, whether physical, as in hyperesthesia, or mental, as
in morbid sensitiveness, has been commonly called hysterical,
however induced.
Lastly, inasmuch as malingering is a very frequent concomitant
of an advanced stage of one class of hysterical cases, all
malingering whatever, in young females, has been confounded
with hysteria.
Hence, a large number of infinitely various affections and
states, arising from different causes, manifested by different symp-
toms, and tending towards different terminations, have been
combined to form the ordinary conception of a " Protean malady"
that, strictly speaking, has no existence. In saying this, we do
not for a moment dispute the accuracy, as clinical sketches, of
the received descriptions of hysterical knee, hysterical spine,
hysteria simulating peritonitis, &c.; but simply wish to affirm
that, of two young women who artificially imitate or produce
disease, or in whom slight physical changes are attended by
prominent nervous symptoms, one may be the subject of hysteria,
while the other is not. We protest against the use of any noso-
logical term in a sense so wide as to be utterly indefinite, useless
for all purposes of argument or exact description, and valuable
only to include a group of phenomena which possess in common
one character alone?viz., that they none of them demand active
medical treatment. We would, therefore, limit the word hysteria
to the paroxysmal affections produced by concealed or suppressed
emotion; and the word hysterical, to the various morbid states
or actions by which hysteria may be succeeded. It must be
admitted that we want a convenient term by which to denote the
exalted nervous sensibility that obscures or complicates the
diseases of certain individuals, and that involves a marked
liability to hysteria; but it is, nevertheless, a perversion of
language to call this sensibility, or the diseases it may complicate,
hysterical, in a person in whom hysteria has never been developed.
As far as regards the revivals in the north of Ireland, there
seems to be an universal consent that any hysteria which may
complicate them is in itself a great evil, to be resisted in every
possible way. Concerning the word we find unanimity among
persons of every shade of opinion; and we must approach the
thing signified before diversity becomes apparent. That many
among the clergy should be slow to recognise hysteria, and,
when it is pointed out to them, should cling to a hope that the
diagnosis may be erroneous, is a result to be expected from our
knowledge of human nature. But that medical writers should
gravely argue the question, What is hysteria ? with intent to show
that it is nothing sufficiently tangible to be discovered and
identified with certainty in any case ; or that they should refer to
the "troubled countenance" of Belsliazzar as a phenomenon analo-
HYSTERIA IN CONNEXION WITH RELIGIOUS REVIVALS. 27
gous to tlie scenes lately enacted in some of tlie meeting-liouses
of Belfast, is a matter less easy to explain, and far more painful
to contemplate. The revival of religion is no mere local outbreak;
and appears likely to display itself as no transient enthusiasm.
On various occasions, in former times, such revivals have been
kindled; often to serve, early in their progress, as stages for the self-
seeker, the vicious, or the profane, and eventually to be trampled
under foot by the outraged moral sense of the communities among
whom their manifold corruptions have been displayed. In order
that the present movement may furnish no parallel, in these
respects, to so many that have preceded it, the greatest caution is
required from all who can in any way, by writing, speech, or
thought, influence its course, or guide the operations of its leaders.
If such caution be not exercised, or if, having been exercised, it
be relaxed; if the unspeakable blessing of a general turning of
tbe public mind towards God be not used under a deep and
"watchful sense of responsibility, then old scenes will be acted
anew. The sobriety of the Christian pulpit will too surely give
way to the rhetoric of the tub ; the practicality of Christian
doctrine to the imaginative creations of the fanatic ; the contrition
of the penitent to the performances of the hysterical; and the
sincerity of the pastor to the greed of the hypocrite. It can
scarcely be doubted that, in former revivals, the first step down-
wards has been the cultivation of hysteria; and it is the first
step that costs. Convulsions and catalepsy, trances and visions,
ire easily enough produced by some of the weakest, and some of
the worst, of womankind; and, when these conditions are
recognised as titles to sanctity and signs of grace, when they are
seen to be the means of obtaining notoriety and profit, the supply
will never fall short of the demand. Magdalens without shame,
penitenfs without humility and without amendment, soon, under
such circumstances, afford evidence of the value of the work ; and
the sober and devout shrink from any confession of their feelings
or any record of their experience, lest they should be confounded
with the frantic teachers or the questionable devotees of the camp
meeting or the hill-side. Such has been the history of many a
religious movement, which, at its commencement, promised fairly;
but which served only to produce a reactionary coldness, dead-
ness, and formality, wherever its influence was lelt. Under the
"belief that the public mind of this kingdom is at present deeply
stirred, and that the results of this impression will depend,
mainly, upon the manner in which it is used, we purpose to offer
some observations upon the nature and progress of hysteria; in
the hope that they may assist to prepare the clergy, and, to some
extent, the medical profession also, for dealing at the right time,
and in the right manner, with any nervous disorders that may be
developed during the course of religious ministrations.
28 HYSTERIA IN CONNEXION WITH RELIGIOUS REVIVALS.
In order to accomplish this object, it is necessary to direct a
cursory glance towards those agencies, so pre-eminent among tlie
active powers of man, which we describe collectively as the
emotions ; and briefly to consider the ends they are intended to
fulfil, and their normal and abnormal effects upon the economy.
For these purposes it is sufficient to point out that an
emotion consists essentially of an idea, either sensational or
intellectual, linked with a feeling of pleasure or pain. By a
process known to us only through its effects, this combina-
tion is able to develope or liberate nervous force sufficient
to commence and sustain appropriate action, and bearing a
definite relation of quantity to the strength and the duration
of the passion that is aroused. Meagre as such an account
may seem, when compared with the number and variety of
the feelings that chequer human life, it still contains all the
essentials of their strength; and it is when the force engendered
can neither be self-contained, nor expended through safe and proper
channels, that the phenomena called hysterical are displayed.
In order to render this clear, it may be observed that every
emotion may be either contemplative or active, according to the
degree in which it is developed ; and that many of the emotions
experienced by every individual never reach the stage of activity
at all, but exhaust themselves in the very act of directing the
consciousness upon their own existence. The emotion is felt,
and the mind is roused out of torpidity or indolence, to dwell
upon it for a few moments; after which the impression fades
away. In other cases, the feeling, instead of disappearing,
gathers strength and .intensity with the attention that is paid to
it; and (being attended, it may be presumed, with a larger
development of force than can be employed in maintaining that
attention) calls imperatively for the performance of some' action
which the circumstances require or suggest. Itwould be beyond our
present scope to inquire into the nature of the peculiarities, either
inherent or acquired, that determine the relative force of various
impressions in the production of emotion ; but the fact is patent
to daily observation that, in every- person, certain feelings,
whenever excited in his mind, exert an immediate control over
his actual conduct; while others operate no farther than upon
his consciousness. The differences of character, indeed, that are
witnessed in the world depend, very greatly, upon differences in
the nature of the feelings that are thus habitually active or passive
in the case of each individual.
In considering the nature of the activity that the emotions
prompt, it is necessary to enlarge our sphere of observation, and
to take the lower animals into account. By doing so, the
phenomena are presented to us in their simplest forms and
combinations; and it becomes manifest that nearly all pleasur-
HYSTERIA IN CONNEXION WITH RELIGIOUS REVIVALS. 29
able emotions require various kinds of physical activity for their
fall fruition and enjoyment; while painful feelings require
similar activity, in order to remove, or to withdraw from, the
causes that excite them. The emotions of sex will serve to illus-
trate the former kind, and the agonies of fear or hatred the
latter ; each producing action, either for the possession of the
heloved object, or for the mitigation of the pain experienced
while the emotion is unrelieved. On the one hand, attainment
and possession, on the other, avoidance or removal, may therefore
he regarded as the ends towards which emotional force must, in
almost every case, be naturally and primarily directed.
In the brute creation, moreover, it is manifest that these ends
must frequently be essential, either to the safety of the animal,
or to the propagation of the species; for both of. which the
emotions are plainly intended to provide. The right direction of
the force developed is therefore secured " by laws written upon
the nervous pulp." The emotions work out their own fulfilment
with unerring certainty; and in all cases govern the conduct of
the animal. They are expended either upon the motor nerves,
through (or by the aid of) the cerebellum, so as to produce co-
ordinate muscular movements; or upon the ganglionic nerves,
increasing or modifying secretion, or providing a more abundant
supply of blood to any parts that may require it. Besides these
actions, there are some that, as far as we know, are simply ex-
pressive and preliminary, such as many movements of the tail, or
of the hairy covering; which, if apparently objectless in themselves,
are commonly a prelude to others, and serve a useful purpose
by giving warning of the intentions of the animal. Lastly,
under strong emotion, when appropriate action is either impos-
sible, or when, having been performed to the limit of the powers
of the organism, it is inadequate to afford relief, the lower animals
frequently give utterance to a very remarkable cry, unlike the
sounds which they naturally emit. The conditions can only be
fulfilled by the presence of imminent danger, when escape is
rendered impossible, either by fatigue or by physical obstacles.
An exhausted hare close before the hounds, a toad or frog
pursued by a snake, and many other creatures under similar
circumstances, will shriek in a frightful manner; as they will
also do, according to M. Brown-Sequard, upon mechanical
irritation of that part of the brain called the calamus scrip-
tori us. The cry referred to is probably due to the opera-
tion upon the nervous centres of emotional force for which
there is no other outlet; and must be carefully distinguished
from the many sounds which would be included in the
general category of appropriate co-ordinate muscular movements.
To the latter must be referred all ordinary cries of pain or
distress; the calls between individuals of different sexes, or
30 HYSTERIA IN CONNEXION WITH RELIGIOUS REVIVALS.
"between tlie clam and her offspring; and those which most
animals originally gregarious will utter upon slight provocation,
to serve either as a summons or a warning to their companions.
In the human subject, during infancy and early childhood,
the emotions govern the organism to a very great extent. But,
as life advances, very remarkable changes in the nature of their
influence may he observed.
In the first place, the natural emotional acts that, with
reference to brutes, we have called appropriate, would cease to be
appropriate in men and women (that is to say, they would defeat
themselves) in any condition of life raised above that of the
lowest and most brutalized savages. Hence man learns the neces-
sity, and hence the human organism possesses the power, of ab-
staining from these acts under many circumstances, and by many
different methods, of which three are frequently to be observed.
The first of these depends upon the fact that the faculty of
judgment and the power of volition afford, in themselves, suffi-
cient employment for many emotions of a highly active character.
Every man either possesses, or by timely exercise may obtain,
the power to place the sources of all emotion under subjugation
to his intelligence and his will; so that the force of his passions
is exerted in exciting and sustaining the activity of the hemi-
spherical ganglia, and, partly, perhaps, in giving effect to their
commands. In this way, it is not only possible, but common,
for the intelligence to supersede the original emotion by one
wholly opposed to it ; as in cases where the natural disposition
to revenge an injury is overruled by the dictates of Christian duty.
Infinitely below the power to control an emotion at its source,
but still almost exclusively human, is the power to control it in
action for the sake of more certainly obtaining the end to which
it points. An emotion that is thus treated is commonly
greatly strengthened by the continued direction of the thoughts
upon it; but it seldom exerts any hurtful influence upon the
body, unless finally and entirely disappointed.
Still lower in the scale stands the direct influence of volition
upon the muscular system; an influence that is greatly
strengthened, in civilized life, by the handicrafts, or varieties of
manual industry, that are almost universally practised. In many
persons whose powers of reason and will have not been developed
by cultivation, and in whom there is nothing to oppose the growth,
or to govern and direct the course of the feelings, there is yet a
great capability of suppressing their outward manifestations by
the simple expedient of holding the body at rest. When this is
done, it becomes atrial of strength between the organism and the
emotional force; which, constantly accumulating, and denied
outlet through natural channels, is apt to burst forth through
others. It is this action which realizes our conception of
hysteria in connexion with religious revivals. 31
hysteria; and, in order to understand it, it is necessary to inquire
to what effects the term " unnatural" may be applied.
In the human species, to which is given, almost universally,
the power to arrest emotions at their outlet; and, as a result of
culture, the power to control them at their source, we find that
the former seldom becomes complete unless the latter has been
attained. In females generally, and in the young of both sexes,
the facial muscles, the facial circulation, and the lachrymal glands,
are prompt to exhibit feelings which do not otherwise receive
relief; and it is difficult to regard expression, pallor, blushes, or
tears, in any other light than as safety-valves, expending in harm-
less action a force that would be hurtful if retained. As the
body strengthens, it would appear that the nervous system of
organic life is the first to acquire the power of resisting with
impunity feelings that are only moderately intense; so that tears
01* blushing can no longer be excited by trifling causes : and, with
complete control over the source of the emotions, there may be
gained in time complete control over their manifestations through
the countenance. This may be regarded, however, as among the
last and most exceptional of volitional attainments ; and the
actions which we have enumerated are too frequent, as well as too
plainly beneficial, to be considered morbid in their general cha-
racter ; although they may sometimes become so by reason of the
degree in which they are manifested.
Changes affecting the circulation through the central organ
appear to occupy a debateable ground between the normal and
abnormal effects of feeling. The force which operates through
the ganglionic system is probably intended to stimulate secreting
organs; and also, by its action upon the heart and arteries,
to supply an increased quantity of blood to any parts, either
glandular or muscular, that may be called into activity by
the circumstances of the particular case. To a certain degree,
therefore, operations of this kind must be considered natural; as
when palpitation of the heart, under the influence of feai-, is an
evident preparation of the system for the active efforts of flight;
or when increased salivary secretion is excited by the perception
of agreeable food. It is worthy of remark, moreover, that an
expenditure of nervous force upon secreting organs commonly
brings a hysteric fit to its termination ; by providing, we may sup-
pose, natural channels of escape for an agency that was producing
morbid effects while such channels were closed. In slight cases
of hysteria, weeping "will often afford the relief required; and, in
more serious cases, a profuse flow of urine commonly follows
immediately after the paroxysm. It is obvious, from analogy,
that the secretion of urine must be the means of terminating the
fit; although the discharge from the body is delayed by the office
of the bladder as a containing viscus. From these instances, and
32 HYSTERIA IN CONNEXION WITH RELIGIOUS REVIVALS.
from many similar ones, we may conclude that the ganglionic
system is one of the natural outlets for the discharge of emotional
force ; and that the effects of such discharge cannot properly be
called morbid, or hysterical, in their nature ; although they may
oftentimes be injurious when excessive or perverted. For example,
strong emotion has been known to produce sudden death by
paralysing the heart; to change entirely the character of a secre-
tion formed under its influence ; or to destroy the vitality of the
secreting organ. It may be conceived, at least as possible, that
the difference between such cases and ordinary ones depends
mainly upon the amount of force that is suddenly developed; and
the parallel case of a discharge of electricity, producing, accord-
ing to its strength, either moderate stimulation or complete
destruction of life, may be cited in support of the opinion.
The nature of emotional muscular actions may be tested, with
tolerable certainty, by observation of their tendencies; and, if
these are appropriate to the kind of feeling that is excited, the
movements must not be considered hysterical. There are many
examples of persons who, under the influence of terror, have per-
formed actions in no way guided by volition, but adapted to
secure their safety; while, when terror produces hysteria, the
attendant movements are objectless or convulsive. We are
acquainted with a gentleman who, having only travelled by
railway three times in his life, has every time been so unfortunate
as to select a train that sustained a terrible accident before he
left it. On the last occasion, he extricated himself from the
wreck of broken carriages, and, without heed to the necessities of
the wounded, took to his heels. He was about three miles from
home, and went thither, across country, at racing speed, never
stopping, or looking behind him, until he sank exhausted in his
own entrance hall. This was not hysteria, but the natural and
appropriate action of a frightened brute; and only inappropriate
in a man because the human volition ought always to control the
human feelings. Perhaps the presence or absence of the co-
ordinating influence of the cerebellum might often be taken to
determine the nature of the movements in a doubtful case;?that
organ being probably the rightful channel through which force is
conveyed to the muscles as a result of sensorial changes.
In considering whether any given action be appropriate, it is
necessary to look beyond the ordinary range of merely human
operations. As in the instance cited above, the predominance of
emotion over will lowers man to the level of the brutes ; and may
occasion things to be done which, seemingly objectless, would
yet fulfil important purposes at a certain point in the animal scale.
Instinctive actions are not controlled by outward circumstances;
and it is a sufficient explanation of defecation or vomiting under
the influence of terror, to remark that these acts are the invariable
I
f,
hysteria in connexion with religious revivals. S3
precursors of flight in many beasts of chase ; while in some animals,
as the polecat and the cuttle-fish, they afford an additional and
important provision for escape. The foetor that is a weapon to
so many creatures, and that appears only to be developed when a
weapon is required, may be taken to explain how it is that the
emotions sometimes operate, as it appears hurtfully, to change
the character of various secretions.
The aetions already referred to?viz., co-ordinate muscular
movements, appropriate to the circumstances, either evidently or
by analogy, increased or modified activity of the circulation, and
increased or perverted secretion, are, therefore, by our definition,
excluded from the phenomena that should be called hysterical;
even though they may be clearly the effects of emotion, and may,
in some cases, be prejudicial, or even fatal.
When, however, an emotion is very strongly developed, and is
denied access to its ordinary channels of discharge, its first action
is upon the sensorium, and tends to increase indefinitely that
contemplative stage which is a necessary prelude to exertion. In
this way it produces a state of morbid self-feeling, self-conscious-
ness, or introspectiveness (as it is indifferently called), which
represents the essential moral phenomenon of the hysteric
state.
It will readily be apprehended that no distinct line can be drawn
beween natural and hysterical self-consciousness; for the reason that
the contemplative tendencies vary, within considerable limits, for all
classes of feeling. It is equally manifest that, in every case, there
must be a certain amount of emotional stimulus that would turn
contemplation into action, unless restrained from doing so by the
operation of the will.
This amount of stimulus being applied, and the will being
exerted merely to hold the body at rest, the state of self-con-
sciousness may next be intensified and prolonged up to the limit
of the sensorial capacity for such exertion. In the case of a
feeling that is frequently or habitually indulged, while at the
same time its proper out-going is restrained, the force excited will
often be confined to the sensorium during many successive occa-
sions of indulgence, and will render that organ excessively prone
to respond to the call of the particular emotion, or of its imme-
diate kindred. For instance, the intense contemplation, during
childhood, of emotions of terror excited by the narratives or
threats of a nurse, will infallibly, and very considerably, increase
the control of fear over the organism.
In some cases during the first accession of an emotion, in
others after many periods of recurrence, the limit of sensorial or
contemplative power will be fully reached, while as yet the force
developed is not expended. Under such circumstances the force
NO. XVII.?NEW SERIES. D
34 HYSTERIA IN CONNEXION WITH RELIGIOUS REVIVALS.
finds its outlet through various channels ; and its operations con-
stitute the physical phenomena of hysteria.
It is worthy of remark that these phenomena are often initiated
by some trifling' circumstance that forcibly arrests the attention,
and thus diminishes the sensorial capacity for attending to the
feelings. It is very common for an hysteric fit to commence at
the moment when a period of reverie is broken by some sudden
call upon the outward sense of the individual.
The precise nature of the physical phenomena will vary with
the differences of different organisms. We have seen that, in the
case of the lower animals, a peculiar and most piteous cry usually
attends the development of emotional force in quantity too great
for the vital powers; and a cry, similar and probably analogous, is
often the immediate precursor of a hysteric paroxysm. Upon this
cry Usually follow bodily movements, not co-ordinate or appro-
priate, but objectless and convulsive, affecting chiefly the extremities,
the throat or gullet, the eyeballs, or the eyelids. We say chiefly,
because such movements are of no absolute necessity, and occur in
no determinate order: so that the presence or absence of "globus"
(i.e., a choking sensation, as of a ballrisingin the throat,?the effect
of local spasm), is not conclusive with regard to the existence of
hysteria.
In the case of an emotion suddenly-aroused, and rapidly
culminating, the muscular movements are usually succeeded,
before long, by active secretion, either renal or lachrymal; and
the paroxysm is brought to a speedy close. The contemplative
stage has been short, and the feeling has, so to speak, quickly
overflowed the sensorium, without having time to control or
modify its habitual operations. In cases of an opposite kind,
where the paroxysm follows intense or protracted contemplation,
the same degree of relief is not afforded ; and the physical phe-
nomena, when they have moderated an excessive or unbearable
degree of tension, are commonly followed by some form of
somnambulism. In other words, a convulsive fit does not suffice
wholly to divert the emotional force from the sensorium; but
merely preserves that organ from being altogether paralysed or
destroyed by excess of stimulation
It would be tedious to enumerate the possible varieties of the
somnambulistic state. There are two of these?namely, trance,
and ecstasy, that have most bearing upon our present purpose.
The state of trance can scarcely be distinguished from ordinary
sleep, excepting by being more profound. It is characterized by
torpor, as far as regards all impressions conveyed through the organs
of sense : while, at the same time, the sensorium is cognizant of a
train of ideas, or dream, suggested by the active emotion, and coin-
cident with the habitual course of contemplation concerning it.
In ecstasy these conditions are slightly modified, so that the
HYSTERIA IN CONNEXION WITH RELIGIOUS REVIVALS. 35
?sensorium is percipient of impressions from, without, if they
liarmonize with, or are even associated with, the dominant feeling.
There is also some degree of co-ordinate reaction upon the
muscular system; so that the course of the dream is indicated,
more or less, by appropriate speech and gesture; and the influence
exerted upon it by suggestion can be readily observed and
demonstrated. , ?
. The immediate termination of these states, convulsive or
somnambulistic, is necessarily in a period of weakness and ex-
haustion commensurate with the nervous force put forth and to
he recovered from, (if at all) only by the gradual operation of
circumstances favourable to strength of body and repose of mind.
Their ultimate tendency, is to place both the will, and the physical
organism under the government of the emotions; and so to
degrade humanity below the level of the brutes that perish.
We say " below the level," advisedly. The passions of the inferior
animals are regulated in amount and guided in operation by the
hand of unerring "Wisdom, so as to produce their due and desired
effect in the economy of creation. The passions of mankind,
"when emancipated from the control of volition and intelligence,
are apt to riot in the most unbridled licence; and it is to be
observed that the victory of one emotion over the will is the
victory of all, of the emotional state generally over the volitional.
This is an inversion of the proper order of the human faculties,
a subjugation of the spiritual to the animal element in the
human organism. As such it may be traced in its effects, pro-
ducing all shades of perverted belief, from infidelity or credulity
t0 insane delusion ; all varieties of perverted conduct, from sen-
suality or depravity to insane ferocity.
Now if we compare the foregoing account of hysteria with
recent actual occurrences, we shall find a complete and remark-
able coincidence between them. Starting from the fact that (in
a community of persons mostly uneducated, mostly in the con-
dition of imperfect physical tone induced .by mill labour, and
mostly possessing a dexterity in handicraft that would enable
them to exercise a great degree of control over their muscles),
an unusual interest has been stirred up with regard to the things
which concern eternal life; it may next be observed that this
interest has been made a means of attracting large numbers of
individuals to crowded lilaces of worship, where they have been
excited by the most energetic denunciations of their own lost
and fallen state, as well as by threats of the Divine vengeance
impending over them. It must be remembered that these
denunciations and threats have reference, in the creeds in which
the revival took its origin, not to actual, but to original sin ;
and that hence they were calculated to excite emotions of the
D 2
36 HYSTERIA IN CONNEXION WITH RELIGIOUS REVIVALS.
utmost terror and despair, from which 110 way of escape would
be pointed out by the preacher along the path of duty. The
devotees would be instructed to wait for the Spirit of grace to
descend into their hearts ; to wait, not in action, not in striving
after a holy life, but in the contemplation of their own imputed
sinfulness and impending destruction. The feelings hence
arising would be intensified by the sympathy of surrounding
numbers, would be sustained by the iteration of the preacher,
would be directed at no practical aim, would be held off from the
muscular system by a sense of the decencies of public worship,
as well as by the reflection that bodily flight affords no relief
from mental terror. In a congregation thus situated there will
soon be an individual whose power of emotional self-consciousness
lias reached its limit, while the emotion is sustained by the awful
words?the repetition of hell!?hell!?hell!?issuing from the pul-
pit.. Then will come the hysterical cry, succeeded by the hysterical
convulsion. When the convulsion abates, if the sonsorium have
been, saturated by terror, by an anticipatory self-feeling of the
torments of the damned, this feeling will display itself in action,
prior to the return of consciousness as regards ordinary outward
impressions. Broken words and imperfect actions will indicate
the ruling fear; will have reference to Satan, and to flight from
or avoidance of his snares. The conversation of bystanders,
when relevant to this ruling fear, will serve to guide or modify
the acted dream; and their uttered anticipations of coming
relief and peace will, as the fear is exhausted, gradually realize
themselves. Smiles irradiate the countenance, the Most Holy
Name is heard upon the lips, and the somnambulist either
awakes in a state of rapture and excitement, or sinks into the
sleep that is demanded by her fatigued and enfeebled frame.
In accordance with the principle already laid down, the
occurrence of one hysteric fit, in a place of worship, will be ex-
ceeding likely to precipitate another, by abruptly breaking into
the self-contemplative state. Moreover, if the preacher point out
the person affected as one by whom saving grace has at that
moment been received, as one predestined from eternity to con-
version and final perseverance, the incident is eminently calcu-
lated to impress and convince his hearers, to add indefinitely to
the power of his words, to arouse the most intense longing for a
similar visitation, and to excite the most lively dread lest the
grace sought for should be withheld. By both kinds of operation,
hysteria is coutinually propagated and increased.
Upon recovering from the immediate effects of the paroxysm,
the state of the " subjects" may admit of considerable variation.
In some, even if not in many instances, the shock will be found
to have dethroned the reason ; and the unhappy patient will
awake from somnambulism to fatuity or mania. In others, the
HYSTEltIA IN CONNEXION WITH RELIGIOUS REVIVALS. 37
original terror being completely removed by the assurances of tlie
preacher, a state of feeling is induced, of which gratified vanity
is the chief characteristic. The so-called penitent will converse
fluently about her experience, describe her struggles and trials,
her beatific visions, her eventual peace, her abiding assurance of
salvation and eternal bliss, her profound repentance for her sins.
She will seldom be ready to confess or bewail any particular
transgressions ; she will not be likely to afford any practical
evidence of humility ; and she will usually season her dish of
ruarvels so as to suit the varying credulity of her different
auditors. She is jealous of her position as the prima donna of
her chapel or her sect, and elaborates ingenious novelties by which
to crush the pretensions of any intrusive debutante. However
1ngenious, she will become wearisome at last. The nine days
allotted to terrestrial wonders will pursue their inevitable course,
and will bring in their train a girl who escaped, in her vision,
from two devils instead of one; or who can garnish the narrative
?f her flight by incidents from the Mysteries of London, or the
Castle of Udolplio. The first subject disappears from the scene,
not to follow the example of Dorcas or of Lydia, but too often
to lead a life concerning which her sometime hearers are glad
to bury scandal beneath oblivion.
There remain other cases still, in which, in addition to mere
terror, some real and actual sentiment of religion lias been called
forth. In these, somnambulism is induced but rarely ; aud the
convulsive type of hysteria commonly prevails ; so that tlie evil
results immediately visible are not of so glaring a character as
those already considered. They are, however, equally real;
perhaps equally disastrous. Religion?capable as it is of uniting
all the faculties of the mind in harmonious co-operation, but still
pre-eminently a subject for the highest faculties, becomes in such
persons inseparably associated and united with, and limited to,
mere animal passion, that which, in the human race, is intended
to stimulate the reason, not to supersede it. The ascendency
freely given to all emotions connected with religion cannot be
withheld from others; and, as already stated, a general surrender
of the will to the passions is the result of such a violation ot the
oi'der of nature. And, in many human creatures, the capacity
for much passion lies dormant until discovered by events. The
hysterical devotee of the class we are now considering is exem-
plary whilst untempted ; but her house of faith rests only on the
shifting quicksands of feeling. The first temptation that enlists
nny of the feelings on its side, that is associated with love, with
hatred, with passion of whatever kind, at once attracts to itself
all the forces by which it ought to be opposed. Of two" opposite
feelings, one must yield in action ; and, where religion is only a
feeling, it will be powerless against any other that may be more
38 HYSTERIA IN CONNEXION WITH RELIGIOUS REVIVALS.
recently excited, or less easily displayed. On tliis principle,, we
conceive, may be explained may of the phenomena of reaction ;
and many of the more grievous lapses of persons of professing or
reputed piety.
The " physical phenomena" of the revival having thus been
shown to present, in their predisposing and exciting causes, in
their progress, and in their results, a precise resemblance to the
hysteria commonly seen in medical practice, and produced either
by secular terrors or by amatory reverie, Ave are clearly entitled to
consider them as belonging to the same family ; and as being, in
fact, very striking instances of morbid action. Without tres-
passing upon the domain of the theologian, we may regard these
phenomena in their pathological relations; and may point out
the methods by which they may be prevented, and the manner in
which they may be overcome.
In the first place, however, we may observe that hysteria ancl
Christianity are the zenith and nadir of the moral universe. God
and Mammon are not more irreconcileable in their demands than
a disease which has its very root and centre in indulged self-
feeling, and a religion which prescribes love to others as the first
and highest duty. Hysteria, indeed, is nothing but selfishness
in its most concentrated and engrossing form ; and, as such, is
absolutely incompatible with the existence of Christian love in the
heart, or with the relief which is afforded to all painful feelings
by the sustaining and consoling influences of sincere religion.
It appears somewhat remarkable, therefore, at first sight, that
hysteria should be so common a result of religious preaching
among uneducated persons. During the last century alone
(besides numerous examples in more ancient times), in Scotland,
Wales, America, Ireland, and many parts of England, convulsive
epidemics have been brought about by preaching?epidemics of
which no precise or strictly medical history has been handed,
down; but which, from the scanty records preserved of them,
appear to have been alike in all essential characters. It is-
scarcely less remarkable that no such disorders are recorded in
connexion with the earthly ministry of our Lord ; or as occurring
during the apostolic era?notwithstanding that numerous very
large assemblies then first had the Gospel preached to them. It
is probable that some, at least, of the demoniacs who were then
miraculously cured were what we should now call hysterical; but
it may be regarded as certain that no convulsive seizures were the
rule, or were frequent, or perhaps even ever occurred, among the
early Christian converts. The fact would be far too important to-
be passed over in silence; and therefore the silence of the sacred
writings may be held to be conclusive. There must be a reason
for the difference in this respect between the teaching of apostolic-
and of modern times; and we are inclined to seek this reason in
hysteria in connexion with religious revivals. 39
the nature of the tenets taught. The apostles preached a gospel
of peace, of deliverance, of joy eternal and ineffable. Their
successors in the ministry preach often a doctrine of damnation.
The truth made known to us by revelation (and almost ascer-
tainable by reason), that the souls of the wicked, after death, go to
their own place, and suffer there an inevitable misery, is a portion
of the scheme of salvation necessary to be knownj and highly
proper to be taught; with the limitation that it should hold in
the pulpit the same relative position that it holds in Scripture.
A knowledge that eternity must be spent either in bliss or
suffering is required, in order to vindicate to finite minds the
justice of the Deity, aud to afford a standard by which to estimate
the pains and pleasures of the world. But it is incontestable that
love to God, founded upon an assurance of God's love to man,
is the only possible basis of Christian faith and duty; and it is
inconceivable that love to God can ever be kindled at the flames
of a literal hell. Denunciations of the wrath to come, frantic
appeals to the terrors of a congregation, produce either hysteria
or indifference?either shake the physical frame by positive dread
of impending torture and mere selfish fears for personal safety,
or else harden the listeners by the natural reaction of the human
spirit against threats. In some of the more barbarous countries
subject to the Greek Church, in Georgia and Mingrelia for instance,;
the priests' houses are commonly adorned by rude pictures, bearing
a general resemblance to highly coloured, illustrations of the In-
[loldsby Legends, and representing the torments of the damned.
In one popular cartoon, Georgian souls are depicted in a frying-
pan, with a devil to turn them occasionally with a three-pronged-
fork, while another feeds the glowing fire beneath. In the back-
ground fresh souls are being received by other sable attendants ;
all having horns, hoofs, tails, and tridents de rigueur. Such
pictures probably excite some consternation when they are new ;
hut, long before they are old, the Georgians treat them as birds
treat a scarecrow that they have found out. The Georgians
cannot read, and their priests intend these pictures for sermons.
J-hey are precisely analogous to the efforts of the "loud-voiced
cian" whom Mr. Thackeray describes as " howling about hell-
fh'e in bad grammarand, in either case, they very frequently
e*press nothing but the longing of the artist or the preacher to
Persecute. Many a polemic would like to show the tender mercies
of St. Dominic to all who differ from him; but is driven by want
?f power to vent his spite in words, and to dignify his words by
the title of Christian doctrine..
We hold therefore, that these denunciations of the wrath to-
come, made prominent as the leading and essential feature of
scriptural teaching?are without any shadow of justification or.
excuse. "We do not here enter into their foundation in the word
40 HYSTERIA IN CONNEXION WITH RELIGIOUS REVIVALS.
of God, but we maintain that the preachers of a certain school
give them an undue prominence, and urge them at an unfitting
season. We judge of them by their fruits. Hysteria, originating
in terror, maintained for effect, terminating in profligacy or
insanity, is a sad contrast to the peace that passetli under-
standing.
The pamphlet of the Archdeacon of Meath, to which attention
was drawn in our last number, bears the testimony of an acute
and impartial observer to the existence of a strong and deep
current of religious feeling in the places to which the revival had
then extended. Most earnestly do we trust that this current may
deepen and widen as it flows; and that all who are brought
within its influence may bear fruits meet for repentance. But in
the hysterical phenomena, and, to a far greater extent, in the
source from which they spring, we perceive an evil of frightful
magnitude and incalculable strength. It is not only that a few
women will fall into the gulf we have endeavoured to point out;
or that many persons will be hardened by an almost instinctive
repulsion of the teaching they will hear; but, above and beyond
these evils, there is the setting up of a false standard of religion
and morality?a standard under which self-consciousness will
represent self-examination, ecstasy be accepted in lieu of faith,
and convulsions as the fulfilment of Christian duty. We ascribe
the origin of these and kindred delusions to the simple fact that
the leaders of religious movements are usually ignorant of psycho-
logy, unacquainted with the more ordinary forms of hysteria, and
therefore unable to discern the incompatibility of the conditions
they excite with the feelings and changes to which they endeavour
to refer them. They hope for the best in every instance; and
they see no reason why spasms should be contrary to the spirit
of sincere devotion.
The manner in which nervous attacks may be restrained during
divine service, has been pointed out by Archdeacon Stopford;
and his observations harmonize with the principle that, in order
to control hysteria, its very existence should, as far as possible,
be ignored. We conceive, however, that in times of religious
excitement, and in the presence of a congregation of persons
likely to be much swayed by feeling, the fear of exciting disease
should never be absent from the mind of the preacher. In order
to indicate the cautions which this fear should prompt, it is
necessary to approach the subject of the proper place and office
of emotion with regard to the reception of divine truth.
We have already stated that emotion, at once active and re-
pressed, is the necessary precursor or essential cause of hysteria.
It is plain that any conceivable emotion may be occasionally
aroused under circumstances to render suppression of its mani-
hysteria in connexion with religious revivals. 41
testations desirable; but the rule is that those emotions only are
repressed which would in general be thought blameworthy or
indelicate. Practically, therefore, the causes of hysteria are
reduced to the amatory passion, terror, anger or hatred, envy and
vanity, either alone or variously blended; and the hysteria induced
by preaching is traceable to terror and vanity almost exclusively.
Fear of eternal suffering, and a wish to be distinguished as of the
elect, are the ultimate elements of a " case" at a revival meeting.
Now the emotions appropriate to the Christian religion, excited
by its great truths, and maintained by obedience to its precepts,
are of a kind totally opposed to those mentioned above. Love
to God and to our fellow-men, gratitude for blessings, and com-
passion for the afflicted and for sinners, are the states of feeling
enjoined by the Divine Saviour, and these naturally expand into
action and influence conduct, obtaining, as they do so, the appro-
bation of all who experience their effects. Moreover, if under
any (hardly conceivable) circumstances, they should be restrained
for a time from their natural outward operation, they are not
calculated to produce the agonizing sensorial tension that pre-
cedes hysteria, but rather to expand themselves upon the cere-
brum, exciting intellectual instead of bodily activity, and engaging
the mind about projects of usefulness or benevolence. In these
feelings, the preacher who aims his teaching chiefly at the heart
(as some, by reason of their natural tendencies and gifts, are
prone to do), may find ample scope for all his efforts, especially
"when addressing those who are being urged to make their first
faltering steps along the narrow way, and who require to be
"allured" by the Divine hand, before, in the Valley of Achor,
they find their " door of hope."
In dealing with such themes as these, it is most important, if
not essential, that the preacher should not degrade them. The
"vocabulary in common use among certain classes of religionists
has this tendency; and thus counteracts, in a marked degree, the
elevating influence of the emotions proper to Christianity. The
epithets that are sufficiently descriptive of a trinket or a baby,
and the terms used about insipid or frivolous worldly enjoy-
ttients, when applied to the Divine Creator, or to the happiness
?f a blissful eternity, have a direct tendency to lower our con-
ception of the Deity, and tp make earthly things a standard for
the things of heaven" To.the extent that they do so, they affect
the quality, so to speak, of the resulting emotions ; and reduce
them to the same level with kindred feelings excited by objects of
a lower order. For example, in a case where love to a creature
was the source of a temptation to violate a divine ordinance, and
thus came into direct opposition with the impulse arising out of
love to God, the relative power of the latter would be greatly
42 HYSTERIA IN CONNEXION WITH RELIGIOUS REV1YALS.
increased by everything tliat tended to retain it habitually upon
the highest level of the mind. Such an influence is exerted by
reverence, by the constant employment, when speaking of the
Deity, of words of the most exalted signification, and especially
by a reverent avoidance of all unnecessary speech upon sacred
topics. The contrary habits, the addiction to bald and disjointed
chatter about religion, the application of familiar terms to the
Creator, and the practice of deciding about the Divine providence,
as if it were not inscrutable, all illustrate, in the strong language
of Bishop South, "the terrible imposture and force of words."
They bring down God to a quasi humanity in the minds of those
who practise them, and destroy the predominance, as motives, of
the emotions which have God for their object.
With this precaution there is, perhaps, no limit to the degree
in which the proper emotions of religion should be encouraged.
They glide necessarily into appropriate action, filling the mind
with pure and lofty thoughts, impelling the body to just and
righteous deeds. They are the great sources of all abiding joy ;
and they furnish the only efficient consolation under every sorrow.
They sustain the physical powers in a greater degree than any
other kind of stimulant, and the energy they impart is succeeded
l?y no depression. They have prompted the mightiest efforts of
the intellect and the grandest decisions of the will, and they
extend an impartial influence to all who will seek for their
support; shielding the weak, guiding the strong, verifying the
promises of hope, and withdrawing the sting of affliction.
The passion of terror, on the other hand, can only be safely
used when it is rightly guided. It is often appealed to in
education, and often in legislation, but always as the sanction of
a rule that it is not difficult to keep. In such cases it is directed
immediately into a practical channel of action or avoidance, and
controls the conduct without injuring the health. In like manner,
when terror is associated with the sanction of a divine command,
the way to keep that command should be vigorously and strongly
impressed upon the mind of the hearer; the more strongly, the,
less the individual is adapted, by nature or habits, for intellectual
exertion. The most vivid imaginable fears about a future state,
acting upon a philosophical mind, would discharge themselves on
the cerebrum, would excite a spirit of inquiry, would enlist all
the faculties of the organism in an endeavour to find the true,
answer to the question, " What shall I do to be saved ?" It is
quite conceivable that the course of thought and study thus
suggested and initiated might receive the divine blessing, might
in time become associated with higher motives than terror, with
those motives which alone, as we are taught, can open the door
of eternal bliss. It may often be right, therefore, in addressing
HYSTERIA IN CONNEXION WITH RELIGIOUS REVIVALS. 43
an educated and sagacious audience, upon wliom the glad tidings
of the gospel appear inoperative, to open those sterner pages of
Holy Writ which describe the doom of the condemned, and to
direct attention to the fate of those who neglect to work out their
own salvation. For the unthinking and the ignorant such an
appeal to fear is not adapted ; revelation, reason, and experience,
all alike condemn it. Eevelation, because the devils " believe
and trembleand their actual state cannot be conducive to man's
welfare. Beason, because the natural tendency of fear is to
operate downwards upon the body, producing muscular movements,
terminating in mere physical exhaustion. Experience, inasmuch
as we have before us the records of many such appeals to com-
munities or individuals, and the results of nearly all of them have
been disastrous.
Upon this point, indeed, there is such an overwhelming mass
of testimony, that we have been impelled to write strongly on the
subject. At Belfast, there were great differences of opinion among
the clergy with regard to the character of the cases "struck;"
some being led by common sense, or observation, to consider
that the influence thus manifested was pernicious ,* while others^
animated, it may. be presumed, by a less cautious zeal, and led
astray, perhaps, by the hope that their own ministrations were
especially blessed, laid themselves out to promote the occurrence
of hysteria. On neither side does the question appear to have
heen viewed as one already decided by ample experience ; but
rather as one admitting of a priori argument, based upon
hypotheses concerning the operation of the Holy Spirit. Our
object has been to show that the bodily find psychical condition
of "struck" cases is perfectly well understood, is reducible to
known and simple laws of the animal economy, and may be
summed up as that state of the human organism in which every?
thing sensual and earthly is at the maximum of its power. There
should no longer be any question or doubt whatever, either
among the clergy or the public, as to the character of these
seizures, or as to the doty and necessity of discountenancing
and avoiding them; for although some of the cases are, we are
told, now leading pure and holy lives, it is impossible for any
one acquainted with the ordeal through which they have passed
to think of its perils without a shudder, or to regard an escape
from them otherwise than as a most especial mercy. Moreover;
Ave cannot but view with apprehension the latitude that has
been given to some of the chief causes of hysteria, and the
probable prevalence of some of its milder, or less developed forms;
in which painful emotions keep the consciousness turned inwards
npon self, and lead to an instrospectiveness which is often
mistaken for self-examination. Persons who are. familiar with
44 HYSTEEIA IN CONNEXION WITH RELIGIOUS REVIVALS.
the aesthetic religionists of the high Tractarian. school will liaye
no difficulty in recognising the condition to which we refer.
As far as regards the present revival, we are glad to helieve
that the hysterical element once connected with it has almost or
entirely perished. We do not helieve that it ever gained any
deep root, or that it was anything more than a result of an error
of judgment on the part of the individual preachers who excited
it. It was peculiar to no creed or sect, and was only so far
localized that it followed an injudicious use of appeals to the
terrors of an unenlightened audience. From the same source, in
former times, similar disorders have sprung; either to over-
power, or to be overpowered by, the religious character of the
contemporaneous movements. We hold the two to be incom-
patible ; and therefore, in the decline of hysteria, we recognise
the best evidence that the work now proceeding is founded upon
God's truth, and carried on in accordance with God's law. The
testimony of moral improvement which we receive is in the
highest degree encouraging; but, while the cause is so recent,
the sceptical may question the durability of the effects; and,
even with regard to the facts, there are rival statisticians in the
field. In order, therefore, that the "revival" may maintain its
ground in the minds of sober and Christian people, and in order
that it may continue to receive, as it is now manifestly receiving,
the divine blessing, too much caution cannot be exercised in
the rejection of abnormal phenomena, too high a sense of
responsibility cannot be entertained in examining successive
phenomena as they are manifested. Our own faith forbids us to
believe in any especial or unusual outpouring of the Holy Spirit;
because we think that outpouring is normally continuous and all-
sufficient. We conceive the revival to be man's work, man's
act of turning to God, the result of man's yearning after spiritual
communion with his Maker. From this point of view, we conceive
that it may be blemished by human infirmities, or even altogether
perverted by bad men or by demoniac agency; and on the
other hand, that such agencies may be excluded by the exercise
of an amount of care commensurate with the magnitude of the
interests at stake. The more earnest the sharers in the move-
ment, the more incessant and the more insidious will be the
assaults upon their faith and practice; and the more jealous
should be their watchfulness over the great charge committed to
their keeping. Precisely in the degree in which such care and
such watchfulness are exercised may we hope for the development
of all good and the repression of all evil. Experience teaches
us the possibility of an opposite result; and that a general
turning of the people towards God is, in itself, the first step
only; which may lead, if not duly followed up, to reactionary
THE PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY. 45'
coldness and impiety. By this generation such a first step is
now being made; and it is for each of us to strive, that our
future movements may be directed towards our rightful goal.
'' Prove all things, hold fast that which is good." Such is the
divine injunction ; and a strict obedience to it will best promote
"*vliat God vouchsafes to acknowledge as His glory, or to reveal to
"us as the means of man's salvation.
