Psychological Quarterly Retrospect
====================================

The columns of the Daily Press form, as it were, a current clinical
record for the psychological physician. It is well that it should be so,
for the facts recorded there are common property, and the lessons to
he learned from them will, it is to be presumed, be the more readily ac-
quired, the more patent the circumstances upon which they are founded.
Thus, for example, of Neglected or Unrecognised Brain Disease
and Nascent Lunacy ? subjects to which, notwithstanding their
grave importance, but few have as yet given attention; subjects, the
social aspects of which are of more immediate moment than the medical
it is from the proceedings of our courts of justice, as reported in our
newspapers, that the most striking illustrations are derived. In proof
?f this, when such proof is needed, and in confirmation of the increasing
Magnitude of the subjects, we cite the following cases selected from the
journals of the last three months.
Murder.?Winchester Crown Court.?(Before Mr. Justice Keating.)?
Wihiam Henry Whitworth was indicted for the wilful murder of Martha, his
wife, and his six children, at the Isle of Wight.
Mr. W. M. Cooke was instructed for the prosecution; and Mr. H. T. Cole
for the prisoner.
It having been stated that the prisoner was insane, and not in a fit state to
plead, the jury were sworn to determine whether the prisoner was in a fit state
to plead.
Dr. Lyford, the surgeon of the gaol, was called, and he stated that he had
seen the prisoner upon his first coming into the gaol, and had been in daily
attendance upon him ever since, and lie was decidedly not in a fit state to
plead. His mind was full of delusions; his mental faculties were extinguished,
as he supposed, from a softening of the brain, which must have been going on
lor a considerable time. He thought it would be permanent.
The Judge asked the jury to give their opinion.
The jury said they were of opinion that the prisoner was not in a fit state of
mind to plead.
.The prisoner was directed to be detained during Her Majesty's pleasure.?
{Times, July 18).
In this case, the prisoner, a sergeant of artillery, had resided with
his wife and family in one of the small forts in the Isle of Wight.
With the destruction of his family all evidence disappeared by which
the precise mental condition of the unrecognised maniac, immediately
prior to the perpetration of the murders, could be ascertained; but
from the evidence given on the preliminary examination before the
magistrates, it seemed tolerably certain that he had shown marked
symptoms of brain-disease for some time prior to the horrid tragedy.
, . He himself was the first to announce the commission of the murders,
h 2
is
L ?
lsiv
NEGLECTED BRAIN-DISEASE :?MURDER.
and at the time of announcement he was labouring under manifest
delusion.
Murder.?York, July 18.?Crown Court.?(Before Mr. Baron Wilde.)
?Thomas Kirkwood, aged thirty, was indicted for the wilful murder of
Elizabeth Ann Parker, at Hull, on the 23rd of April last.
Mr. P. Thomson and Mr. Lewers appeared for the prosecution; and Mr.
Seymour and Mr. Waddy for the defence.
It appeared from the opening statement of the learned counsel for the pro-
secution, and from the evidence of the witnesses called by him, that the pri-
soner, who is a soldier belonging to the 29th Regiment, was in April last on
furlough at Hull, and went first to stay with his sister, a Mrs. Todd, at Hull,
and afterwards lodged with a person named Taylor. While staying with his
sister he made the acquaintance of the deceased, Mrs. Elizabeth Ann Parker, a
young widow, who lived with her mother, Mrs. Sleight, and stayed at the
house of Mrs. Sleight. A rumour having reached them that he had overstayed
his leave of absence, they got rid of him, and he then went to lodge with
Taylor. He continued to call at Mrs. Sleight's, and on the morning of the
23rd of April he went there as early as eight o'clock,, and remained there till
about eleven, talking with Mrs. Parker. At eleven lie went out to a neigh-
bour's named Burnham, and asked for a pipe, and then went back to Mrs.
Sleight's. There he bade good-bye to Mrs. Parker and gave her a kiss, and
suddenly put his arm round her neck and cut her throat with a razor. Mrs.
Burnham heard her name called twice, and then a cry of murder, and on look-
ing out of her door saw the prisoner and Mrs. Parker scuffling together, she
having her hand on his shoulder, and he attempting to get away. Mrs. Parker
was covered with blood, and she saw the prisoner make his escape from her
and run away. On going to Mrs. Parker she was found with a deep wound at
the side of her neck, which bled profusely, two large veins having been v
divided. At the time a surgeon named M'Mellan was passing, and he, with
the assistance of another medical gentleman named Carnley, succeeded in tying
the veins and stopping the bleeding, but the deceased was so exhausted that
she sank and died about four o'clock the same day. Near where the scuffle
had taken place the blade and haft of a razor were found, broken and saturated
with blood, and this razor the prisoner had borrowed from Taylor to shave
with the night before. Before she died Mrs. Parker made a declaration that
the prisoner called at eight o'clock that morning, and sat talking for three
hours. She had no quarrel with him. He said nothing before he attacked
her. He was not courting her, and she knew no motive why he should injure
her. He had given her a kiss once or twice before, when he bade her good-
bye. It appeared from Mrs. Sleight's evidence that the prisoner wras in the
habit of bidding good-bye, and saying he was going away next day; and she
corroborated the statement that her daughter had not countenanced any atten-
tions from the prisoner. After leaving Mrs. Sleight's house it appeared the
prisoner went to his lodgings at Taylor's, with his handkerchief wrapped
round his hand, which was bloody, and" he gave as an excuse that he had been I",
drilling, and had got his hand hurt with a bayonet. He then washed his
hands, and wrent out. He seemed very excited, and the worse for liquor. He
was taken into custody a little before twelve o'clock, sitting by the roadside
with his head on his hand and his clothes bloody. The witnesses all agreed
that he had had nothing to drink before he attacked the deceased. There was no
evidence to show that he had had any liquor afterwards, and it appeared that
he was habitually a sober man.
For the defence, witnesses were called who proved that he had a sister, who
was insane and who died so; that he had a brother who was not considered
to be sound in his mind, and that the prisoner himself, when eleven years old,
NEGLECTED BRAIN-DISEASE : ? SUICIDE.
had liis head shaved, and used to go about in a nightcap, and his maimer and
demeanour then got him the nickname of " Fond Tom." When lie grew tip
he was moody, and used to sit alone with his head on his hand for hours ; he
was always depressed, and in low spirits, and dull. After he entered ihe
army he went to India, and there had the country fever and a sunstroke, and
two of his comrades, who served in the same country, swore that he was
unlike other men; he never joined in the sports of the men, and used to keep
aloof. He was eccentric and peculiar, got up at nights and walked about
muttering to himself, and was then considered to be not quite right in his
head. When he came home again his sister swore that lie used to jump out of
bed at nights, and walk about the house muttering something to himself which
she could not understand. Sometimes he would burst out laughing, and when
asked what he was laughing at, he would say, "Nothing." She got so
alarmed about him that she got the errand boy employed at the house to sleep
with him, and this boy gave similar evidence as to his jumping out oi bed and
walking about at night muttering. Sometimes he would sit at the bedside
making faces when no one was there. His sister got so alarmed that she
wrote to his captain to recall him, and got rid of him out of her house.
The motive suggested by the prosecution was, that the prisoner had said
he had met the deceased the night before with a man with moustaches, and
that he was influenced by jealousy, but there was no proof whatever that the
deceased had been out with any man the night before, and her mother was
confident she had not, and this was urged for the defence to be a mere
insane delusion. \ . .
On the grounds that insanity was hereditary in his family, that he had
early shown symptoms of this terrible malady, and that his conduct up to
the period of this occurrence had been such as to make those who associated
with him believe him not to be sane, and that his attack on the deceased
appeared to be quite without motive and when he was proved to be sober, it
was contended that the murder was committed by a man who was insane, and
not legally responsible for his acts.
The learned Judge, in a most clear and able manner, summed up the evidence.
He directed the jury that any tiling like eccentricity or peculiarity of manner
was not sufficient to excuse a man from the penalties of the crime of murder.
It might well be that such a man could well understand the distinction between
right and wrong. But they must consider whether the man's mind was proved
to be so unsound that he did not know the character and quality of the acts
that he was committing. If they thought so they must acquit him 011 that
ground; if not they must find him guilty.
The jury retired, and, after an absence of nearly an hour, returned with a
verdict of Not Guilty, on the ground of insanity.
The prisoner was then ordered to be confined during Her Majesty's pleasure.
During the trial the prisoner, who appeared in his uniform, stood with his
head bent down and leant on his hands. He had a great deal of very thickly-set
hair, which appeared almost like a wig about his face. Until the sentence was
pronounced he never looked up.
Suicide.?An inquestwas held yesterday (Aug. 6) at the Ship Inn, Redeliff-hill,
Bristol, before Mr. J. B. Grindon, city coroner, on the body of Mr. George Haynes
Hinchcliffe, one of the coroners for the county of Stafford. The circumstances
attending the case were of a melancholy and almost romantic character. The
deceased' gentleman was married only as lately as Wednesday last at West
Bromwich to a lady of equal position in society, to whom he had been for
some time previously engaged, and in course of that _ day the newly-wedded
pair arrived at the Queen's Hotel, Clifton, on their trip lor the honeymoon.
?Nothing strange was observed in the manner of the bridegroom until he went
lxvi
NEGLECTED BRAIN-DISEASE :?SUICIDE.
to his wife's chamber some time after she had retired for the night, and
shortly afterwards reappeared and requested to be provided with another bed-
room. The house being full, Mr. Hinchcliffe was told that he could not be
accommodated, and he then left the Queen's and proceeded to the Sedan
Chair Tavern, on the Broad-quay, where he slept for the night. His wife,
alarmed at his strange behaviour, telegraphed for her brother, Mr. Fereday,
of West Bromwich, who arrived in the course of the following day, and Mr.
Hinchcliffe was sought out and prevailed on to return to his wife. He dined
with her and her brother the same evening, but again left the Queen's, and
there is reason to believe that he wandered about all night. On Saturday he
took lodgings for the night at the house of Mr. Price, grocer, of Thomas-street,
and there committed suicide under the strange circumstances disclosed in the
subjoined evidence.
William Bateman Reed deposed,?I am the proprietor of the Queen's
Hotel, Tyndall's-park. On Wednesday evening last the deceased arrived at my
hotel with a lady; they had the appearance of a newly-married couple. The
body I have seen at the General Hospital is the body of the gentleman. Late
in the evening the chambermaid informed me that the bridegroom retired to
his room some time after the lady, and that he came out shortly afterwards and
asked for another bed. We could not accommodate him, and he left the house
without any luggage. The next morning the lady telegraphed to her friends,
requesting them to come down. The gentleman returned on the following morn-
ing, and asked to see the lady, but. she refused to do so unless in the presence
of her brother, Mr. Fereday, to whom she had telegraphed, requesting him to
come down, as she was in extreme danger. I removed the lady to my private
house,as she stated that she feared her husband had gone insane. In the afternoon
a man in the garb of a sailor came for Mr. Hinchciiffe's luggage, but I did not
then let him have it. I went with the brother-in-law and found deceased at the
Steam Packet Tavern. He returned to our house, and dined with his wife and
brother-in-law. He appeared to be very low in spirits. The brother-in-law
told me he could not discover any reason why they should separate. I spoke
to the deceased between 10 and 11 o'clock, and lie told me that he had gone
into his wife's bedroom on the Wednesday evening and told her that they could
not be happy together. She said, " Good God ! you had better leave the room,"
he did so. This, he said, was all that passed. On Thursday evening he left
our house, and went, as I ascertained, to the Sedan Chair, and slept there that
night. He called again at our house on Friday and Saturday, on which latter
day his wife and biother-in-law had left.
Walter Thomas, grocer, of 99, Thomas-street, Bristol.?I saw deceased
on Saturday night a little before 12 o'clock. He asked me if I had a spare bed.
I told him I did not let lodgings, but he could get a bed at the Queen's
Head, close by. He said he did not want to go to an inn, and, after consulting ,
my wife, I agreed to accommodate him with a bed. I accompanied him to his
bedroom. He looked to see if there was any water in the bottle, and I got him
some and he drank it. He made no particular observation ; he said he would
breakfast with us the following morning. He asked if I could let him have a
razor and brush in the morning, and 1 said I would. I went to bed about a
quarter after 12, and was roused the following morning, about 2 o'clock, by
the police.
Police-sergeant Foot.?About 20 minutes to 2 on Sunday morning I saw
a man at the top of Mr. Price's house, who said he had been robbed, and on
my ringing the bell he told me it was all right, as he had found what lie had lost.
Another officer came up, and we asked him (deceased) his name and residence,
but he refused to give them, and said he did not believe we were policemen
at all. Several persons gathered round, and I said I would call up Air.
Price and see who his lodger was. We had had information of a man having
NEGLECTED BRAIN-DISEASE :?SUICIDE.
lxvii
escaped from Dr. Fox's Asylum. I went away and returned in a few minutes,
when I saw the man holding on by the window-sash. I cautioned him of his
danger, and in a minute or so his hold gave way, and he fell into the street. I
immediately picked him np, and found him apparently dead. In two or three
minutes after rousing Mr. Price, and getting a shutter to put the body on, we
took deceased to the General Hospital.
Police-constable 185 confirmed the evidence of the last witness.
Mr. Dowling, house-surgeon at the Bristol General Hospital.?I was at the
hospital when deceased was brought there on Sunday morning. He was then
dead. His skull was fractured in such a way as to cause his death. He had
a fracture of the left thigh also. I have made an external examination of the
body. Deceased was suffering from hernia. It was not in a dangerous state.
-He wore a truss. There are many popular prejudices that hernia is more
serious than it really is, and, if viewed in that particular light, a sensitive man's
nilm^ might be affected by this disease.
. I he Rev. George Frederick Wade, incumbent of Eastoft, Yorkshire, brother-
in-law of the deceased.?I never knew deceased anything but perfectly sane. I
married him a few days ago at West Bromwich. He left for Clifton. Iam
certain he is the person now lying dead at the General Hospital. I have
known deceased for nearly 20 years. He was considered by all who knew him
as ^jle ideal of all that was honourable, truthful, and gentlemanlike. He suc-
ceeded his father as one of the coroners for Staffordshire, having been elected
} an overwhelming majority. He was exceedingly nervous. I have known
nm faint at matters which another man would only laugh at. I saw his brother-
in-law, Mr. Fereday, on Saturday, who told me of all the strange things that had
lappeued up to that time. I was astonished, as when I saw him and his wife
eave I thought what a happy couple they were. Deceased was very excitable,
Particularly sensitive of anything like blame. The rupture which has been
spoken of took place while he was hunting. There was nothing to have pre-
v ented hirn and his wife from living happily together. H is wife was an ex-
ceedingly nervous lady, and no doubt that has made matters worse. I do not
relieve the deceased would have destroyed himself had he been in possession of
'is faculties. He was quite alive to the sin of self-destruction. I respected
im as I respect few persons in this world, and loved him dearly. He was
33 years of age.
Frederick Kalkroven.?I keep the Sedan Chair, Broad-quay. On Thursday
evening deceased came to my house in a cab, and ordered a bed. He took no
refreshment of any kind. He was very quiet. He went to bed a little before
, ? He brought a large carpet-bag and two coats with him. Nothing about
us manners betrayed insanity. He went out in the morning without taking
any breakfast. He did not return that day. He left his bag open in the bed-
r?7M Between 5 and G on Saturday evening he came with an officer and
said he wished to pay his bill. He was very quiet at the time. He paid his
v 1 \raUC^ aS ^ uuderstood, for the railway station.
II Mary ^nn Tove.Y> ?f Waterloo-court, Thomas-street.?I saw deceased on
le housetop of Mr. Price on Saturday night for some time. He said he
Ranted a policeman. I told him there were two there. He said I was trying
0 gammon" him ; they were not policemen. He talked like a man deranged.
SpW|.him fall from the window into the street.
J ohce-constable Buller.?On Saturday afternoon deceased came to the Cen-
tal-station and said he had lost his carpet-bag at a public-house on the Quay,
^^ent with him, and found his bag at the Sedan Chair. He then requested
mi lo a ca.k f?r as l'e said lie was going by the 6.45 train to Bir-
wiel tt 1 so' He 8'ave me name as ^r- Hinchcliffe, of West Brom-
derancred 6 ^ a VCrj strau?e wa^ at times to me> aud I thought he was
lxviii UNRECOGNISED BRAIN-DISEASE.
The Coroner having summed up, the jury without hesitation found that the
deceased destroyed himself while labouring under temporary insanity.?
{Times, Aug. 17.)
These are marked examples of a class of cases which, from being
neglected or unrecognised, play immense mischief in society. If we
could flatter ourselves that, sooner or later, such cases, after the fashion
of those we have just related, invariably ended in some criminal act
which brought them within the grasp of the law, or which terminated
the case summarily, we might suppose that the evil, in one, and an
exceedingly contracted and somewhat inhumane sense, worked its own
remedy. But that is far from being the fact. Crime and suicide are
but two of the many unhappy results to which neglected or unrecog-
nised brain-disease leads. Most frequently, within the sacred circle of
domestic life, the undetected mischief gives rise to untold-of misery
and ruin, until it terminates, perhaps after long months of wretched-
ness, in unmistakable lunacy. .
If we would lift the veil still higher from this painful but most
important subject, we need but revert again to the criminal records
of the quarter. On the 23rd of July, Thomas Hopley, a schoolmaster,
described as a man of high attainments, was tried, at the Lewes
Assizes, lor the manslaughter of Reginald Channell Canceller, a boy
of fifteen years of age, and one of his pupils. Hopley received for
the charge of the boy a stipend of 180?. per year. The lad exhibited no
aptitude for learning, and was looked upon by his master as being un-
usually obstinate; and in April he had written to Cancellor's father,
telling him that he had tried every means in his power to conquer the
boy's obstinacy, but without avail, and that the only thing less to be
done was to resort to strong measures of corporal punishment. The
father gave permission for Hopley to act as he thought fit. This permis-
sion Hopley construed in the very fullest sense, and adopted a course of
treatment towards the hoy, almost unparalleled in its brutality, and
which ended in the lad's death. It was proved on the trial that, for
a period of nearly two hours, the prisoner beat Cancellor with a
skipping-rope and a stick, and that the boy either died under the
punishment or very quickly after it. 'i
The following statement was made by the prisoner before the magis-
trates on his preliminary examination, and was read at the trial:?
The deceased was a very peculiar boy, and was not only very obstinate,
but was also actuated by a determination not to learn anything. Although
between fifteen and sixteen years old, lie did not know the difference, or pre-
tended not to know it, between a shilling and a sixpence or a fourpenny piece.
He communicated with his father, and he considered that he had his sanction
for what he did, and, feeling that it was absolutely necessary that he should
master the boy's propensities, he resolved, with great regret, to do so by severe
punishment. He was in one of those fits of obstinacy on the day in question,
UNRECOGNISED BRA IN-DISEASE.
Ixix
and lie admitted that he beat him until he subdued him, and he said his lesson
rapidly and correctly. After this the prisoner said the fit again returned, and
the deceased refused to go upstairs or to undress himself, and feeling that if
he had given in it might have the effect of ruining the boy for ever, he again
punished him, and succeeded in subduing him, and the deceased expressed
himself grateful and went to bed. The prisoner admitted that he used the
rope and the stick, but said he only beat the deceased about the legs and
shoulders, and he had no other instrument to make use of, he being so averse
to corporal punishment that he had not even so much as a cane in the house.
The statement concluded by an assertion by the prisoner that he was not at all
in a passion or in anger when he inflicted the punishment upon the deceased,
but that he felt he was doing his duty, and that he repeatedly requested the
deceased to give in, and spare him the pain of inflicting further punishment
upon him.
The body of the unfortunate lad was examined, six days after death,
by Mr. Prescott Hewett, who deposed as follows :?
He made a post mortem examination of the deceased on the 28th of April,
assisted by Dr. Willis and Dr. Holmes. When he first saw the body it was
completely covered, so that no part but the face was visible. There were
.? white kid gloves on the hands, and the legs and feet were covered with appa-
rently men's stockings, which reached half way up the thighs. Upon removing
the coverings and examining the body, he discovered that the legs and arms
were of a dark livid colour, and swollen from extravasated blood. He cut
through the skin, and then ascertained that there was a very large quantity of
blood extravasated into the cellular membranes underneath. Under the skin
?f the palm of one of the hands there was extravasated blood three-quarters of
an inch in thickness, and the cellular membranes under the skin of the thighs
were reduced to a perfect jelly?in fact, all torn to pieces and lacerated by the
blows that had been inflicted. The injuries must have been inflicted by some
heavy blunt weapon, and the stick that had been produced was an instrument
calculated to have inflicted such injuries. The rope, in liis opinion, was cal-
culated to make the bruises, and the stick to have produced the lacerations to
which he had referred. On the right leg of the deceased he observed two
bounds about the size of a sixpence, and an inch in depth, and he was of
opinion that these wounds might have been occasioned by a job or thrust with
the pointed end of the stick that had been produced. The head of the de-
ceased was large, and exhibited the appearance of his having suffered from
Water on the brain, and this turned out to be the case when the head was
opened.
The Lord Chief Justice.?Would this condition of the brain account
or the deceased being of defective intelligence?
Witness.?It certainly would do so.
Ur. Hewett, in conclusion, said that from the appearances he observed, he
^as satisfied that considerable violence had been used to the deceased, and he
came to the conclusion that his death was caused by a shock to the nervous
system, and by the large quantity of blood extravasated in the cellular mem-
branes. He also expressed his opinion, that from the evidence before the
^?urt, and the statement made by the prisoner, that the body of the deceased
Was stiff when he first saw it in the morning, that the death took place about
welve o'clock on the previous night.
A verdict of Guilty was returned, and Hopley was sentenced to four
years penal servitude.
Here, then, we have an example of a man of reputed high attain-
ments, a schoolmaster of mark, regarding the incapacity of a semi-
lxx UNRECOGNISED BRAIN-DISEASE.
idiot as sheer obstinacy ! But, even supposing he had been right, how
shall we characterize the horrible brutality of the method adopted to
overcome the lad's perversity ? It is almost inconceivable that at a t
time (to take no higher ground) when Rarey was showing to crowded
audiences in London the worse than futility of endeavouring to break
in animals by means of physical punishment, that an educated man,
within a few miles of the spot where the horse-tamer was lecturing,
should have thought that by means of the rod he could conquer
and train a supposed obstinate boy! Rightly did the Times say of
Hopley:?
" There is nothing to be said for this man. Every one must feel that four
ears of penal servitude is by no means too severe a sentence for the crime lie
as committed. It is true that the boy never ought to have been put under
his management, that his was an exceptional case, and ought to have been
medically treated. It may be true that Hopley thinks that severity is the only
way to break in stubborn boys. But to beat a boy for two hours with a thick
stick and a skipping rope, to macerate him, to ' prod' him, in private and at
midnight, is not discipline, but murder. All private punishment should be
severely discountenanced, but it would be absurd to speak of this as punish-
ment ; it was a deadly attack, followed by a naturally fatal consequence. This
case has come out much worse than the preliminary investigation prepared us
to expect, and we hold it up as a warning, not less to parents than to school-
masters."
To return, however, to the question with which we started:?The
cases we have quoted teach us the extraordinary ignorance which is
prevalent among all classes of society concerning the significance of
some marked forms of mental disease. Had a degree of perversion cor-
responding to that witnessed in the functions of the brain been mani-
fested, in the different cases, in the functions of the heart, the intestines,
or the muscular system, the need of the physician would have been at
once felt and his aid sought. It is not until the public learn to look
upon the signs of disordered brain-function in the same light as those
of any other function, that we shall miss cases such as those we have
just recited among the records of our courts of justice, or mitigate the
less apparent evils occasioned by neglected or unrecognised brain-
disease. Lelut has well said that " madness is not a thing apart;
all madmen are not under the protection of the asylums which are
devoted to them. From complete or philosophical reason to delirium
truly maniacal there are innumerable degrees, of which it would be
advantageous that every man should have a general knowledge, lest
anger or vengeance should usurp the place of an indulgent pity?a
pity which each one may at one time or other have required, and which
he may require again."
While, however, we insist upon the importance of recognising
Negleoted and Unrecognised Brain Disease, as a source of
THE "DAILY TELEGRAPH" ON SUICIDE.
lxxi
certain social evils, and one deserving of more accurate study than it
has yet received, we must not err by exaggerating that importance at
the expense of other and equally weighty considerations. If the current
events of the quarter have furnished several striking illustrations of
this subject, neither have they been wanting in other matter of hardly
less interest to the practical psychologist. Thus, suicide forces itself
upon the attention. The case we have already cited was the result of
disease, and demands our pity ; but many cases have been recorded
during the past quarter, which, from the comparative triviality of the
causes inducing the act, indicate the existence of a most unhealthy
tone of thought upon the subject among certain of the metropolitan
classes, which cannot be too greatly reprobated. It is not too much
to say, that in England suicide as a rule is divested of any senti-
mentality, and wears a very commonplace and unattractive aspect. It
is with our population looked upon truly as a last resort, and not as a
legitimate mode of escape from the first serious cross which may
happen to occur to an individual. Suicide is, however, just one of
those subjects which are most apt to receive a gloss from unhealthy
sentiment, and so impose upon immature and too mobile minds. It,
therefore, behoves the public on the first signs of a reaction iji favour
of suicide among any class of the population, to crush it at once by
utter and immediate condemnation. In a question of this kind, we
feel assured that public opinion would be all-powerful.
No organ of the press does such good service in this matter as the
chief of the cheap journals?the Daily Telegraph. The mode
m which this journal hunts down suicide deserves the warmest com-
mendation. Admirable in tone, sound in object, and brilliant in
quality, the articles which it has devoted to the subject in the past
quarter were fully calculated to effect that good, which from their
nature, and the enormous circulation of the journal, might be hoped
lor. We shall reproduce these articles, as well for the lessons they con-
tain as for the interesting illustrations they afford of the feelings of the
most important organ of the cheap daily press upon a most painful
and disheartening social evil.
It is probable that, were the statistics of suicide analyzed, and were we
placed in a position to fix with certainty on the circumstances which have led
to every attempt at self-murder, we should find that a large proportion, if not
a majority, of these criminal acts were due to the most trifling causes. Your
deeply-dyed criminal seldom tries to hang himself to the bars of his cell-window,
or to dash out his brains against its stone walls. When, indeed, he does
attempt felo de sc, it is not because he is told that he is about to be transported
;or life, but because the governor has stopped his ration of boiled beef, or the
turnkey has reprimanded him for not folding his counterpane properly. A
woman who has cut the throats of half-a-dozen children is committed for trial,
and goes away quietly enough in the van to Newgate, whereas a poor "drunk
lxxii
THE "DAILY TELEGRAPH" ON SUICIDE.
and disorderly," who lias been remanded to the police-cell through inability to
pay a five-shilling fine, straightway proceeds to hang herself in her garters, after
the manner of the unfortunate Miss Bailey. A shop lad accused by his master
of embezzling a few halfpence will often cast himself into the canal, whereas .<
the rogue who has forged for thousands of pounds, and beggared dozens of
families, receives his sentence of penal servitude without murmuring, and takes
to chairmaking or matweaving, under the auspices of the prison taskmaster,
quite blithely. Many a servant-girl, whose mistress has reproached her with
a propensity for ringlets or crinoline, or who has had a " few words " with her
"young man" in the Coldstreams relative to her flirtation with some dapper
constable in the P division, rushes to the chemist's shop, purchases some oxalic
acid, and crams it down her throat. In moral and religious tracts suicide is
generally the orthodox termination to a career of female frailty. " Drowned !
drowned!" is the fifth act to the drama which commences in a villa at St,
John's-wood; but any intelligent police-constable or divisional surgeon will
tell us that the suicidal element enters but in an extraordinarily minute degree
into the phases of the social evil. Now and then some wretched creature will
fling her bonnet and shawl on the pavement, and jump over the parapet, or
rush down the steps of a bridge into the water; but in nine cases out of ten it
will be found that the predisposing causes of the rash act have not been misery
or want, or remorse at a life of sin, but that the unhappy creature has been ' \
drinking rather freely, or has had some paltry squabble with a sister Cyprian ot-
her landlady. Of course, we leave on one side the self-slaughters that are per-
petrated through suicidal mania, through constitutional hypochondria, through
deliberate design?as when a man sees 110 way out of his difficulties, and cal-
culates, as has often happened, that he may better his position by killing him-
self. But there have been suicides for the toothache. There have been suicides
because it rained?because a new bonnet had not come home from the mil-
liner's. There have been suicides through emulation?suicidal epidemics
which form, perhaps,- one of the most curiously obscure diseases of the
mind of which a mental pathologist could treat.
Self-destruction, unhappily, has at all times been very prevalent among the
young, more especially among the weaker sex; and the causes are almost inva-
riably the same?crosses in love and quarrels with parents. The latter reason
is so*frequent that it developes itself even in children, and boys and girls of
ten and twelve have been known to commit suicide to revenge themselves for
a scolding, or to avoid a punishment with which they have been threatened.
Nine-tenths of the painful domestic tragedies which plunge respectable families
into irremediable despair are attributable to one fatal cause?temper. There
is temper, often, on the part of the parent who too harshly censurcs or corrects
a child. There is equally temper on the part of the son or daughter who rebels
against a fancied usurpation or overstraining of parental or maternal authority, ,
who is unable to struggle against the superior power of the head of the family,
and who?determined that revenge shall not be quite impotent?invokes the
aid'of the water-butt or the laudanum-botlle. Not many days since, our
columns contained a report of a most lamentable event that occurred in the
family of a respectable tradesman at Plymouth. The father had some wretched
squabble with his daughter, a girl of nineteen, about the price of a pair of
boots she had sold. His temper became ungovernable. He took a rope and
beat the girl severely. She, stung to frenzy by the humiliating chastisement,
rushed up stairs, flung herself out of a window, and dashed her skull to atoms
on the pavement. We daresay that many who read the report of the inquest
were moved to feelings of the strongest indigiiatiou against a man who seemed
heartless and brutal enough to flog a girl of nineteen with a cord ; but, when
the sad history came to be analyzed, it was found that the girl had before
threatened to commit suicide, that this last conflict was only the end of a series
I
THE "DAILY TELEGRAPH ON SUICIDE. lxxiii
of quarrels with her father, and that she was obdurate and rebellious. There
were faults on both sides, and on each the error was temper.
Under the head of "romantic suicide and attempt at suicide," our readers
have quite recently perused another sad story, which bears with equal force on
our remarks. Mr. Brent, the coroner, has been holding an inquest on the
body of a young girl only seventeen years of age, who, in company with a female
friend about the samfe age, threw herself into the New River, at Highbury Yale,
on Thursday last. The two girls were children of most respectable parents,
and having formed an acquaintance at a Sunday school treat two or three years
since, had become most intimate friends. They wrote love-letters to each other
??as girls will do before they have something better to love?exchanging small
presents and locks of hair. The deceased girl appears to have been very fond
of "pleasure"?that is, of balls and junkettings. On the 25th of June she
remained from home all night. In great alarm, her father called on the family
of her young companion, thinking they were together. Only one, however, and
that one not his daughter, was at home. The deceased, however, came home,
and her mother is said to have struck her for attempting to speak to her friend.
W hat other scenes of bickerings and harshness may have preceded or followed
, this act, it is out of our power to determine. Finally, the two young women
ran away, with?God help them !?sixpence in their pockets. The deceased
had told her mother it was the last she would ever see of her. They
^ walked some time and got very hungry, when the deceased proposed to buy
arsenic for both. They walked beyond Edmonton and back into London.
They lived on one shilling and threepence, which a gentleman gave them in
charity, until Thursday morning?they had run away on the Tuesday. The girl
who survives, asked her friend, if she would return home. She replied
that she never would. They walked to Highbury Yale, and joining hands, and
shrieking, "Oh, love ! love!" jumped into the New lliver. Was there ever a
tale " so sad, so tender, and so true ?" The girl who lives was rescued by a
gentleman who heard the cries of the unhappy pair. A brave plasterer?all
honour to him?who was at work in a neighbouring building saw a shawl
floating in the water, jumped in, and brought?alas; nothing but a dripping
corpse to land. Every means of resuscitation was tried, but in vain. The
girl was proved to have been good and virtuous beyond suspicion. Nothing
but this unhappy temper had conspired to render her home miserable, her
parents bereaved, herself a guilty suicide. We trust that the result of this
most tragical event will be, for the remainder of her life, an awful but salutary
warning to the young woman who has been providentially delivered from a
watery grave; but should it not also be a warning as pregnant with example
to parents who treat their children with undue harshness, and, in their correc-
tion of the imprudences of youth, have recourse not to reason and kindness,
but to revilings and blows??(Daily Telegraph, July 6.)
It can scarcely have escaped public notice that for a considerable time past,
and especially during the month now ending, the London magistrates have
been constantly engaged in dealing with cases of suicide. It may or may not
be a question whether some mystery of nature exists in connexion with a
mania of this kind, whether atmospherical or astrological influences are at
work, or whether philosophy may find a cause for so deadly an autumnal epi-
demic. One of the modern magi affirms that individuals born under the sign
of Saturn, when the sun is in Hyleg, are liable to attempt self-destruction;
but so far as we have investigated the promptings of metropolitan make-
believes atfelo de se, we discover them to be, firstly, drunkenness; secondly,
imposture ; and thirdly, despair?this last being in all cases accompanied by a
strong development of mental disease. It is often difficult, however, to draw
the line at which, in consequence of this morbid affliction, personal liberty
I
k
lxxiv THE "DAILY TELEGRAPH" ON SUICIDE. f
should be restrained. The literary gentleman who deprived himself of life a
few months since, did so in the very midst of his ordinary intellectual tasks,
and stopped reviewing a book in order to cut his throat. There can be no
doubt that the mind of the unfortunate west-country coroner who threw him-
self out of window was mortally affected. The poor clergyman whose death
we on Wednesday recorded, was, of course, at least temporarily insane. Con-
cerning this class of suicides we are not proposing to treat. They belong to
the psychologists, the physicians, and the humane guardians of lunacy. But
there are others which have been painfully and repulsively obtrusive of late.
The sottish artisan, who has squandered his wages in bestial excess, and has
reduced himself to a state of inhuman bewilderment, staggers to the water's
edge and drops in, perfectly aware that the policeman, whose bull's-eye is upon
him, will come to the rescue and lodge him safely in the station-house. The
draggle-tailed hussy who has pawned her husband's clothes, beaten her children,
received two black eyes in a fight, and saturated herself to the blood and to
the brain with gin, howls down the steps of some bridge, sure of attracting
attention, and wralks into the river like a timid bather, just far enough not to
be out of reach. She is certain to shriek before she takes her drenching, and
it may be noted, as a fact for Benthamites, that these intoxicated shams of
suicide never take place except within sight or call of a crowded thorough-
fare. The genuine outcast, the desolate creature who wanders to the Bridge
of Sighs, the hopeless criminal resolved upon anticipating justice, seeks the
loneliest niche on the loneliest bridge, or the midnight obscurity of Hamp-
stead Heath, or a private room in a retired hotel; the brawler, savage with
himself, and the harridan, who has nothing left to her but a mimicry of self-
drowning, or strangulation with her garter, habitually yells loudly enough
before enacting the hideous farce, whether in the shallows of the Thames or in
the cell of a poiice-station.
We do not assume that any magisterial efforts will ever give meaning to },
the menace of Sir Peter Laurie, and "put down suicide." Nor would we re-
commend, as one way of aiming at this result, the course adopted formerly
by the municipal Government of New Orleans, in which city, for three con-
secutive months, the corpse of every self-murderer was hung up naked and
publicly scourged?an indignity which speedily toned down the romantic aspi-
rations of young gentlemen and ladies ambitious of a poetical notoriety after
death. Captain Langley records that in Sindh, when a person attempted to
drown himself, he was taken out of the water, kicked seven times, and set
free; but it might be dangerous to arm the night police of London with so
anomalous a prerogative. Yet is there no possible method of checking this
horrible and disgusting mania ? It has been demonstrated that the ancient
and barbarous custom of cross-road graves and unconsecrated burials is Avholly
inoperative. Verdicts of "Temporary insanity" almost invariably, except in the
cases of suicides who have slain others before slaying themselves, relieve the ?
dead from this unchristian insult. But we are speaking now of impostors who
intend only to run the risk of a soaking, or tighten a handkerchief round their
necks, in order to rouse sympathy or to gratily some instinct of drunkenness. i
Too often the magistrates, in their benevolence, allow them to go unpunished,
after an admonition wasted upon callous ears. Now, where it is established
that the attempt was a sham, the severest punishment ought to be inflicted, as
upon rogues and vagabonds of the worst description. Under other circum-
stances, when poor girls who have been seduced, or semptresses out of work,
or children dreading chastisement, have essayed, more or less resolutely, the
destruction of their own lives, they ought never to be set free without under-
going more or less of penitentiary discipline. We do not mean to imply that l.
they should be classed with thieves, disturbers of the peace, or criminals of any
kind; but they should indubitably be confined for a longer or shorter period,
J
THE AESTHETICS OF MUEDER AND SUICIDE. lxxv
kept to moderate labour upon the plainest wholesome food, and receive a course
of admonition such as might drive out of their minds the idea of suicide. A
repetition of the offence must invariably be considered a serious infringement
of law, and visited with the penalties either of a House of Correction or of a
lunatic asylum, the latter being, perhaps, the more effectual. Moreover, the
public, we fear, is often too ready with its subscriptions in cases where young
women, having led a dissipated life, and dreading the struggles of poverty,
seek for sympathy by exhibiting themselves in a police court, trembling from
the effects of" a plunge in the river. Too much discrimination cannot be ob-
served with regard to these appellants to the benevolence of society. The
Penitentiary or the Reformatory is the fit receptacle of every one whose mind
has been so completely overpowered, and whose conscience has been so fatally
drugged, as to risk the death of felony rather than endure the ordinary troubles
of the world. A night in a police cell, an exhortation from the magistrate, or
even a week's visitations by the chaplain, can hardly suffice for the cure of a
moral malady so fearful. But, as we have said, a distinction must be drawn
between serious and deep anguish, provoking to the rashness of self-murder,
and that maudlin self-abandonment which leads the drunkard to the river's
edge, to be dragged out by a waterman or a constable. The sots and vagrants
who perpetrate this offence are fit subjects for the stocks and pillory, and the
law, while not pretending to deal with human nature as with a vulgar mecha-
nism, ought to treat a pretended suicide as it would treat a fortune-telling
gipsy, or a begging-letter impostor.?(Daily Telegraph, Aug. 31.)
In further illustration of this subject, we quote the following sin-
gular but instructive case :?
Attempted Suicide and Murder?Winchester Assizes.?Crown Court,
July 18.?Robert Simpson (a private in the Rifles) was indicted for cutting
and wounding Sophia Rowe, with intent to kill and murder her, at Winchester.
Mr. Gunner was counsel for the prosecution.
This was one of the most extraordinary cases ever heard. It appeared that
Rowe was the daughter of a brickmaker named James Rowe, who lived at
Stowmarket, Suffolk. She had come to Winchester as a servant. In December
last she was out of place. She went to the Painters' Arms in Winchester to
assist the landlady, a Mrs. Watlen, and she remained at that house until Satur-
day, the 12th of May. In the meantime she had become acquainted with the
prisoner, who was 22 years of age, and they kept company together. On a
Thursday and Friday night they slept together, and on the Friday morning,
before they got up, the prisoner said he was tired of being a soldier, and
A should cut his throat, and he requested Rowe to borrow a razor for him. She
told him she would not borrow one. He then became very unhappy, and the
girl gave him 1 s. 6d. to purchase a razor with. '1 hey got up, and in the course
of the day the prisoner went out and bought a razor, and he gave it to Rowe,
who locked it up in her box. They remained at the Painters' Arms all the
rest of the day. When they went to bed, between ten and eleven o'clock at
night, the prisoner asked Rowe to put the razor under the head of the bed,
and she took it out of her box and put it under the bolster. Soon after they
were in bed another lodger, named Rachel Welbv, came in and got into the
same bed with them, and slept with them all night. On the Saturday morn-
ing Rachel Welby got up a little before seven o'clock, and while she was dress-
ing she heard Rowe say, "Doit, dear; do it, dear." After she had gone
down, Rowe stated that the prisoner said he was determined to cut his throat;
she endeavoured to dissuade him, but he said he would do it. Rowe, who was
very fond of him, said if he cut his own throat he should cut hers first. He
said he had not power to do it. Rowe said if he would not cut hers he should
f ~T1 ?inn
lxxvi
THE AESTHETICS OF MURDER AND SUICIDE.
not cut his. The prisoner then asked her to lay her arm down for him to put
his head on. She laid her arm down, and he placed his head upon it. He at
that time had the razor in his hand, and he cut her throat, and then he .cut his
own. It would seem that some noise was made, and Mrs. Watlen went into
the room, and saw them both lying in bed on their backs with their throats
cut. Howe said, " Good-bye," and the prisoner said, " This is love." Howe
then said, "I shall die happy." Mrs. Watlen asked Rowe who had done it,
and she pointed to the prisoner. Mrs. Watlen instantly sent for Mr. Buckle,
a surgeon, who found them in the manner before described by Mrs. Watlen.
Their throats were bleeding very much, and the woman was just fainting from
loss of blood. The girl's throat was more severely cut than the prisoner's.
The surgeon immediately took fhe requisite steps, and saved the lives of both
parties.
The learned Judge, in summing up, said that if the jury believed the
evidence, they must find the prisoner guilty, because, had the woman died,
he would have been guilty of murder. He supposed the people had been
reading novels. It was a most shameful and wicked act. Even if the girl had
asked him to take her life, he had no right to do so.
The jury found the prisoner Guilty.
Judgment of death recorded.
