On Habits af Intoxication as Causing a Type of Disease
=======================================================

THE JOURNAL
OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND
MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
APRIL 1, 18G0.
Aut. I.?


"Doctor, I will give you a wrinkle," said a friend to us not
long ago, as we were gossiping concerning wine, and an at-
tendant was directed to descend into the cellar, and bring from a
particular bin a bottle of champagne. It may be as well, perhaps,
to remark, lest the uninitiated should stumble over the term,
that a wrinkle, in the refined slang of the day, signifies a little
bit of practical wisdom. The phrase is highly metaphorical.
Worldly wisdom increases with years; so also do the furrows
"which indent the forehead. Therefore an increase of wrinkles on
the brow may be regarded as an index of increasing sapience^
and a wrinkle may legitimately stand as a figurative synonym for
au item of practical wisdom. This by the way. The champagne
Avas in due time placed upon the table, and the sparkling fluid
had a most agreeable taste and refreshing effect, for the evening
^as hot and stifling. "Well, how do you like the wine?" in-
quired our friend. " A pleasant drink for a scorching day," we
Replied. f< Eead that," lie said, putting into our hands the cork
"which had just been extracted from the bottle, and pointing to
the inner extremity?that which had been in proximity to the
"wine. There we saw and read, not a little to our astonishment,
the formidable word mort, printed in clear bold letters. " That,"
said our friend, " is a trade-mark, and when you see it affixed to
the cork of a champagne bottle, you may rest assured that no
grapes ever contributed towards the formation of the wine.
This was the wrinkle; but the singularity of the trade-mark
ftwoke other thoughts than those immediately connected with the
utility of knowing it. Should there have been a full stop after
*0. XVIII.?NEW series. k
126 ON HABITS OF INTOXICATION
the different letters?each having a specific signification, the for-
mation of the word being merely accidental ? Or was the trade-
mark such as we read it, Mort?Death?and if so, was its adop-
tion a Mephistophelian satire of the wine-merchant on the wine
vended ? Truly, a reversed cork so stamped and placed upon the
plates of the guests at a feast might well serve the purpose of
the puppet-mummy introduced during the course of an ancient
Egyptian banquet; or might convey as homely but as forcible
a lesson as that taught in Holbein's drawing of the toper in the
Dance of Death, in which Death is represented as officiously pour-
ing the inebriating drink into the mouth of one of the carousers.
Or may we regard this trade mark as a foreshadowing of that
time, which Dr. Magnus Huss tells us, in his work on chronic
alcoholism, he doubts not will sooner or later arrive, when alcohol
will no longer be known as aqua vitce but anua mortis.
And, indeed, as we become more and more familiar with the
remote effects of alcohol upon the system, in whatever form the
potent spirit be consumed, we cannot resist the conclusion
that, as too commonly used, it would be more correctly termed
aqua mortis than aqua vitce. It will be well briefly to recal
a few of the reasons which justify this inference, as in so
doing we shall best pave the way to the subject-matter of this
article.
Mr. Neison, in his researches on the " Rate of Mortality among
Persons of Intemperate Habits," shows that in the instances he
investigated, at the term of life 21?30 the mortality was up-
wards of five times that of the general community; and that in
the succeeding twenty years of life it was about four times as great,
the difference becoming less and less as age advanced. " If
there be anything, therefore," he adds, " in the usages of society
calculated to destroy life, the most powerful is certainlv the in-
ordinate use of strong drink."*
Again, of the immediate causes of death among the intemperate,
Head diseases (Nervous system) ranked most prominent, while
diseases of the Digestive organs and dropsy, and diseases of the Re-
spiratory organs were about on a par, although showing a compara-
tive difference of very considerable importance. Now the deaths
from Head diseases among the population of England and Wales,
aged twenty and upwards, constitute only 9*710 per cent, of the
deaths from all causes at those ages; but Mr. Neison tells us that
*' among the intemperate classes they constitute 27*100 per cent.,
being nearly three times as great. With other diseases," continues
this gentleman, " similar differences will be found. In the gene-
ral community, the deaths from diseases of the respiratory organs,
at tl:e same period of life, amount to 33'150 per cent, of the
" ' ? * Vital Statistics, 2nd edit, p. 205.
AS CAUSING A TYPE OF DISEASE. 127
deaths from all causes; while among the intemperate group they
are only 22-980 per cent, of all the deaths."* Of the Head
diseases among the intemperate, upwards of 50 per cent, were
recorded as " delirium tremens."
Further, while the mortality from the two groups of Head
diseases and of the Digestive organs forms 15*950 percent, of the
deaths from all causes, at corresponding ages, the mortality from
the same groups of diseases among the intemperate forms 50'40
per cent, of all the deaths that take place, or more than three times
the general average. " These may, therefore," writes Mr.
Neison, "be regarded as the distinctive type of the causes of
death among intemperate persons; and the predominance of
deaths assigned to such causes in any particular collection of
facts, may fairly, in the absence of other and more direct evidence,
?add to the inference of irregularity of habits having prevailed to
an unusual extent."+
If, then, the inordinate use of alcoholic beverages exercises so
lethiferous an influence, it must be conceded on this ground alone,
that the subject is one of sufficient gravity to claim the most
careful attention of the practical physician. In our systems of
medicine it is, however, customary chiefly to direct notice to the
more immediate results of excessive indulgence, and these alone
find a place in our nosological arrangements and mortality
records. Not that the more remote effects of intemperance have
been, or are overlooked or forgotten. Far from it; for the sub-
ject is one having such important bearings upon the moral, intel-
lectual, and physical deterioration of individuals and of nations,
and even upon the extinction of families and races, that much
research has been and still is being devoted to it. And yet with
all this the more remote morbific results of intemperance have
not been so fully appreciated as to receive a legitimate position
m systematic medicine, and until this requirement be fulfilled,
several evils must be perpetuated. First, the records of mortality
and of sickness being thus far imperfect, from them no satisfac-
tory measure can be obtained of the lethal or deteriorating
influence of intemperance on the whole population. The nosolo-
gical system adopted by the Registrar-General marks in two in-
stances only?intemperance and delirium tremens?death as a
result of excessive indulgence in strong drink. It is manifest
that these examples can embrace but a small amount of the mor-
tality arising directly from intoxication. The nosology of the
Registrar-General is that, however, which principally governs the
systematic teaching of physic in our schools of medicine. Hence
a second evil, to wit, that the attention being fixed mainly
upon the immediate ills arising from intemperance, we are apt to
* Op. cit., p. 221. t Op. cit., p. 222.
K 2
128 -ON HABITS OF INTOXICATION
under-estimate the more remote and even more important, because
less apparent, more insidious, and, in the end, more disastrous
evils. Nor is this all; for tlie morbific effects whicli may be
developed by the free usage of alcoholic drinks, short of intem-
perance, and which we think are still very imperfectly understood,
are liable to be altogether overlooked in practical medicine.
The time has now come, however, when we think, that with no
small advantage to medicine, and the community at large, the
morbific effects of alcohol may rightly receive a more prominent
position in the systematic teaching of the medical art than it has
yet received. In J 852, Dr. Magnus Huss, of Stockholm, showed
that the remote, as well as the immediate effects of intemperance
upon the nervous system had a specific character, and that they
could be clearly distinguished from other affections of the brain
and spinal cord. The more remote effects of intemperance Dr.
Magnus Huss designates by the term chronic alcoholism, by which
he wished to be understood, "the collective symptoms of a disordered
condition of the mental, moto.r, and sensory functions of the nervous
system, these symptoms assuming a chronic form, and without
their being immediately connected with any of those modifications
of the central or peripheric portions of the nervous system which
may be detected during life, or discovered after death by ocular
inspection, such symptoms, however, affecting individuals who
have persisted for a considerable length of time in the abuse of
alcoholic liquors."
Adopting, then, the terminology of Dr. Magnus Huss, the
poisonous effects of alcohol, in whatever form taken, would be
designated by the general phrase alcoholism, these morbid results
being further described as occurring either in an acute or chronic
form. Or else, using the ordinary term intoxication, we should
speak of acute and chronic alcoholic intoxication, including under
the former phrase drunkenness, ordinarily so termed, and delirium
with tremor; under the latter, the collective symptoms described
by Dr. Magnus Huss.
Alcoholism is, perhaps, not a very euphonious term, but yet,
for scientific usage, it is much preferable to intoxication. The
latter is in common use to signify drunkenness, and its adoption
as a technical phrase having a very different and much wider
meaning than drunkenness, ill the usual acceptation of that
word, would most probably lead to confusion. It is well to
avoid, if practicable, in scientific language, a word which has a
technical and popular meaning differing the one from the other.
Hence we prefer the term alcoholism.
A modification in the use of the term chronic alcoholism
would, we think, also be advisable. The expression, as defined
AS CAUSING A TYPE OF DISEASE. 129
by Dr. Magnus Huss, and generally adopted by those who have
written upon the subject, includes a wide range of symptoms,
frequently differing greatly in intensity and duration, and to
which the term chronic is not always very applicable. Dr.
Leon Thomeuf, in a recent clinical essay (an inaugural thesis) on
alcoholism,* describes three phases of the disorder, using the
phrase alcoholic intoxication :?
1. Acute alcoholic intoxication, in which the effect is always
immediatelv linked to the action of the cause, and this being
exhausted, the disturbance to which it has given rise quickly
vanishes. This, the more immediate or primitive phase of
intoxication, includes drunkenness, oinomania, and delirium
with tremor, and it is characterized by expansive sentiments,
Agitation, and fury.
2. Subacute alcoholic intoxication, which supervenes subse-
quently to the immediate action of the cause, and which corre-
sponds sometimes to the alcoholic insanity of M. Marcel, at
others to a peculiar form of melancholy, which is accompanied
by certain disordered states of motility. This phase is marked
by depressive sentiments.
3. Chronic alcoholic intoxication, which determines certain
structural or functional changes in the central nervous system,
giving rise to the ordinary symptoms of different forms of
insanity.
Dr. Thomeuf*s arrangement was derived from observation of
cases at Charenton, of which asylum he was an interne, but we
think that much advantage would be obtained from adopting this
threefold division, and extending it to the whole phenomena of
alcoholism, as observed as well in private and general practice,
in the special practice of a lunatic asylum.
Dr. B. A. Morel, in his recent important treatise on mental
disorders, classes chronic alcoholism among the mental perver-
sions produced by the use of divers inebriating matters. He
Writes?
" The continued and progressive ingestion of certain intoxicating
substances, as, for example, alcohol, constitutes a malady which latterly
has been designated chronic alcoholism. When we employ this term,
we wish to design a pathological state, as well physical as moral, in an
individual who, enjoying primitively his reason, suffers himself to slide
progressively into habits which, becoming inveterate, present them-
selves in the form of irresistible tendencies, and determine in the or-
ganism lesions of a special nature. This does not, however, exclude
the existence of other pathological, pre-existing conditions which in-
fluence the disposition that an individual may show to indulge to
* Annales Medico-P$ychologiq_itcs, 1859, p. 565.
13Q ON HABITS OF INTOXICATION
excess in alcoholic drinks. Thus, it is not uncommon to see, at the
commencement of mental disorders, and particularly of general paralysis,
persons who have always been cited for their sobriety, suddenly manifest
great depravity of the instincts. Alcoholism, in cases of this kind,
is a result of pre-existing disease ; and, if this mode of considering the
subject is of a character to throw light upon diagnosis and prognosis,
it also has an important bearing in regard to the legal medicine of the
insane."*
The question of the influence of alcoholism as a cause of insanity
lias been so recently raised, in the evidence given before the Par-
liamentary Committees which sat during the last and preceding
sessions of Parliament, to inquire into the care and treatment of
lunatics, that it may be useful to glance for a moment at the
statistics in reference to this subject which have been noted by
Dr. Thomeuf.
It would appear that 350 lunatics were admitted into Charenton
in the two years 1857-58. Of these cases, 102 were caused prin-
cipally, if not solely, by the use of alcoholic drinks, that is, 29'1
per cent, of the whole were cases of alcoholism. The different
characters presented by these cases were carefully recorded and
are of great interest. They were as follows :?
Delirium tremens . 15 per cent. Melancholia . . .
Drunken mania .> 6 ? Anomalous psychical 24 per cent.
Congestive mania . 1 ? symptoms, after
General paralysis . 34 ? delirium tremens 4 ?
Epileptiform convul- Folie circularie . . 3 ?
sions . . . . 2 ? Stupidite .... 2 ?
It will be understood from this list how it happens that, if the im-
mediate cause of death in cases of alcoholism be the fact entered
in our registers of mortality, which is the rule, the lethal effects
of the disease will lie in a great measure hid among the records
of deaths from idiopathic affections.
A requisite step to the admission of alcoholism in its fullest
acceptation into our nosological arrangements, is a fuller appre-
ciation than is yet generally possessed of the specific character of
the subacute and chronic forms of the affection. Whatever tends
to promote this end is of moment. We would, therefore, direct
attention to a little work on the subject, which has recently been
published by Dr. Marcet,f and which, although it professes chiefly
to have a therapeutical object, is exceedingly well calculated to
convey a clear notion of the nature and symptoms of chronic alco-
* Traite des Maladies Mentales. Par le Dr. B. A. Morel. Paris, I860,
p. 214.
+ On Chronic Alcoholic Intoxication, or Alcoholic Stimulants in connexion with
the Nervous System: with a Synoptical Table of Cases. By W. Marcet, M.D.,.
F.R.S., Assistant-Physician to the Westminster Hospital, &c. Churchill, I860.
AS CAUSING A TYPE OF DISEASE. 131
holism (using that term with the signification attached to it by
Dr- Magnus Huss), as this affection is most commonly met
with..
" The symptoms of the disease," writes Dr. Marcet, " depend on a
functional disturbance of the properties of the nervous system, which may
last for weeks, months, or years, even after the habit of excessive drinking
has been given up. On first applying to his medical adviser, the patient
Will probably not state the cause of his illness, and thus seriously mislead
the physician in his estimation of the nature of the complaint. If we
try to account for this difficulty of establishing the cause of the
disease in cases of chronic alcoholism, it will be found that in some
instances the patient is ashamed of his intemperance, and will not
confess it. In others, he considers that the nature of his occupation
is such as to require an excessive amount of drink; he is seldom or
never drunk, in his opinion he takes no more than is absolutely re-
quired, and lie is not aware of his.suffering from alcoholic stimulants.
Some will positively disbelieve that their illness can be owing to the
abuse of alcoholic liquors, as they have been under a pledge to drink
very little or none at all for some time previously; but it will be .no-
ticed, in the course of the examination, that before taking the pledge
these individuals were thorough drunkards, and had been obliged to
give up drinking 011 account of their health. Finally, in those instances
where the mind has been affected through frequent fits of drunkenness
and repeated attacks of delirium tremens, the patient may have great
aversion from giving plain answers to the questions of the physician,
and thus lead him to understand that he never indulged too freely in
spirituous drinks.
" There is something peculiar in the look and gait of individuals in
the habit of drinking to excess, or even of habitual tipplers, which will
greatly assist in discovering the nature of the complaint, even before
addressing the patient. Iiis peculiar complexion, often sharp features,
or, if he be fat, the injected cheeks and nose, and their violet appearance,
the trembling of the limbs, often of the whole body, or a want of
steadiness and co-ordination in the movements, not very unlike in-
cipient chorea?all these are so many symptoms that the medical
practitioner will not fail to observe. On conversing with such patients,
their intellect will not often be found blunted, and the account they give
?f their sufferings is perhaps remarkably clear. It may be, however, that
the patient has fallen into a state of melancholia, and fancies his doctor
ls attempting to do him some injury, in which case the sufferer will
pndeavour to turn aside the conversation, and adroitly avoid the sub-
ject. I have observed a well-marked instance of this kind in a boy of
eighteen whose case I had great difficulty at first in making out; but
* fortnight afterwards, his health having much improved, he gave me
a clear account of his illness. Another patient, although he had given
up the habit of drinking to excess, taking no more on an average than
two pints of beer daily for the last six years, yet assured me that he
was occasionally unconscious of what he was doing, and that his friends,
sometimes thought he was insane."?(pp. 6-9.)
332 ON HABITS OF INTOXICATION
The cliief symptoms of chronic alcoholism are trembling of
the feet and hands, gradually increasing weakness, and in the
fully developed cases paralysis, startings of the tendons, and
cramps. The sleep is much disturbed by frightful dreams, or it
-cannot be obtained either on account of formications or prick-
ings, or neuralgic pains in the limbs, or extreme restlessness. In
the more advanced stages of the disease, the night not unfrequently
becomes a period of horrible suffering. The patient in vain seeks
to place his limbs in a position which would afford relief to the
uneasy sensations or burning pain which affects them, and if sleep
or drowsiness steals upon him, it is presently driven away by
convulsive startings, which seem to tear asunder the muscles.
The neuralgic pains which at first haunt solely the night begin to
affect the patient and increase upon him by day. Vertigo often
happens, and at times the vision is clouded, or the patient feels
as if he had been suddenly plunged into darkness. Hallucina-
tions are of common occurrence. Dr. Marcet writes :?
" They mostly affect the organs of sight and of hearing. For instance,
one of my patients, when walking in the street, had seen ropes dan-
gling about his head; to another, objects appeared as if they were
double ; some perceived occasionally insects creeping about: the various
visions often disappearing as soon as the attention was directed to
them. These factitious perceptions of the sight appear sometimes so
real that the individual moves aside to avoid an imaginary object
standing in his way. A cabman (Case 4-7) I was treating for chronic
alcoholism told me lie frequently pulled up his horse suddenly, or drove
to one side of the street, lest he should run over some obstacle he
distinctly saw in front of his horse, and which he afterwards found not
to exist in reality. In his case objects appeared to be multiplied to as
many as ten times their real number, so that if a lamp-post, a man, or
a cart, happened to' be near him, he perceived ten lamp-posts, or ten
men, or as many carts. He could not possibly make out which object
was really to be avoided, and was obliged to give up driving on account
of the risk of an accident. In most cases the patient is occasionally,
or perhaps constantly, troubled with shadows or a black mist, or flying
specks (viusccg volitantes) passing rapidly before his eyes, and causing
a dimness of sight, especially when he is looking attentively at some-
thing ; in the act of reading, for example, the book is suddenly dark-
ened, and a state of almost complete blindness ensues, lasting a few
minutes. I have met with one instance where the patient perceived
spots of all kinds of colour.* During the long and sleepless nights,
aberrations of the sight frequently happen. The wife of a patient I
was treating for chronic alcoholism told me her husband often fancied,
whilst lying awake, that he saw rats and cats, and various other de-
* Magnus Huss has observed cases of chronic alcoholism where objects appeared
peculiarly coloured. He reports having met with two instances of hallucinations
of the smell, and also with hallucinations of the taste, the patients believing they
were drinking brandy instead of water.
AS CAUSING A TYPE OF DISEASE. 133
scriptions of animals, on the bedclothes ; he used to doze at intervals,
and in the morning could not remember anything of the nightly
visions. The aberrations of the sense of hearing are not so frequent,
but I have met with patients who occasionally heard voices addressing
them when nobody was present."?(pp. 11-14.)
The intellectual and moral faculties, particularly the latter, are
invariably perverted to a greater or less extent, and too com-
monly the patient becomes completely debased and brutalized,
heeding nothing but the cravings of his own appetites or the
pricks of his own sufferings. The digestive functions are more
or less interfered with, and the kidneys and liver are very liable
to be morbidly affected, the former with granular degeneration.
Frequently, also, the heart is enfeebled by fatty degeneration of its
structure. Wasting sets in, and the patient in the end may sink
from exhaustion, or an induced lesion of liver, kidneys, digestive
?rgans or heart may cut his life short, or, which is the commonest
result, lie dies apoplectic, or maniacal, or demented, or para-
lysed from head to foot, intellect and feeling being first alike
abolished.
Such are, briefly, the symptoms which commonly mark the
progress of chronic alcoholism. They may not all be found to
occur in each case, for every degree of intensity in the manifes-
tation of the psychical or physical symptoms is found in different
instances ; but there never wants that grouping together of cer-
tain mental, motor, and sensory perversions which is characte-
ristic of alcoholic poisoning. No better example could be given
of a special form in which chronic alcoholism is sometimes ob-
served, and of the significant grouping of particular symptoms
already described, than the alcoholic melancholia remarked by
T>r. Thomeuf, at Cliarenton. Fifteen instances came under the
scrutiny of this writer, and the symptoms noted may be summed
np as follows :?
Psychical Symptoms.?Hallucinations were the dominant
symptom. Disordered sensations induced delirium, and were fol-
lowed by perversion of the emotions and instincts. The halluci-
nations were of peculiar importance, because they may be regarded
as pathognomonic of the affection. At the first glance they seemed
to differ much ? this patient beheld men who wished to assassinate
that, while he sat at a tablc-cl'hdte, heard voices mocking
nina; while another saw and felt vipers and toads which nipped
uim. But in almost every instance the hallucinations caused a
Painful moral impression, and often even profound terror.
Hallucinations of the hearing occurred twelve times in the
nfteen cases; hallucinations of the sight eleven times; of the
touch twice; and of the taste once.
T>r. Thomeuf never encountered in this affection an hallucina-
134 ON HABITS OF INTOXICATION
tion of a lively character, and the delirium always was of a melan-
cholic and sombre cast. The delirious conceptions were marked
by profound sadness?by ideas of persecution. Thus one patient
accused himself of being a drunkard, and he sought to escape.
from this reproach by attempting to cast himself from the win-
dow. The tendency to suicide was, indeed, frequently observed.
Another patient conceived that he had violated his daughter, and
wished to deliver himself up to justice in order that he might be
punished. A third heard voices which said to him that he was a
wretch because he had had the small-pox ; he believed himself
to be rotten. Lastly, a fourth was convinced that he was no
longer a man, but a woman, also a bitch.
The attention was always more or less affected. It was in-
variably necessary to elevate the voice in order to attract the
patient's notice, or to repeat a question in order to procure an
answer. The memory was generally enfeebled. The affections
were either perverted or abolished, the patients hating those who
were formerly most dear to them. Jealousy was occasionally a
conspicuous passion, and the instincts themselves were not un-
frequently perverted.
In the majority of the cases sleep was diminished, or even lost,
during the whole progress of the malady. Frightful hallucina-
tions or dreams, in several cases, prevented all rest at night.
This is not difficult to be understood. Those who suffer from
alcoholism are greatly depressed, and it is well known that a
lowering of the vital powers gives to our ideas a tinge of
sadness which is exaggerated by silence and particularly by
darkness.
Physical Symptoms.?In twelve cases, Dr. Thomeuf observed
marked quivering of the muscles of the face (this being generallv
more manifest on one side), an undulatory movement of the lip
and trembling of the tongue. This is worthy of note, as usually
the muscular tremblings of chronic alcoholism are most fre-
quently observed in the limbs. In two cases these movements
persisted for a year. Insensibility to pain is often observed in
drunkenness, and the same phenomenon was noticed by Dr.
Thomeuf as existing in several of his patients. In three he could
plunge a needle into the limbs without exciting any sign of pain,
and one of the patients bore the application of an enormous cau-
tery to the arm without uttering a word. The insensibility was
most apparent in the arms, beneath the elbows, and the legs, be-
neath the knees. The patients suffered also from dyspepsia, with
acid eructations. The pulse in nearly every case was normal,
varying from sixty to eighty-four beats, except during the exa-
cerbations, when it became more rapid. Obscene ideas were
occasionally noticed.
AS CAUSING A TYPE OF DISEASE. 135
This affection invariably occurred among old drunkards, and it
sometimes succeeded an attack of delirium tremens. The symp-
toms which usually ushered in the malady were characteristic
of chronic alcoholism. The individual became pusillanimous,
distrustful, and vindictive. There was trembling of the hands
find arms, more manifest in the morning, and often the sole
symptom. Then cephalalgia, vertigo, and dazzling of the eyes
set in, with more or less disturbance of the digestive functions.
J-1 the affection was not checked here, melancholia, usually with
paralytic symptoms, succeeded.
Almost the whole of Dr. Thomeuf's patients were discharged
cured, or much relieved, after fifteen days' residence in the asylum.
Generally, however, slight trembling of the muscles of the face
and limbs remained. But old drunkards are commonly dipso-
maniacs, and sooner or later graver symptoms are induced,
and the patient's mental and moral faculties are utterly degraded
?r broken up, constituting a form of dementia known among our
neighbours as abrutissement cles ivrognes. Or, general paralysis
supervenes, but not the general paralysis known as that of the
insane. General paralysis, as a morbid entity, often occurs in
persons who have been guilty of excess in spirituous liquors; but
a distinction exists between the general paralysis which is a re-
mote and ultimate result of alcoholism, and that which consti
tutes an idiopathic affection, having a well-marked course. Morel
Remarks, agreeing with Dr. Magnus Huss, that " It does not seem
possible to us at the present day to confound chronic alcoholism
With other idiopathic affections of the brain and spinal marrow.
The progressive general paralysis-of the insane, when it arrives
at its last limits, is perhaps the sole affection of which the diffe-
rential diagnosis offers some difficulty."* Calmeil, we presume,
deludes both forms of general paralysis under the head chronic
diffuse periencephalitis, and that form which is an ultimate result
ox alcoholism will appertain to his melancholic type of the disease.!
-'-he etiological differences of the two varieties of the affection
^re, however, sufficiently important to render a knowledge of
their differential characters useful. These Dr. Thomeuf sums
^lP in the following manner:?
?Alcoholic Melancholia complicated with
Paralysis.
From headache.
Active hallucinations affecting
a]l the senses, disordered vision
(illusions).
General Paralysis.
Generally as headache.
Enfeeblement of the under-
standing, rarely hallucinations.
_ * Traite des Degenerescences, p. 94.
T Traite des Maladies Inflavimatoircs du Cerveau, vol. i. p. 271, et seq.
136 ON HABITS OF INTOXICATION
Alcoholic Melancholia complicated with
Paralysis,
Delirious conceptions depending
upon the hallucinations ; ideas of
persecution, tendency to suicide,
evil instincts, consciousness of
degradation.
Embarrassed speech depending
somewhat upon fear, upon start-
ings of the muscles of the face,
and especially upon tremulousness
of the tongue.
Feebleness little marked of the
inferior members; equal on both
sides.
Trembling of the hands and the
arms more marked in the morning;
formications, cramps, and startings
of the tendons of the fore-arm.
Pupils nearly always dilated.
Anesthajsia of the extremities
of the limbs, extending generally
in the superior limbs to the
elbow, and the inferior to the
knee.
Sleep disturbed with dreams,
sometimes sleeplessness.
Diminution of the appetite,
acid eructations, vomiting of mu-
cus in the morning.
Diminution of the generative
functions, frigidity.
Readily cured or modified.
Occasional supervention of de-
lirium tremens.
General Paralysis.
Ideas of grandeur and content-
ment.
Embarrassed speech depending
upon feebleness of the conceptions
and paralysis of the muscles of
the face.
Feebleness of the inferior mem-
bers, more marked generally upon
one side than the other.
Nothing appreciable in the
superior limbs, sometimes default
of co-ordination.
Pupils often unequal, often con-
tracted.
Sensibility normal or obtuse
over the whole surface.
Sleep generally normal.
Appetite augmented.
Augmentation of the generative
functions.
Progress of the disease ordi-
narily rapid, always fatal.
Tendency to congestions, and
to epileptiform attacks."*
Tlie causes which predispose an individual to alcoholism are
various. The quality of the spirituous fluid imbibed, the quan-
tity, the time of imbibition, the age of the imbiber, the sex, the
habits, and the profession, all exercise more or less influence in
determining, or staving off, or modifying the ulterior results of
intemperance or undue indulgence in strong drink. The whole
of these points are clearly and pithily discussed by Dr. Marcet,
to whose book we would refer our readers for information con-
* See Dr. Legrand du Saulle's Analysis of Dr. Thomeufs Essay, Annales
Medico-Psycliologiques, 1S59, p. 566, ct scq.
AS CAUSING A TYPE OF DISEASE. 137
cerning them. A few remarks, however, may not be amiss con-
cerning one or two of the predisposing causes. And first of
quality.
. The recent commercial treaty with France, and the probable
Production of the lighter and commoner French wines into this
country at a comparatively low cost, has given rise to a tolerably
"Wide feeling of gratification in the kingdom. Not a little has
been said in the Senate and elsewhere about the advantages to be
derived from readiness of access to " a light, wholesome beve-
rage," as compared with our own heady and too frequently adul-
terated beer. As a substitute for the port and sherry in common
Use, a cheap, light, good French wine would, no doubt, be a
most welcome boon to many an individual, but what reason is
there to believe, that if French wines should become a common
drink among us, we should get the cheaper varieties any purer
?r better than the French themselves ? Looking at the question
solely from a health point of view, we obtain one or two facts
from Dr. Thomeuf's essay, which are all the more worthy of
being treasured up because they are of a recent date. He tells
Us that the subjects of alcoholism at Charenton had drunk
chiefly brandy, absinthe, and gros-vin. Now Professor Bou-
cbardat has stated, that the wine retailed in Paris is chiefly
composed of a small quantity of wine, to which alcohol is added,
with colouring matter. Hence Dr. Thomeuf concludes, that
brandy is to be regarded as having been the ordinary drink of
the patients he treated. Shall wc escape from an inundation of
" doctored" li urht wines??wines, of which the " wholesomeness"
O '
Would be most problematical.
Mr. Neison gives certain deductions concerning the influence
?f beer and spirits upon the mortality of the intemperate in this
kingdom of great interest. He says, that the average duration
?f life after the commencement of intemperate habits is,
Among beer-drinkers . . . 21*7 years
spirit-drinkers . ? . 10*7 ?
And among those who drink spirits
and beer indiscriminately . ? 16"1 ,,
Consequently the rate of mortality will be,
Among beer-drinkers . ? 4*59 7 per cent, yearly
? spirit-drinkers . ? 5*996 ,,
? mixed-drinkers . . .6*194 ?
He adds, "Intemperate indulgence in the use of distilled
liquors is hence more hurtful to health than the like use of
fermented liquors, but the immoderate use of both combined is
more injurious than the exclusive use of one kind only. *
* Vital Statistics, p. 218.
13S ON HABITS OF INTOXICATION
111 illustration of tlie quantity which may occasionally induce
alcoholism, Dr. Marcet cites a very curious case which came
under his own observation :?
" G. 33., aged 28, a stoker in the House of Parliament, admitted
as out-patient at the Westminster Hospital, on February 24th, 1859'.
Has always been of sober habits, and was only drunk once in his life,
when no more than twelve years of age. His daily allowance of beer
has been one pint, and he has taken no spirits. Three years ago he
became a teetotaller, because he found that even so little as one pint of
beer daily did not agree with his health. He has suffered from the
usual symptoms of chronic alcoholism for the last three years."?
(p. 25.)
Mr. Neison has recorded several important deductions re-
specting the duration of life after the commencement of intem-
perate habits, among different classes of persons, which have an
important bearing upon the question of the influence of profession
upon alcoholism. It would appear from Mr. Neison's researches,
that the average duration of life, in the intemperate, is?
Among mechanics, working, and labouring men . 18 years
? traders, dealers, and merchants . . 17 ?
? professional men and gentlemen . . 15 ?
? females . . . . . . 14 ?
Dr. Marcet remarks that, " women appear to be much less
subject to suffer from tlie long-contracted abuse of alcoholic
liquors than men" (p. 30). If the effect of the vicious habit be
measured by the mortality, it will be seen, from Mr. Neison's
data, that the reverse is probably the truth.
An attack of alcoholism may be determined in an intemperate
person, either by an exceptional excess, or by the supervention
of some disease, or the occurrence of an accident, diminishing
the resistance of the system towards the poisonous effects of the
spirit. Our own experience teaches us, that the influence of
idiopathic affections in facilitating attacks of alcoholism should
never be lost sight of in persons who live a free life, but who
are not usually termed intemperate.
" There is in every class of society," writes Dr. Marcet, "a number
of persons who, although they do not become intoxicated, suffer from
chronic alcoholism, from drinking more spirits, wine, or beer than
agrees with their health. Most of these persons lead a useful and
active life, and apply for medical advice, being quite unaware of the
cause of their illness. Many of the upper ranks of society are thus
seized with symptoms of chronic alcoholism. The habit of indulging
freely in wine at frequent dinner-parties, of drinking wine at lunch, of
taking occasionally a glass of wine between meals, or of sipping every
evening two or three glasses of sherry and water, or brandy and water ;
the usual good living at the officers' mess or at the clubs; the custom
AS CAUSING A TYPE OF DISEASE. 139
which exists for commercial travellers, not only of using freely stimu-
lants at dinner, but also of drinking wine with their customers when
transacting business, and finding, of course, an equal pleasure in these
Potations?all these various circumstances, and many others besides,
are quite sufficient to bring on an attack of chronic alcoholism when
an individual is predisposed to tlie disease. Drinking is not usually
ln these cases an indomitable habit, and accordingly, the patient will
gladly
give it up if he feel certain that by so doing his health can be
improved."?(pp. 69-70.)
The treatment of chronic alcoholism lias hitherto been chiefly
hygienic and general?the hygiene being moral as well as phy-
sical. The control of the habit of drinking is only to be secured
hy obtaining the patient's complete confidence, or by secluding
him, the latter resource being in the present state of the law,
as a rule, admissible only when one or other of the ordinarily re-
ceived forms of insanity has been developed by the pernicious-
vice. To this point we shall recur presently. Abstinence,
entire abstinence from spirituous liquors, is the first necessity
towards effecting a cure. It is requisite, also, that the depuratory
organs should be placed in the completest order, by bringing to
hear upon them the means, duly regulated according to the cir-
cumstances of the case, which the materia medica places at our
disposal, preferring, however, as far as practicable, those which
yender the exhibition of drugs unnecessary. The diet, therefore,
is of primary importance, and should he simple, nutritious, and
readily digestible. The skin should receive peculiar attention
and be acted upon by baths, warm or cold, sponging, friction, and
tegular exercise, according to "the circumstances of the case.
Acute pain may he combated by anodynes or opiates; but these
"will not be found to be of much utility by themselves, even if
they be at all advisable, in extreme restlessness or delirium.
Prolonged warm baths, with or without cold effusion to the
head, seem to be most serviceable when one or other of the
events named occurs ; and small doses of opium may be of ser-
vice in procuring rest after the use of the bath. The whole
armament of tonics have been brought to bear upon chronic,
alcoholism with more or less success.
Dr. Magnus Huss has recommended fusel-oil in the treatment
the affection. He gives the drug in the form of pills, and
thinks that it diminishes the trembling, uneasiness, formications,
and sense of debility. He recommends camphor also as a
?calmative.
Thus much for the general treatment of chronic alcoholism ;
hut Br. Marcet writes :?
"If chronic alcoholism be considered as depending on a peculiarly
diseased condition of a certain part of the body, owing to the action
140 ON HABITS OF INTOXICATION
of a poison, no remedy can be looked upon as decidedly efficacious un-
less it exerts its power not directly on the symptoms themselves, which
are but the signs of the illness, but on the principle of the disorder.
Bearing this in mind, I have endeavoured to discover a treatment
which, by acting immediately on the nervous system, should remove its
diseased condition?the result of the long-continued abuse of alcoholic
stimulants, thereby acting as a means of arresting the symptoms of
the illness. 1 am consequently not about to recommend one remedy
for a certain symptom, and another remedy for another symptom, but
shall endeavour to show that there exists a substance, possessed of
powerful and definite medicinal properties, and having the remarkable
property of restoring to health, or at all events of greatly relieving the
disordered nervous system of persons suffering from chronic alcoholism ;
the medicinal agent in question acting efficaciously in cases where the
principal symptom may be either sleeplessness, or hallucinations, or
trembling, or any other; and this substance is Oxide of Zinc."?
(pp. 76-77.)
Dr. Marcet enters at length into a consideration of the phy-
siological and therapeutical action of this preparation, and the
latter he conceives to be tonic, so far as the nervous system is
concerned, sedative and antispasmodic. He states that he has
used the metal with advantage in cases of epilepsy, chorea,
mild hysteria, paralysis and lead-palsy, exhaustion from excessive
mental work, and now also chronic alcoholism. At first he had
looked upon the preparation as a specific agent in the treatment
of epilepsy; but he now frankly states that he is " obliged to
admit that it seldom, if ever, cures the disease, although its use
is certainly often attended with beneficial effects."?(p. 95.)
Dr. Marcet describes the usual effects of the administration of
the oxide of zinc in chronic alcoholism, within his experience, in
the following terms :?
" First, the sleep is improved, the patient does not lie so Ion"- awake
at night, and the nightmare becomes less frightful; then the halluci-
nations decrease, the patient is no longer troubled with black specks
passing constantly before his eyes, or with the sight of imaginary ob-
jects, such as insects or other animals crawling about the room, and
extraordinary noises are no longer heard; the attacks of trembling
also diminish in frequency if not in intensity, and gradually pass off.
This improvement is attended with an increase of appetite, as well as
a marked diminution of the gastric symptoms; and when the patient
can take food and digest it well, he may be looked upon as in a fair
way towards recovery. Gradually, muscular power returns, and the
mental depression, which frequently accompanies chronic alcoholism,
disappears ; the patient becomes cheerful and happy, and expresses
with gratitude his joy at feeling quite well.* "When the disorder is
* It is to be understood that during the period of recovery the symptoms are
frequently not relieved in the above-mentioned order.
AS CAUSLNG A TYPE OF DISEASE. 141
complicated with an organic disease, I have found it advisable to begin,
with oxide of zinc, in order to alleviate as much as possible the
functional derangement of the nervous system, and then to adopt such
11 course of treatment as may be considered the most suitable to the
occasion."?(pp. 101-105.)
Dr. Marcet supports his opinions on the therapeutical influence
?? the oxide of zinc in chronic alcoholism, by a detailed account
?f oases treated by liim at the Westminster Hospital. He adds
also a synoptical table of forty-eight cases that have been under
his care, and of which twenty-five appear to have been cured and
many of the others much relieved.
If the treatment of chronic alcoholism rested solely with the
strictly medical relation between the physician and liis patient, of
which we have as yet alone spoken, Ave might look more hopefully
than at present can be done, upon the effects of curative remedies
m the graver forms of the disease. The frequent culmination of
the affection, however, in one or other of the recognised forms of
msanity often renders necessary the interference of the law in
order effectually to deal with it by compulsory restraint. Now
the law permits the seclusion of the different forms of mania or of
melancholia, and so forth, resulting from intemperance, but it does
not recognise the specific character of the mental aberration arising
from that cause, but treats it in the same manner as idiopathic
insanitv. Neither does the law recognise intemperance as itself a
frequent form of insanity, acquired or derived; nor does it re-
cognise the chronic results of intemperance as a species of in-
sanity per sc. Hence the restraint which, by controlling the
insatiable appetite for drink and the depraved desires of the
patient, is essential in the treatment of the graver cases of alco-
holism, can only be had recourse to during the delirious paroxysms
?r exacerbations of the affection, but cannot be applied to the
affection itself. Thus a case of alcoholic homicidal or destructive
mania is admitted into an asylum. The case rapidly improves,
and presently the patient regains the appearance of one of sound
mind. It is requisite thereupon that he should be at once dis-
charged from control. If the case has resulted from an exceptional
debauch, and the individual is not an habitual drinker, this is the
right course to pursue ; for it may be presumed that the morbid
state of the mind has ceased entirely with the cessation of
the symptoms of aberration. If, however, the patient be an
habitual drinker, and more particularly if it appears that the
habit is prompted by hereditary tendencies, and that the maniacal
or melancholic state* for which he was admitted into the asylum be
hut the culmination of a prolonged series of symptoms indicative
of disordered emotional and instinctive powers, the case assumes
NO. XVIII.?NEW SERIES. L
142 ON HABITS OF INTOXICATION
a very different aspect. For the so-called attack of insanity, is
under such circumstances, commonly hut an exacerbation of
elironic mental disorder. Hence if the relief of the exacerbation
alone he looked upon as the cure of the disease, or as the justifi-
cation for permitting the patient again to have self-control, sooner
or later after discharge, he, driven by his insatiable and morbid,
appetite for drink, has once more recourse to it. What follows?
The police records, or a walk through any asylum, will supply
abundant information. The brutalized, insensate mass of
flesh, sitting immovable and with idiotic aspect, in that corner of
the corridor, had been thrice before admitted into the asylum for
alcoholic mania, and in the intervals of his admissions he had
ruined his family, driven his daughters into the streets, and his
sons into crime. You may meet one or two of the former in the
Haymarket, if you wish to confirm the story, any night; and one
of the latter is to be found in a convict establishment, undergoing
a long period of imprisonment. Again : we read, as we sip our
matutinal coffee and munch our well-crisped toast, that A, B, or
C, was discharged from this or that asylum, four or five weeks
ago. He took a " little" drink the other night with a friend,
on his way home stabbed a stranger to the heart, or, getting
home, as the case may be, murdered his wife or one or two
children, or himself?or and himself. If, however, he have avoided
doing injury to himself, then the State steps in, a sufficiency of
mischief having been fully and effectually accomplished, and shuts
liim carefully up for the remainder of his life. Rightly does the
State recognise the murderous act as an insane one, and spare'the
scaffold; rightly does it prevent the possibility of such an act
being committed again by the same individual; but wrongly,
most wrongly, does it demur to make provision by which cases of
insanity, acute or chronic, arising from the use of intoxicating
liquids, might he kept a sufficient length of time under control, as
would probably suffice to work a permanent effect upon the
morbid appetite for strong drink, and upon the moral and intel-
lectual debasement which invariably accompanies that appetite.
The object sought, so far as the community is concerned, is to
diminish as much as possible the probability of murder, suicide,
or any other form of crime, or the ruin of families, being brought
about in such a fashion; and this might be effected by specially
providing for a greater latitude of detention in these cases than is
usually accorded in cases of insanity. The Commissioners of
Lunacy have suggested that they should be permitted to allow
cases of insanity to leave asylums, when advisable, on trial, the
original certificate of insanity being uncancelled. This provision
would aid much in securing a more effectual treatment of alcoholic
lunatics, and we hope that it will pass into lav.'.
AS CAUSING A TYPE OF DISEASE. 143
But tlie cases to wliioli we have just referred?(hose which having
heen admitted into an asylum, are of necessity, from the existing
state of the law, discharged before any permanent c fleet can be made
upon the chronic mental perversion from which they suffer?
constitute but a small portion of the difficulty which besets us in
contending with insanity in its relations to intemperance. Cer-
tainly the said cases attract the chief attention both of the pro-
fession and the public, but there is an cqnnlly, and even if
numbers be considered, more important class of cases in which
medicine and morality is entirely helpless for lack of a power of
legal interference. It is only, as we have already said, when the
mental disorder from intemperance culminates in a commonly-
recognised form of insanity, that the law interferes io save the indi-
vidual from himself, and to protect his relatives and friends, or the
community. During the whole of the nascent and maturing stages
the alienation, during the progressive degradation of the moral
faculties of the individual, the medical man is compelled to look
on, and witness the most heartrending ruin of a family, often in soul
individually as well as in worldly possessions, by one whose intem-
perance is the manifestation of a true insane impulse, hereditary or
acquired. The control of friends or relatives experience shows fails
?utterly, as a rule, to control the morbid propensity for drink and
subtract the means for its indulgence?the initial steps towards
either palliation or cure?and yet these cases euimot be consigned
to an asylum. It has frequently been urged, and rightly so, that
the law should permit the temporary seclusion of such examples
of habitual drunkenness as those of which we have just spoken.
And the public at once start back at the proposition. Daily
familiar with the sight of drunkenness, they say, that if excessive
drunkenness is to be made a criterion of madness, a door would
be opened for the abuse of the law, and by means of which the
most nefarious schemes could be carried on, as in the very worst
period of the history of mad-houses. Even the hebdomadal,
market-day toper would not be safe from incarceration through
the officious kindness of anxious relatives or friends. The
Law, also, properly chary of the liberty of the subject, may
rightly object, that until medicine itself could show by some-
thing more than general descriptions the necessity for special
legal intervention in reference to the insanity' arising from
intemperance, or to intemperance the result of insanity ; until the
records of our asylums, or our mortality tables bear upon their
fftce indications of the proportion which the special forms ? of
insanity arising from intemperance hold to idiopathic insanity ;
until the disease alcoholism in its fullest sense receives in our
schools of medicine a measure of attention befitting the
amount of social injury it is supposed to effect, the Law might
L 2
144 THE TLATONIC DIALOGUES.
reasonably doubt tlie necessity of interfering, and hesitate to do
so. Interference may in the end he requisite, hut it has not as
yet been shown, to legal apprehensions, to he so."*
And this brings us back to another practical appreciation of the
point from which we started at the commencement of this paper.
Until the mental and physical phenomena of poisoning by alcohol
receive an extension in the systematic teaching of medicine, and
a position in our nosological arrangements in some degree perti-
nent to the amount of physical and moral mischief attributed to
the potent liquid in ordinary life, we, the medical profession, shall
probably not succeed in avoiding a habit of using phrases in re-
ference to intoxication which to ourselves signify one thing, to
the bystanders another ; we shall not, therefore, succeed in con-
vincing the public that intoxication or drunkenness the mania,
and intoxication or drunkenness the bad habit, are two entirely
different things?the one readily distinguishable, with cnre, from
the other, and the one requiring the police magistrate, the other
the doctor. Finally, we shall not convince the Law that alcoholism
is a matter for special enactments, or rather for special provisions
in the enactments for insanity generally.
In concluding this article we may remark, that Dr. Marcet's
work, referred to several times in this article, constitutes the last
addition to the literature of alcoholism, and it efficiently con-
tributes, in so far as the more ordinary phenomena of the chronic
affection is concerned, to a better knowledge of the subject. It
is but just to him to add, that the work is brief, clear, very read-
able, and eminently practical?four properties of sufficient excel-
lence to establish a prominent claim for notice of any book, apart
from the consideration that this one has the additional excellence
of recommending a new and tried plan of treatment, which, if it
be confirmed by further experience, must prove a most valuable
aid in dealing with a troublesome, and often impracticable
disease.
* Among the Flemings guardians are appointed over the persons and estates
of prodigal individuals, as well as over lunatics.?Southey's Common Place Booh.
