On the Unity of the Human Species, Considered with Relation to the Amelioration of Races By Education and Intermarriage
==========================================================================================================================

458
Aet. II.?
?
By A. BRIEKRE DE BOISMONT.
{Translated from, the French by II. J. Manning, Esq.)
When I took up my pen to write the history of hallucinations,
my wish was to enter a protest against the scientific opinion which
makes Socrates, Pascal, Joan of Arc, and many others, downright
madmen. The motive which sends me into the lists now is the
instinctive repugnance which I feel to the doctrine of the inequality of races. I find it impossible, indeed, to look upon all the inhabitants of the different countries of the earth otherwise than as
members of the same family. Isolation, misery, famine, conquest,
emigration, ignorance, &c., have modified original types, made
them stationary, retarded or even degenerated them ; but the
attentive observer perceives that it only wants devotedness and
will to remedy this state of things. Examples abound to prove
that colonies, apparently the least favoured, may be raised from
their apparent decay, either by the aid of social relations, or by
means of intermixture. Such will be the object of this work.
Writers have supposed that they have found a decisive argument,
from having seen in the bazaars of Cairo or Damascus, the
colossal Circassian; the Egyptian, of shorter stature and arched
nose; the Nubian, of the colour of violet, but with an agreeable
face, the nose short and small, the teeth fine and even; the Turk,
with white and transparent skin ; the Negro, with crisp hair, flat
nose, high cheek-bones; theEellali, olive-coloured; the Bedouin,
almost as black as the Nubian, but of tall stature, aquiline nose,
and royal mien. Recalling this quotation from an illustrious
naturalist, the author of the Plurality of Races, who promises to
bear worthily his father's name, adds : " And yet all these men, so
opposite to one another, live and have.lived for centuries at the
distance of a few leagues, and almost under the same sky ,!"
We might remark that the geographical distance of most of
these people from one another is not so inconsiderable as M.
Pouchet thinks. We might also add that he has grouped in this
picture only the extremes of each type; but we prefer answering
* Read before the Society M^dicale du Pantheon, 14 March, 1860, apropos of a
discussion upon the different races of mankind, occasioned by "the remarkable
work" of M. Hipp. Lamarche, La Politique ct les Religions, Etudes d'un Journaliste
(Paris, 1859), one of the chief arguments of which is summed up by the author in
these terms : "I believe with our great masters in the unity of the human species,
in the superiority of the Caucasian race, shown by continual progress, and in the
possible amelioration of races less thoroughly distributed by intermixture with our
own."
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
459
him by a similar group of the different peoples of the European
race. Examine the German, the Russian, the Spaniard, the
Italian, the Frenchman, the Englishman, and you will he struck
by the difference in feature, language, and habits presented by
each of these races. Nay more : the same country will offer the
most striking dissimilitude between its different divisions. To
quote but one example of this ?the Piedmontese could not be
mistaken for a Neapolitan. Yet who would dispute the common
origin of all these nations ?
These preliminaries set forth, we have only now to lay down
our arguments.
An examination of the physical, physiological, and psychological characteristics of our species?such is the plan to which I
have limited myself; yet I do not hesitate to confess that, as I
advanced in the study of the question, my own inefficiency
alarmed me, and that, but for the engagement I had entered into
with the Society to which for some time I have had the honour of
belonging, I should have abandoned the task. When I saw among
the adversaries of the unity of the human species such men as Linnseus, Geoffroy St. Hi!aire, Eichard Owen,.and other names full of
energy, youth, and science, I felt that I had nothing new to show,
and that my inquiries could only be analytical and critical, which
placed me in a marked degree of inferiority; but led 011 by my
philosophical convictions, fortified, by certain anthropological
observations, calling to my help Blumenbach, Cuvier, Humboldt,
Flourens, and Professor Godron (of Nancy), who has written a
book* rich in facts, and from which I have borrowed extensively,
I followed up my undertaking; and it is the result of my labour
which I present to the Society, and for which I claim every
indulgence.
A circumstance which I had frequently observed, and which all
medical men may observe, had also predisposed me in favour of
the unity of the human race. Nothing is more common than to
find in the same family handsome, well-made children, and others
ugly and ill-formed. The configuration of the cranium offers
sometimes the most opposite shapes. The colour of the skin is
often variable. By the side of the fairest skins are seen others of
yellow or brown tint, approaching almost to the foreign type.
The difference in intellect is not less decided : the highest qualifications spring up in all their brilliancy side by side with the
most confirmed idiocy. Yet no one outside the circle in which
they are produced takes it into his head to seek for an explanation of dissimilitudes in appearance so alarming. Why should
the human species escape this great family law ?
* Be TEspbce et des Races dans les Etres Organises, et specialement de V Unite du
Genre Humain. Two vols. Paris, 1859.
460
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
Doubtless the four principal races among whom the world is
divided?the white, the black, the tawny, and the red?present
numerous differences ; but there is one primitive law which must
not be lost sight of, and that is the reproduction of all these races,
one by another. This physiological fact, laid down by Buffon,
and demonstrated by M. Flourens, is now incontrovertible, and
constitutes the species. Whatever analogy is presented by certain
species, however possible their intermixture may be, sterility is
sooner or later the result. Other considerations of the highest
importance may be summoned in favour of the unity of the human
race.
A profound study of secondary meteorological influences, of
the important influence exercised by the mode of life, of profound
modifying causes, of inheritance, of amalgamation, of all the circumstances which go to form customs, habits, religious laws, and
the moral aspect of a people, explains the repeated varieties to be
observed in the physical characteristics and intellectual development of a people, and leads to the recognition of but one family
in these men of such different colour and appearance.
This doctrine of the unity of the human race, one of the most
beautiful ornaments of Christianity and philosophy (the proof of
which is, that it has caused barbarity and cruelty, formerly permanent, to be acts instantaneously and momentarily branded):
this doctrine penetrates the conscience little by little; and, in
spite of the opposition it encounters, we foretel the time when it
will become the code of humanity.
We are well aware that it seems at first sight difficult, not to
say impossible, to place on the same level, and to consider as
belonging to the same family, the fair-skinned Caucasian type,
with its oval face, broad forehead, Greek profile, aquiline nose,
and straight front teeth, and the Negro type, with its black skin,
frizzled hair, receding head, narrowed at the top, and long jawbone. But this parallel is a style of argument which is merely
begging the question. We have taken the two extremes of
beauty and ugliness, and left in the background the intermediate
series which unites the two ends of the chain.
Let us take the most striking difference, viz., the colour.
Certainly nothing could be more opposite than the ebony black
of the Negro of the Guinea coast, and the rosy white of the European. But, according to Dr Charles Livingstone,* one of the
most able explorers of Africa, this hideous colour, commonly
placed as a sign outside a tobacco shop, only exists among the
lowest class of the population. During his extensive wanderings
across Central Africa he has noticed the black tinged with olive,
* Livingstone: Explorations dans VAfrique Australe, ouvrage traduit de VAnglais. Par Mme. Loreau. Paris, 1859.
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES. 461
the olive tint less deep, the bronze tint, and the coffee colour;
the black colour is specially marked in the districts which are
hot and damp. Prichard has remarked that there are tribes in
Africa with a brown skin, with chocolate colour, or simply sunburnt? (3rd edit. vol. ii. p. 158). Schreber declares that there
are in Africa and Madagascar yellow Negroes and red Negroes
with the same kind of hair.* And, lastly, Prichard points out the
" Gallas Edjows" as almost white, though living under the equator.
If we confine ourselves to this fact, this fair colouring of the
Negro may appear astonishing, but it is not peculiar to this race.
The Touaregs, pirates of the Sahara, are white in certain countries, according to General Daumas, and it is not even very rare
to meet among them fair-complexioned women with blue eyes.f
In other districts, according to Heeren, they have the tawny and
even black skin, without the crisp hair or the features of the
Negro. These Touaregs only marry among themselves. Lastly,
Abel de Remusat reports that here are in the provinces of Central China women of fair complexion with the same varieties of
tint that are seen among the women of Central Europe. J
More recent documents, published by Baron H. Aucapitaine,
and inserted in the Revue et Magasin de Zoologie, give the following information respecting the colouring of the skin among
the Negroes of Kabylia:?
" M. d'Abaddie, known by his travels in Abyssinia, has just addressed to M. Quatrefages? a letter relating to a very curious anthropological fact, viz., the effect of an exclusively animal diet upon the
colour of Negroes. The learned French traveller tells us that in the
south of Nubia those blacks who live wholly upon meat have a clearer
tint than the other tribes whose diet is exclusively vegetable. Reading
this remark led me to a similar observation with regard to the Negroes
of Kabylia. Meat in Kabylia is very dear; it is a luxury which the
Berber does not allow himself every day. But the Negroes, who
are all butchers, feed constantly on the remains of animals which they
sell in the markets. Their life, like those of whom M. d'Abaddie
speaks, is passed amidst blood and fleshy vapours; they have a very
clear tint, though preserving, both men and women, the frizzle hair
and all the characteristics of the race of Haoussa."
[" Till now, I had always attributed this fact to the mixed blood
of the Kabyles and the cold climate. I happened to be at
Tamda-el-Blat, among the Beni-Djennad, when I received the
Bulletin de la Societe de Geographic ; I was able at once to get
information among the numerous freed men who reside in this
village, and I found that the Negroes only marry among each
* Historia Naturalis Quadrupedum, vol. i. pp. 14, 15.
+ Voyage au Grand Desert du Sahara.
X Recherches sur les Langues Tartares, 1820.
? Bulletin de la Societe de Geographie, 1859, vol. xiv., p. 179.
462 ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
other, 'although they are looked on in Kabyle society, which is
essentially democratic, as fellow-citizens equal to the rest.
Must we attribute this fact to degenerate blood, the result of
repeated marriages between members of the same race ? I think
not. It must be owing then, as M. d'Abaddie says, to their
feeding continually on meat, and to the contact with bleeding
flesh which they are constantly dragging and moving about.
This appears to me to be a very interesting question in an anthropological point of view, and one which deserves close investigation."]*
The Negro race then may show skins of very different colour;
and this fact is observable also in other races.
The Abyssinians, who preserve evident characters of their
Semitic origin, are both black, brown, and almost white.
The Jews themselves have not preserved everywhere their primitive colour. In the northern countries of Europe they are
white; in Germany many of them have red beards; in Portugal
they are tawny. In the province of Cochin China, where a
number of them have settled, they have black skins, though they
do not contract marriages with foreigners. Prichardf says, that
there is also at Mattacli6ri a colony of white Jews, who are called
in India Jerusalem Jews. And, lastly, there are black Jews
dwelling in Africa, in the kingdom of Haoussa.
Thus great varieties of colour have been produced among this
people during eighteen centuries, but no change has occurred in
their cast of feature, habits, or ideas. Under a black skin or a
white, observes General Daumas, in Soudan, in the Sahara, or
the sea-coast towns, everywhere Jews have the same instincts,
and the twofold aptitude for languages and commerce.|
Colour, then, is not a fixed characteristic. It may vary among
members of one and the same race, or of one and the same tribe.
And this is frequently observable also in domestic animals.
We are all aware that colouring of the skin is due to pigmentary secretion, that it is present in all races, and that though
very limited among Europeans, it is plainly seen on the nipple.
M. Flourens showed it us very well developed in a French soldier
who had lived a long time in Algiers. He has discovered it
among whites by means of the microscope. And he has proved
that in the foetus of the Negro, as in that of the white, there is
no trace of pigment. In a communication lately made to the
Anthropological Society (3rd Nov. 1859), Dr Gubler reports,
that, wishing to compare the brain of a Negro in the service of
* Moniteur Universel du 22 Mars, 1S60, note de M. le Baron Aucapitaine, ins?r?e dans la Revue et Magasin de Zoologic.
+ Ilistoire Naturelle de VHomme. Paris, 1843.
J Le Grand Desert, p. 244.
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES. 463
M. Rayer, ?wlio died at La Charite, with that of white men,
specially with regard to the internal dark colouring so marked in
the black race, he placed at intervals on the same table brains
procured from fair and dark complexioned subjects. He was
then enabled to determine that the substance was paler in the
first than in the second, and that the deepest colouring in the
latter was of the nature of pigmentary secretion. And in these
latter subjects it is not only in the cerebral substance that the
colouring matter is deposited. Analogous deposits are sometimes met with in the pia mater surrounding the protuberance.
M. Virchow, according to M. Brown-Sequard, has often seen
pigmentary colouring under the pia mater of white men, and
notably under the medulla oblongata; and it is probable that this
matter, kept in reserve, so to speak, may fill some part in the
economy. It follows from these facts that colouring matter is
not so rare in the European as has been supposed.
Numerous causes have naturally been sought, to account for
the production of colour. Climate and heat have been most
frequently cited. And truly if we ascend from Norway to the
Equator, we see the skin changing gradually; from white becoming sunburnt, then brown, and lastly black, in Soudan. But if
the climate is the cause of these variations, the same causes ought
to produce everywhere the same effects. But yet in Europe the
Laplanders, with their tawny complexion, form an exception ; if
this depends on cold, why have the Icelanders so white a skin,
with blue eyes and light hair ?
Besides these, there is an army of facts which prove that the
colour of the skin has nothing to do with the heat of the climate.
Thus in Asia may be seen brown-skinned Calmucks side by side
with Georgians and Circassians, who are so remarkable for the
whiteness of their skin. Not far from the inhabitants of Cashmere, who are white or nearly so, and under the same latitude,
we find the Nepaulese, who, notwithstanding the great elevation
of their mountains and their temperate climate, have a black skin;
whereas the neighbouring Bengalese, who live in the plains and
more to the south, have a skin only coffee-coloured.
The Portuguese, who have been settlers on the Guinea coast
since the fifteenth century, and on the Mozambique coast since
the sixteenth, have not lost their original colour.*
The Arabs, who inhabited these same coasts many centuries
before the arrival of the Portuguese, have not taken the Negro
colour.
We should have the same observations to make with regard to
direct heat, the hygrometric state of the air, &c., for with these
* Salt: Voyage en Atyssinie, trad., vol. i., pp. 7*2?94.
464
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
two conditions we should find facts similar to the foregoing ; so
that it is with us an established principle that in analyzing the
chief elements of the influence of climate, we arrive at the conclusion that this influence is always secondary.
To what then shall we attribute these varieties in colour presented by the numerous races of man ? In all probability to the
same internal causes, still unknown, which produce them in
domestic animals, and among which " albinism," " erythrism," and
" melanism," play an important part. These three different
colours, which are modifications of the pigmentary secretion, are
to be observed in a number of animals which enjoy perfect
health, and are able to reproduce their species. To quote only
one instance, there are in India, white, red, and black elephants.
Consequently we believe that M. Isidore Geoffroy St. Hilaire was
right in supposing that the absence of pigment, or, according to
us, its extreme scarcity (which constitutes albinism), was the
normal state of animals naturally white.* With regard to
erythrism and melanism, their existence with health is still less
doubtful. The first of these colours, which is also observable in
animals, is the normal state of the " Eed Skins" of America. It
was the colour of the ancient Egyptians. We had in our establishment the wife of a superior officer, of Coptic origin, who recalled in a striking manner the figures on the ancient monuments.
Melanism, so common with domestic animals, forming among
them permanent races, gives to the skin characters which do not
differ from those observed in the cutaneous apparatus of the black
man ; so that we may look upon this latter as afflicted with
normal melanism.
Melanism, like albinism and erythrism, may be partial and congenital. Thus, with certain white women, the areola of the
nipple is entirely black. Blumenbach has described a portion of
the skin of the abdomen of a beggar which was as black as the
skin of an African. Camper tells of a woman who, whenever she
became pregnant, showed a development of pigment which invaded the whole abdomen; and a similar instance is known,
where the melanism extended from the neck to the lower part of
the body.
We have then in the internal modifications which the secretion
of colouring matter undergoes, whether it disappears or varies in
its elements, or whether it sustains an increase more or less considerable, an explanation of the different colourings of the skin.
As to the time when they took place, we believe with M. Godron,
that it extends back to the origin of different nations : the important thing for us to know is that they may be produced in our
* Bistoire Qiniralt et Particulare des Anomalies dt 1'Organisation chez VHomme
ctles Animaux, vol. i., p. 317. Paris, 1832.
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES. 4G5
race, and that these varieties of colour are not sufficient to constitute a difference of race.
We now come to four other characteristics set down as special;
the frizzled and woolly state of the hair, the obliquity of the eyes,
the shape of the skull, and the features of the face; because,
taken separately, there is something decided in them, while they
cease to be exceptional when studied in the series of beings.
One important remark which we have to make with regard to
the hair of Negroes, is that, as Prichard has shown, it is not different from that of other men, and that it bears no resemblance
whatever to wool. Its frizzly disposition has more than one exception. Thus the Danish missionary Isert met on the Gold
Coast a small tribe of Negroes, whose hair was a foot and a-half
long.* Barbot relates that the Fentis, the Ashantis, the Aguapins,
and the Intas, have frequently curly hair long enough to reach to
the shoulders. And lastly, Prichard adds, that the hair of different Negro tribes presents every possible gradation, from the
woolly head of hair, to the crisp, and even the wavy.f
The first sight of a Chinaman, with his slanting eyes, gives one
a strange impression, and we should be tempted to believe in the
idea of a different species of man. But this striking characteristic
is not general in China. Thus at Canton, and in the towns in the
north of China, this characteristic is even exceptional, especially
among the men. We were present one evening at a performance
in the Cirque de l'lmperatrice, when fourteen foreigners came and
sat near us. It was the Siamese Embassy. We examined closely
their faces during the whole performance, and found that several
of them had not slanting eyes. When Abel Remusat received at
the Bibliotheque the young Chinamen who were to preach the
Christian religion, one of them struck us by the regularity of his
features and the shape of his face, which approached closely the
European type. Nor is the obliquity of the eyes peculiar to the
Chinese, Japanese, or Mongols : it is found among the Caribs of
South America^ and the Botocudos of Brazil.? The resemblance
is striking when we meet at Rio a Chinaman and a Botocudo.
Livingstone has made known this disposition of the eyelids among
the tribes of Southern Africa.? (p. 493.) This obliquity of the
eyes is in reality an obliquity only of the eyelids, the external
angle of which is more" raised. Lastly, we have several times
noticed it in a striking degree among Europeans.
The difference in shape of the skull has been thought a strong
argument. It is clear that among savage tribes it is not rare to
* Voyage en Guinee et dans les Isles cara'ibes en Amerique, p. 176. Paris 1793
+ Prichard: Ifistoire de V Homme, Trad. Franpaise, vol. ii., p. 3 et sea.
J Bulletin de la Societe Ethnologique, p. 77. 1846.
? A. St. Hilaire : Voyage dans la, Province de Rio Janeiro, vol. iii., p. 230.
466
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
land a fixed form of cranium which, through the absence of
foreign marriages, becomes almost special to the tribe. Among
civilized nations, on the other hand, and especially in large towns,
are found skulls of every shape, even the most opposite from what
seems to be the regular type. M. A. Geoffroy St. Hilaire collected
in the catacombs of Paris a series of heads of old inhabitants of
the town, among which were found all the modifications of which
the entire human species is susceptible. The same remark has
been made by M. Serres with regard to heads collected in the
cemetery of the " Tour St. Jacques." The same observation may
be made with the bald; and in our establishment we have found
the greatest varieties, from the pyramidal head of the Mongol, to
the flattened head of some Negroes. The shape of the skull,
which is so varied among Europeans, is not less so among
Negroes. Thus Weber, Al. d'Orligny, and M. Parchappe* have
come to the conclusion that in no nation does there exist, with
respect to the shape of the skull, any fixed characteristic.
One last fact, and with this we conclude our examination of
the organic signs supposed to constitute differences between the
several races of mankind.
The features have been considered to give a metrical scale of
the physiognomy of the different races of man; but careful observation overthrows this obstacle. Blumenbach had already
remarked that there are to be found Ethiopians, who, except their
colour, have the most handsome features of our species. Prichard
has noticed the same regularity in a Negro of Haoussa. This
opinion with respect to the beauty of form of certain Negro tribes
is also held by Raffanel, Caille, Claperton, and Barbot. Prichard
has in his work a drawing of three heads, one that of a Congo
Negro, another that of an American from Louisiana, and the
third that of a Chinaman; and there is the closest analogy in
shape between the three.
According to Bodwick, the higher class of Ashantees are not
only well made, but have features resembling those of the Grecian
type: it is a long step from that to the monkey-shaped muzzle
usually assigned to the Negro. Livingstone remarks that the
Caffre head is as well made as the European. Several of the
Bushman tribes, he adds, are on the whole handsome men ; and
the monuments of the ancient Egyptians show much truer types
of the Balondas than any drawings in works on ethnography that
have come into my hands.?(Op. cit., p. 194 and 421). This
resemblance between the Negro and the Caucasian types tends to
confirm the opinion expressed by M. Serres, that each race has
in it the germ of the type of other races.
* Parchappe : Instruction pour le Peuple?Anatomic ct Physiologic dc VHomme,
p. 704 et se%.
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES. 4.07
With this fine shape of the head and regularity of feature in a
large number of Negro tribes, is it necessary to inquire whether
the inferior capacity of the cranium of this race is real ? The
degree of intelligence shown by these people (of which we shall
speak shortly) would be sufficient answer; but anatomical proof
has been furnished by Dr Morton, who measured 286 heads of
the different varieties of mankind; and he found skulls of white
men with a minimum of seventy-five, and skulls of Negroes with
a maximum of ninety-four; whence it follows that some Negroes
have greater development of brain than some Europeans.
I will not do more than mention the objections which have
been based on the defective junction of the great wing of the.
sphenoid with the anterior inferior angle of the parietal; from
the more backward situation of the occipital foramen; from the
structure of the pelvis ; from the proportion of the limbs; from
the shape of the calf or of the heel; from the darker colour of
the blood; from the fetid perspiration; because to all these
objections unanswerable replies have been made.
We have shown, then, that none of the characteristics by which
it has been attempted to separate the Negro from the Caucasian,
are so invariable as they have been said to be. Consequently,
we think ourselves justified in coming to the conclusion that the
physical differences set down are not sufficient to overthrow the
theory of the unity of the human race.
The examination of the psychological characteristics, upon
which we shall now enter, will give still greater force to this
opinion, which is held by a great number of illustrious men.
But, before entering upon this part of the subject, let us discuss
an objection which we find reproduced in the very interesting
work of M. G. Pouchet, on the plurality of the human species.
There are monuments, says this distinguished observer (probably
the tomb of Rhamses Meiamoun), which, dating 3000 years back,
prove unanswerably that the most decided transformations were
accomplished at that time; and the thousand remaining years
cannot explain the transformation of a transplanted race, since, at
the end of 500 years, we find it as it was before.* We are not
going to enter upon a defence of Bible chronology, but we believe
with M. Godron, who has published a book so rich in facts, that
the style of living, which changes so powerfully the human species,
must have been at work since the origin of different nations; and
the changes once acquired being propagated by inheritance, became permanent and uniform through the continuance of the
same mode of life and the absence of foreign alliances.
It is,, besides, quite undeniable that among domestic animals
* De la Plurality des Races?Essai anthropologiqiie, p. 124. Paris, 1858.
468
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
new races may be formed very rapidly, and sometimes even without the interference of man. Less than a century ago there was
born in America a bull without horns, and, without any interference in order to propagate this peculiarity, the bull perpetuated
his species, and became the stock of a hornless race, (the mocho
ox), and spread itself over entire provinces.*
In 1791, in Massachusetts, among the English race of sheep,
a ram was produced remarkable for the length of its body, the
shortness of its legs, and a trunk like that of a terrier. These
circumstances rendered it unfit for leaping the enclosures. In
this case man intervened, and, by means of cleverly-managed crosses,
these sheep have multiplied, and formed the' loutre' (ancon) race.^
When we come to speak of crosses which have lately been made between European and savage tribes, we shall establish facts analogous to these. One more objection might still be made. Why, it
may be said, if these changes took place in former days, do they no
longer show themselves at the present time ? There is no reason,
for instance, why the colour of the skin should not undergo a
fresh change. We are not in a position to give a satisfactory
answer to this question. We will only call attention to the fact,
that for some years past partial blue! and black discolorations of
the skin of the face, especially of the eyelids, have been observed
in persons who are in good bodily health. On this, consult a
paper by Dr Leroy de Mericourt. Dr Hardy, who has just
published a new instance of it (Union Medicate, Mar. 18G0),
says that there are already seven or eight cases of it in the town
of Brest. The person he describes is in good health, menstruates
regularly, and belongs to the middle class.
Without denying the value of M. Gr. Pouchet's objection, these
facts are of a nature to diminish its force in a marked degree.
However, we will not insist longer upon this point, but pass on to
the examination of psychological peculiarities.
Those who are in favour of a plurality of human races, born in
the different spots where they are met with to this day, have not
only pointed to the difference in physical characters, but have
passed in review the amount of intelligence possessed by the
numerous nations of the earth ; and have sought to establish that,
if several among them are richly endowed, others have for their
share but a certain amount of ability; and that some even are
completely destitute thereof. According to this, those people,
placed below animals?and particularly below the human-shaped
ape, which forms a link between man and the animal kingdom?
would constitute inferior races, and prove the inequality of the
human species. Doubtless, there are stationary tribes, degraded
* Don Felix de Azana: Voyage dans VAmerique scpfentrionale, vol. i., p. 378.
+ Transactions philosophises, p. 58. 1813.
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
469
by misery, degenerated by being deprived of the gifts of nature,
and by deleterious influences ; but does close observation justify
the doctrine of the inequality of races, and of the existence of
superior and inferior classes of men ? Let us examine this
question.
There is a savage race in the south of Africa remarkable for
the development posteriorly of a protuberance of fat in the females,
and, through a kind of clucking which approximates them to the
lower animals, out of the pale of those who speak known languages.
Certain travellers and anthropologists have placed this race in the
lowest scale of humanity, if they have not classed its members
among animals. This is the Bosjesman nation, or rather a tribe of
that nation, as we shall see presently. These people lead truly a
most precarious and miserable life, but they are not so devoid of intelligence as has been affirmed. Peron tells us thatDe Genssens,
Governor at the Cape, had in his house a young Bosjesman who
had acquired Dutch and a little English* with the greatest ease.
But there is yet room for inquiry into the pretended degraded
state of this people. Livingstone, whom we are fond of quoting,
because he has seen things without any preconcieved opinions,
speaks as follows concerning the Bushmen (Bosjesmans) : ?
" They live in the desert from choice. Many of them are of short
stature, yet without the deformity of dwarfs. Those who are
brought to Europe have been chosen on account of their extreme
ugliness. In the suburbs of Zambo, the Bushmen are in general
handsome men, well-made, and with an independence of spirit
almost absolute"?(p. 194). A conscientious observer, who has
studied with the greatest care the comparative anatomy of the
brain, has determined that this organ in the Bosjesman, without
being so voluminous and complete as that of the European, is in
every respect similar to a human brain. He therefore looks upon
this people as susceptible of intellectual development. Among
small tribes like the Bosjesmans, the convolutions of the brain
are but slightly developed ; for instance, the brain of the Hottentot
Venus, of which M. Gratiolet has a wax model, presents a degree
of simplicity which in white nations corresponds to idiocy. Yet
this woman was anything but an idiot.f
The Australian, placed in the same catalogue, ugly, thin, and
ill-formed, has also been looked upon as a brute. But the cruel
extremities to which they had been reduced were forgotten.
Driven by the English from the beautiful districts which the
latter have covered with thriving colonies, the natives of New
Holland were obliged to take refuge in the interior of Australia.
A dry country, vast deserts of sand, thickets where no water and
* Voyage aux Terres Australes, vol. ii., p. 311.
f Moniteur des Sciences Medicares et Pharmaceutiques, p. 103. Feb. 1, 1860.
NO. XX.?NEW SERIES. I I
470
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
scarcely any game is to be found, and in consequence frightful
famine and privations of every kind?is there not in such a combination of circumstances sufficient cause for degeneracy? Yet
Pricliard tells us that Australian children, who have been adopted
at Port Jackson, have learnt to read, write, and draw as well as
white children of the same age.*
The apparent inferiority of these two tribes, the tales told
second-hand of several naturalists, who declared they had seen,
on the northern coast of New Guinea, trees swarming with natives
of both sexes leaping from branch to branch like monkeys, with
their weapons slung on their shoulders, gesticulating, shouting,
and laughing;+ and similar observations said to have been made
in the forests of India, ought to strengthen the opinion, they say,
that the ape belongs to the order of bipeds. Richard Owen, also,
one of the most celebrated anthropologists of our time, has not
hesitated to say that the distinction between this animal and man
is the stumbling-block of anatomists.!
The ourang-outang has naturally been held up in opposition to
these so-called inferior races by the partisans of the animal kingdom. Its quickness in imitating man, its adroitness in many
things, its affections, passions, intelligence, which, not to underrate it, seemed to want nothing but language, made it an intermediate being between the two. " It is neither a man nor a
monkey," said the crowd that gazed at the chimpanzee in the
Jardin des Plantes ; and this is the theory held by the celebrated
Geoffroy Saint Hilaire. We cannot agree with this opinion, as
M. Gratiolethas clearly demonstrated, that the brain of the ape has
anatomical characters which entirely separate it from that of man.
In the monkey, the middle lobe begins and ends before the frontal
lobe; with man, on the other hand, the frontal convolutions
appear first, and those of the middle appear subsequently. Consequently the brain of man differs from that of the ape the more
in those of recent formation, and an arrest of development can
but exaggerate this difference.
But without insisting upon the difference in gait, on the length
of the upper limb, the make of the hand, or the absence of speech,
there is one characteristic which separates the ape as well as the
rest of animals from the human race ; and that is, their non-progressive state. During the thousands of years that animals have
been in contact with man, they do no more than they did in the
first instance, or than what they have been taught to do. The
nests built by the beaver or the bee are the same as were described
centuries ago. Their sociability and their fitness for education
* Hist. Nat., op. cit., p. 266.
+ Crawford: British Association for the Advancement of Science, p. 8. 1852.
? On the Characters of the Class of Mammalia, p. 20. 1857.
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES. 471
are jast what they were at the commencement; while man, placed
in the most disadvantageous condition, is susceptible of education
and of perfection. This we have just shown, and shall illustrate
by instances still more conclusive.
There is one race of mankind which has been specially the
object of the most violent attacks, and which polygenists have
declared to be incapable of amelioration. You will not be surprised that an American should have written these words : " Show
me a single line written by a Negro worth remembering."* Facts
will show how erroneous this opinion is. Look over the documents laid before the English Parliament on the 19th of May,
1829, and you will there find repeated proofs of the immense
superiority in intelligence of children born of emancipated Negroes
in the colony of Sierra Leone over those born of negroes still in
a state of slavery, though living in the same colony. Two years
ago, a Mulatto and a Negro carried off high prizes at the general
meeting at Paris, and this is not an isolated case. The journal Le
Propagateur de la Foi announced that twenty black missionaries
were preparing to carry religious instruction into savage countries.
The Revue des deux Mondes gave us, some years back, details
full of interest respecting the literature of St. Domingo. The
Academy of Science counts among its correspondents M. Lillet
GeofFroy, a negro well versed in mathematical science. Livingstone tells us that Negroes learn the alphabet in a few days. He
was struck with the knowledge of the Ambakystas, nearly all of
whom can read and write with remarkable facility. They learn
with eagerness everything they can?history, jurisprudence, &c.
?and from their tact for commerce they have got the name of
Anglo-Jews. Among the Makololos no individual has the slightest
influence if he is not of irreproachable morals, and has not a loyal
heart. Every kind of immorality is severely condemned by these
idolaters, (p. 543.) My opinion of the Negro race is the more
impartial, seeing that my grandfather died at St. Domingo, and
his goods were confiscated. The conquest of Africa begins to
bear fruit; the Arab tribes, who appeared to be so hostile to European civilization, begin to appreciate the advantages of a home,
and houses begin to spring up. In Algiers, Arab children go to
school, and are remarkable for their quickness. The commandant
De Martimprey lately reviewed the young native sea-boys destined
to furnish France with sailors. He was struck with their progress, and expressed his pleasure thereat. This institution, which
is perfectly well received by the Arabs, receives a great number
of applications for admission from the Arab families.
The same triumphs of civilization are found in America. The
* Gliddon : Types of Mankind, p. 56.
11 2
472
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
Indians had been proclaimed unteachable outlaws, only fit to be
exterminated. How did they answer this cruel description ? One
of their tribes, the Cherokees, settled some years ago in the north
of the Georgia, Alabama, and Tennessee States, built houses,
worked, and tilled ; and these natives, who, at the commencement
of their new life, were reduced to 5000, are now reckoned at
15,000 inhabitants, in good circumstances.
The Moniteur Universel of the 7th October, 1858, published
the following notice of the Veddahs of the island of Ceylon :
" This tribe, whose forefathers were the first Buddhists,* had
sunk to a state of thorough debasement They dwelt in the
mountains, living on wild honey and the produce of fishing. Mr.
Mackenzie, the governor of the island, in pity made the first
overtures in their favour. Two villages were built, and the
Veddahs were invited to come and live in them. Some of
them did leave the horrible caves and pitiful huts which
they had made their dwelling-places. They were persuaded
to take to agriculture. Aided by the English Government, the little colony soon grew, and prospered day by day.
At the present time the greater part of the Veddahs profess
Christianity."
Lastly, there was a short time back a curious article in the
Quarterly Review, upon the amelioration of the inhabitants of
New Zealand. Scarcely a century ago, this colony, situated in
the middle of the Pacific Ocean, was still looked on as a wretched
country, peopled only with savages, who were in the habit of
plunging into the debauchery of cannibal feasts, the last of which
took place in 1842. By placing these natives under the protection
of the law, England raised the level of these races. Civilization,
the precepts of Christianity, and material progress exercised upon
them the happiest influence. Life and property are at the present
day as secure in New Zealand as in the mother country.
Many European villages have attracted into their neighbourhood, or include among their population, a considerable number
of Maoris, who are united by the same interests, hold the same
faith, and stand in the mutual relation of landlord and tenant.
The writer of the article adds that the progress made by the natives in agricultural science and rural economy is truly surprising:
and the chances of the harvest form now the chief interest of
savages who were once so warlike and so cruel.
If the development of material interest carried to excess has
been the subject of well-earned reproach, we must also acknowledge
that it has helped to propagate and introduce ideas of amelioration
which were unknown to people who were beyond the circle of
* Philarbte Chasles : Morale Chrdtienne des Boudhistea. Debats, April 24, 1860.
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
473
intellectual progress. Little space would suffice to show tlie influence which the prolonged stay of our soldiers has had upon
other populations.
The few facts which we have gathered together then show that
man is susceptible of amelioration, even when he is found in a
marked degree of inferiority, in comparison with our own race.
However low, therefore, a nation may have fallen, we protest
against the opinion of a certain class of economists, who make a
sweeping condemnation of certain races which are destined,
according to their idea, to disappear from the face of the earth on
account of their irremediable inferiority. No, indeed : as Christians and philosophers believing in the unity of the races of mankind we cannot sufficiently condemn such a doctrine. All that
is necessary in such a case is to have recourse to all suitable
means to raise them from their decay. " Homo sum, humani nihil
a me alienum puto," wrote an ancient author; such is our motto
for all. These thoughts, which occurred to me on seeing the
work by M. d'Escayrac de Lauture upon Turkey, are in accordance
with the motto of his book, "Aperire viam gentibusand the
curious circumstances of resemblance between the Turks and the
Franks which he quotes prove that intercourse only is necessary
to multiply them.
If man is distinguished from animals by his psychological characters, which are more or less marked in different races, but in
all instances susceptible of development and perfection by ameliorating their physical condition, the moral characters, intercourse, example, and education, play no less a part in drawing the
line between the two species. Of these characters, there is one
in particular which by its generality, I may say its universality, is
the exclusive property of the human race. I mean devotion to
one's fellow-beings. Wherever there is a sufferer, be it Australian,
Negro, or even animal, there is a score, of generous hearts ready
to give succour. This feeling is so deeply rooted in man, that in
time of pressing danger it will come to the help even of an enemy.
In order to be useful to others and help them to share in the
general welfare, man will sacrifice his rest, his property, his
fortune, even his life. This devotedness on behalf of the massey
so long in wretchedness, which spreads more and more among the
enlightened classes, is a divine mark of our species, which cannot
be explained by causes arising from our organization, and whose
origin must consequently be sought for in a principle of another
nature. To suppose that the Alpha and Omega of things are inaccessible to us, is to run counter to the very notion of cause,
which is foreign to the philosophy of sensation.
We have abstained, in this examination of organic and psychological characteristics, from making any allusion to dogmas
'474
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
which we respect. But ought we to follow the advice given by a
man of feeling and talent, to banish thoughts of equality and
fraternity because their interference might be prejudicial to
science ? That is an opinion which we cannot share, and we think
we shall not err in saying that the Society will not share it either.
However interesting science may be, we think it is only useful so
far as it serves for the benefit of mankind ; and as soon as it
ceases to have this end, it no longer deserves the labour of
students. In this respect, we agree entirely in the opinion expressed by the writer of the article on the Neiv Theory of Natural
History : " Wherever slavery oppresses a perfectible moral nature, or a free will capable of being guided by conscience and
religion, it is a crime and a monstrosity ; this is a truth to which
every honest mind ought to clingr and which is more durable
than all the other doctrines of ethnography and natural history
which may be in the ascendant to-day and overthrown tomorrow."*
While upholding the doctrine of the unity of the human race,
we reject, with Al. von Humboldt, as a matter of course the unliappy and unproved distinction made between superior and inferior
races. Doubtless there are some more susceptible of culture,
more civilized, more enlightened, but none more noble than
others. All are made equally for liberty, and the instance of the
New Zealand savages, once cannibals, now agriculturists and
landlords, is the best of all proofs.
Let us here stay to examine an important objection arising
from the study of philology. It cannot be denied that the grammar
of a language is its code of rights, and when we cannot logically
derive one language from another, nor refer two dialects to a
common stock, it seems natural to conclude that the two languages are not of the same family. It is clear that the IndoEuropean languages spring from one common dialect, now dead.
They all have, for instance, the same form of the verb " to be
the form which is also found in the Sanscrit. On this subject, it
will be found interesting to read the lecture given by M. Monlau
as his introductory discourse befo e the Spanish Academy. But in
our actual state of knowledge on the subject, can we show parallel
resemblances between the Sanscrit, the Semitic languages
(Hebrew, Chaldaic, Arabic), Chinese, and the American idioms ?
At the commencement of our medical studies, we followed the
learned instructions of Professors Abel Remusat, De Chezy, and
Caussin de Perceval: and we confess that the grammatical differences of these languages appeared to us so decided, that in
order to find for them a common origin it was necessary to suppose the most extraordinary transformations. It is possible, as
Revue des deux Mondes, p. 467, April 1, 1860.
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES. 475
M. Revau says, in his remarkable Histoi'y of the Semitic languages, that the Assyrian preserves an intermediate dialect which
would form a link between the Sanscrit and the Hebrew. Yet it
may well be declared that the unity of human languages is not
yet satisfactorily demonstrated.
This objection is a gi*ave one, and we recognise it at once : but
is it really worth the stress that has been laid upon it ? For,
since it is clear that the dialects of an advanced civilization have
been lost in Eastern countries, we do not possess all the elements
necessary to the solution of the question: and it only wants a
new Anquetil-Duperron, or a second Burnouf, to find the key to
the cuneiform hieroglyphics, and so overthrow the whole system.
And we know well that in science what does not exist to-day
may exist to-morrow.
In the examination which we have just made of the characters
of organic life and of intellectual life, we have striven to assign
to each of these elements the position which it should occupy. If
we admit, in accordance with repeated observation, that the first
drop ofbloodinman contains in an undeveloped state his physical
and moral qualities, as well as his ills and vices, we are no less
strongly convinced that there is something superior to the drop
of blood. Doubtless nations, like individuals, possess different
abilities and special powers ; and history compels us to admit
that, whatever be the reason, the races of men have not all the
same amount of intelligence, the same moral vigour, the same
forcible inspiration towards the ideal. The mission of some appears to be war, of others sociability ; and of several, art?
" Excudent alii spirantia mollius sera...
Tu regere imperio populos, Romane, memento ;
Hse tibi erunt artes."
While admitting these differences, says M. Gustave de Beaumont, of a secondary nature, we must never lose sight of those
grand traits of generosity which are common to all men and to
all nations. Just as all human beings experience the same material appetites, which constitute one of the conditions of physical
life, so all are endowed with certain immaterial faculties which
form part of their moral existence. All possess the instinctive
love of liberty and of acquiring property; of liberty, which is the
use of one's body, and of the acquisition of property, which is the
expression of one's wants. Some are born by the chance of circumstances in a state of freedom, others in slavery: some with
blessings of which others are deprived. The first lose by their
vices what the second have the merit of creating: but all are
glad to possess, and all suffer by being deprived of these blessings : all equally enjoy, desire, or regret them. Let egotism
deceive itself with regard to these truths, and obscure them ; but
476
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
let not science intervene, and be called to the aid of errors which
she combats and of lies which she disavows *
These immaterial faculties which are found in all men are a
new argument to be added to those furnished by the study of
psychological characters, aud they establish, in our opinion, incontestable proof of the unity and speciality of the human race.
We have now arrived at the last portion of our task, which has
not been less frequently called in question than the foregoing,
but which appears to us as true, and perhaps even better proved,
than the other questions; I mean the formation of races and
their crosses. The formation of races is a consequence of our
nature. As soon as the family increased, the diversity of inclinations, instincts, and passions, the thirst after independence and
the necessities of life, brought about a separation. Subject to influences, among which the mode of life and internal causes
occupy the chief place, man changed the more quickly in
proportion as he was nearer to the original stock; and we must
not forget those external influences which act all the more strongly
in proportion as man is less civilized. Some have denied the
rapidity of these changes ; but those which have occurred in our
own times justify this view of the case. The Society will remember the rapid appearance of the " Mocho" and " Loutre" races.
The same facts are observable in the human race.
The American race, which owes its existence to the English
nation, from which it has been separated scarcely a century, presents nevertheless such striking differences in physical, physiological, and psychological relations from the latter, that Dr Knox
thought himself justified in concluding that they are a kind of
degenerated type of the mother country. Among the psychological characteristics, there is one which has specially struck me.
While the Englishman, shut in his " home," scarcely opens his
door to look at a foreigner (which gave rise to Chateaubriand's
remark, that an exile may be next door to an Englishman for
whole years, and learn nothing of his habits, manners, or mode of
life), the American receives all foreigners with open arms, and
assimilates them so rapidly to himself, that we have known Englishmen who started with all the prejudices of their country,
return in two or three years more Americanized than the
Americans themselves.
The dispersion of the human family into an infinitude of fragments, tribes, and societies, produced mixtures and crosses more
or less numerous, of which it is important to inquire the result.
Before pointing out the principal results of crosses between
different men, it is necessary to explain in a few words the plan
* Gustave de Beaumont: La Soci^t^ Russe et la Soci^te Aniericaine. Revue des
deuxMondes, p. 1182, March 15, 1854.
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
477
adopted by intelligent breeders to modify and reform races of
animals. Their first object is to discover with tact characteristics
which are susceptible of regular transmission; for, as M. Auguste
Laugel observes, it is by regulating attentively the succession of
generations, that step by step the required object is attained.
And the definite result includes the sum total of all these steps.
This procedure is called " selection." In Saxony, the importance
of this principle is so well understood with respect to the merino
sheep, that selection has there become a trade. The sheep are
set upon a table, and studied as a connoisseur studies a picture.
This is repeated every month, and each time the sheep are
marked and classified; and the best only are definitely chosen
for breeding.* It is partly to this kind of proceeding, says M.
Edward Milne, in his Traite de Zoologie, that the Arab horses
owe their well-earned reputation. The Arabs attach such importance to the purity of their splendid horses, that their pedigree
is always authenticated by official documents. They count the
family of some of these noble animals backwards two thousand
years ; and there are a few whose lineage may be shown to extend
over a period of four centuries.
We have given these particulars thus detailed, because we wish
to establish the superiority of the means commonly employed to
preserve cross-breeds among animals ; while those among man are
the result of chance, and have not yet among common people
been made a subject of reflection, or of any particular method.
It is well known that when a cross is made between two
animals of the same species, the offspring takes after both parents,
but generally inclines to the father; hence a male of the purest
breed is employed to ameliorate an indifferent breed. We also
know that by breeding with this offspring, and avoiding mixture
from other species, a mongrel race is procured, which at last
acquires a certain stability and uniformity; but that if the product
of the first cross is put to breed with one or other of the original
parents, the offspring returns to the original type.
The crosses between races of man, whether between neighbouring or distant people, follow the same law of variety ; on the one
hand, returning to one of the parent stock, or on the other, producing mixed races according to the nature of the successive
crosses. The first result is clearly seen in the offspring of the
European with the negress, e.g.,
White and black produce the mulatto.
White and mulatto ? quadroon.
White and quadroon ? quinteroon.
White and quinteroon ? white.
* Auguste Laugel: Nouvelle Th(jorie d'HIstoire Naturelle, l'Oiigine des Espfeces.
Revue des deux Mondes, April 1, 1860.
478
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
And vice versa,
Black and white produce the mulatto.
Black and mulatto ? griffon and zambo.
Black and griffon ? zambo prieto.
Black and zambo prieto ? black.
It is thus shown that after four generations the mulatto becomes lost in one of his original stock.
These circumstances have been brought about on a large scale.
Thus, the first Chinese who came to inhabit Malacca, having
brought no women of their own, married Malays. To the present
day these families make no alliances except among themselves,
or with Chinese who come over from the mother country. The
results of the strict observance of this custom has been to produce women exactly resembling those at Eokin or Canton.*
The production of new species among domestic animals is an
undeniable fact; and the opponents of the doctrine of unity have
sought to explain it by the demoralizing tendency of a state of
servitude. This argument must surprise us when we see the
magnificent exhibitions of horses and animals of all kinds which
are the delight of connoisseurs. Besides, we might answer by
applying the argument to the human species. The adversaries of
our doctrine do not confine themselves to this criticism ; they
deny the existence of a mongrel race of men, and hold that
such a race can only be perpetuated by the continued presence of
two original types; and they say that, owing to the natural tendency to return to the primitive stock, and the usual barrenness
of these half-breeds, the mixed race must be always inferior in
quality and number. We will not go far to find a peremptory
answer : M. Broca supplies one in the case of the French nation.
But before giving it, we must not lose sight of the fact so judiciously pointed out by M. W. Edwards,t that conquering colonists, unless they imitate the Jews or the English in India,
become in the end lost in the conquered race. This happened
with the Romans and Francs, whose type has almost entirely
disappeared in the Gauls : while the types of the Gauls, Gaels, or
Celts, or of the Kimri or Cimbri, who were the former rulers of
this country, have been perpetuated, and produced a cross race,
which has suffered no loss of fruitfulness, energy, or intelligence;
this was shown by Dr Broca at one of the meetings of the
Anthropological Society. The Gauls, better known under the
name of Celts, were a race of small men, dark-complexioned, with
round head, broad forehead, not prominent nose, rounded face,
and hairy body. The Kimri or Cimbri were tall and fair, with a
* Docteur Yvan : De la France en Chine, p. 237. Paris, 1855.
*t* Des Caracteres Physiques des Races Humaines, considerees dans leurs Rapports
avec VHistoire, p. 40. Paris, 1829.
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
479
long liead, high forehead, long, prominent, hooked nose, protruding chin, and short hair. The Kimri occupied the north-east; the
Celts the south, centre, and north-west. The Kimri element predominates notably between the Seine and the Rhine; while south
of the Loire and in Brittany the Celtic element preponderates.
In the difficulty caused by the numerous mixtures which have
resulted from the crossing of these two races, M. Broca had recourse to the distinguishing mark afforded by the difference in
height and make, which is valuable, on account of the positive
evidence afforded by the conscription. The result of his inquiries
is, that the average height is greater in the Cimbric than in the
Celtic parts. And he shows that the effect of the cross has been
to raise the average height of the Celts and to lessen that of the
Kimri, and that the departments where the average height is
lowest are those where the Celt has undergone the least amount
of crossing.
Another conclusion to be drawn from this study is that these
crosses have not had any deleterious influence on the population;
for the strength, health, fruitfulness, and longevity are the same
in the average, whether the races have been little or much mixed.
Here then is an experimental proof?that a cross between two
races of the same group produces a perfectly healthy population,
which propagates itself without returning to the stock of either of
the original races, and in no respect second to them in physical
and intellectual qualities. Must we then admit, on the other
hand, that crosses between very distant races are unproductive or
can only produce half-breeds of diminished fruitfulness ? But
experience on this point has also been had on a large scale in
the European colonies, and the half-breeds who owe their existence to it are now very numerous. In the five States of Mexico,
Guatimala, Colombia, Plata, and Brazil, they form a fifth of the
population.* Omalius d'Halloy estimates the whole number of
the population of the globe at 750 millions, and that of the halfbreeds which have been formed since the great movement of the
15th century at 10 millions.
After the conquest of America, the Spaniards mixed with the
natives, and their children, or bastards, were called Spaniards.
These, says Felix de Azara, united, and their descendants form
at the present day in Paraguay the greater number of those who
are called Spaniards. They seem to have some superiority over
the Spaniards of Europe in regard to height, elegance of form,
and fairness of skin. These examples of the crosses between
different races are not the only ones which solve the important
problem of continued fruitfulness.
* Quatrefages : Histoire Naturelle de 1'Homme. Revue des deux Mondes, 2me
pdriode, vol. viii., p. 162.
480
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
Wherever correct observations lmve been made, the half-breeds
have shown themselves superior in some respects to the white
race itself. In the Philippine Islands the half-breeds are very numerous, and form an active, industrious, and brave class, which
has already wrested important and just concessions from the
metropolis. It is scarcely necessary to recal what kind of men
those were who were so cruelly cut up by civil discord in St.
Domingo. In Brazil, the cross-breed between black and white
has been enabled, thanks to its intellectual and moral worth, to
conquer in a great degree the prejudice of blood; and it is a race
peculiarly remarkable for its cultivation of the arts, which are
much more developed among them than among the pure whites.
In the same empire we find an entire province crossed between
Europeans and natives. What is the result ? The peculiar
features of the Paulistas, their chivalrous character, their bravery
and perseverance, have been noticed in good works written by
reliable authors.* A short time back, the Quarterly Review
quoted a very interesting example of this crossing. The islander^
of New Zealand had lived for centuries like true savages. England has made them citizens, and they adopt the customs of the
mother country. Marriages have taken place between Europeans
and New Zealanders. The produce of this is about 500 individuals whose natural superiority is undeniable.f
M. Gratiolet remarked at the meeting of the 14tli of March,
that in order to study primitive stocks and races of men, we must
as soon as possible study savage tribes which are as yet free from
alliance, because cross-breeds were becoming so common that
primitive races would soon become extinct. The following remarks which we extract from the Revue des deux Mondes, show
the rapidity with which practical ideas make their way:?
" The utility of crossing, in order to ameliorate a race, has not escaped the notice of savage nations. The Groajires of New Granada,
according to M. Elisee Reclus, are extremely handsome, and are formed
with sculptural beauty ; their faces are generally round, their colour,
which is red in youth, gets darker as they grow older, and, in old age,
they are a fine mahogany colour. Among these men, the true aristocracy is that of beauty; riches and power belong to those whom
nature has favoured in this respect. If a shipwreck throws foreign
sailors on their coast, these Indians, who know the ' callipedic' importance of a well-arranged cross, retain those who are tall and vigorous,
and make them pay for the hospitality granted them by a few years of
forced marriage with two or three handsome ' Groajires.' Those unfortunate sailors who happen to be ill-made, are stripped of their clothes,
and turned over from tribe to tribe as far as Rio Hacha, hooted and
ridiculed." I
* M. Quatrefages, op. cit. + Monit. Univcrscl, 11, 14, 23 Jan. 1859.
? Revue des deux Monde's, vol. xxvi. pp. 437, 43S, March 15, 18'iO.
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
481
Tn spite of the vices and defects whicli they have in common
"with other barbarous nations, the aboriginal Indians are making
evident progress ; and there is reason to believe that in the province of Rio Hacha they will form, as the Indians of the interior
have formed at Socorro, Velez, and Pamplona, the most important
element of social regeneration. Up to the latest times they kept
themselves free from all intermixture ; but the numerous opportunities for intercourse resulting from commercial relations have
lately produced some remarkable families of cross-breeds. Already
the commerce between Goajire tribes and foreigners is larger in
proportion than that of any other community of the Granada
republic. Many Goajires have lately settled here and there on
the right bank of the Rio de Hacha, and have cleared the land
preparatory to planting mangoes and other fruit-trees. Five or
six families, attracted by the hope of gain, have gone a step
further. A short distance from the town they have established
market gardens in sufficient number to supply the town.
One last trait in the character of the Goajires is the hatred
which they, in number about 25,000 or 30,000, cherish against
the Spaniards, and the vengeance which they have exacted in
course of time. For nearly three centuries these aborigines have
Avaged war against their conquerors, who, besides conquering
them, used to behead them, cut them in pieces, feed dogs on
their flesh, and reduce them to slavery. The continued war which
they have carried on against the descendants of these Spaniards
has been so terrible, that the latter have completely disappeared
from this part of New Granada, and no Spaniard dare trust himself on the other side of the Rio de Hacha. This is a lesson
which ought not to be lost.
M. Elisee Reclus relates another fact respecting the relation of
races in New Granada on the Sierra Negra coast, one of the great
chains of the Andes. The vast plain of Rio-Oaser has as yet on
it only a few scattered villages; before long it will resemble our
own country. The agents in this change will consist to a great
extent of emigrants from Europe and North America. But the
Indians of the Sierra, the Tupes, the Ariiaques, and the Chimilas,
will also play an important part therein. A few years ago the
Chimilas were still deadly enemies of the Spaniards and of
coloured men. Covering their bodies with bark stripped off
the trees, they lived in the grottoes and forests round CerroPontado, and any foreigner who ventured near their retreat was
murdered without pity. One day a negro of Herculean strength,
named Christoforo Sandoval, instigated by some strangely bold
fancy, went and presented himself before the chief of the Chimilas, unarmed, and accompanied only by his young son. By
what magic the negro succeeded in charming the Red Skin we
482
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.
know not, but tlie effect was instantaneous; the Cacique abdicated, and Cristoforo took his place as chief of the Chimilas.
From that day the Indians made peace with the Spaniards, and
turned their attention to agriculture.
M. de Rochas, a navy surgeon, who lias published an excellent
pamphlet on the anthropology of New Caledonia, after observing that the New Caledonians, who belong to the Oceanic
Negroes, have a dirty black skin, something of the colour of chocolate, points out an improvement in form of some of the tribes of
the eastern coast. He is inclined to attribute it to an intermixture of races resulting from emigration from Polynesia. It
is certain that, not long since, emigrants from Ouvea settled on
one of the Loyalty Islands (in New Caledonia), conquered the
inhabitants, and imposed on them their own language and the
name of their own native place. This is the " Halgan" island of
Dumont d'Urville's maps, called by the natives Ouvea. The
race of new inhabitants mixed with the old race, and the result
was, a population of much finer men than those of the neighbouring islands, at the expense of the yellow Polynesians who had
emigrated from Wallis, (or Ouvea), and to the advantage of the
black natives. These half-breeds, whom we may call new, since
they have existed for only five generations, are taller and stronger
than the Caledonians; their face is masculine and agreeable ;
their hair flat, or curled in long ringlets, but never frizzly; their
lips comparatively thin and but slightly turned up; prognathism
little marked; forehead high and slightly protruding; the nose
longer and the cheek-bones much less prominent than their
neighbours, and their skin much less deeply marked. These
details are very useful, because they show that the Caucasian race
is not the only one that has the power of regenerating a species.
One observation of M. de Rochas, which has also some bearing
upon the question of the amelioration and civilization of races, is
that which treats of diet. The necessity for animal food is so
decided among the Caledonians, that one hears them say, " We
want flesh?we must fight." This terrible but forcible language
is the result of the weakness which is the result of scarcity of
meat. M. de Rochas appears to us, therefore, to be in the right
when he says that " the shepherd who shall teach them to rear
flocks of sheep will do more for civilization than all the moralists
in the worldand that " the man who facilitates their means of
profiting by keeping sheep will have deserved well of France and
of humanity."*
Lastly, if an anecdote told by a serious newspaper may be
allowed in so grave a debate, I can tell you that a merchant at
* V. de Rochas, Chirurgien de la Marine : Revue Algerienne et Coloniale, Gazette
Medicalc, Anthropologic de la Nouvelle Caledoine, March 31, 1860.
ON THE UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES. 483
Graham's Town, Cape of Good Hope, sold in two weeks a hundredweight of steel bands among the coloured ladies of the district
(descendants of Hottentots and Europeans), among whom crinoline is in high request.
This enumeration of different facts connected with the subject
of crossing between different tribes of men, whether of neighbouring or distant classes, has taught us that the progeny is generally
superior to the original types; and teaches us also that degeneracy
may be combated by this powerful means. The extent of this
paper will not allow us to dwell on this important subject, and
we will content ourselves with observing that the examples among
domestic animals are conclusive. Without going out of France,
and keeping to recent experience, we will instance the Charmois
sheep and the Boulogne pigs. By means of a well-arranged cross
between the races of Berri and Touraine, and then between the
offspring of this cross and the merino ram of New Kent, and
uniting these with the inferior ewes of Limousin, a breed has been
obtained of twice the value of that so sought after in England.
With respect to the Boulogne and Montreuil pigs, they come of a
local breed which had much degenerated, but was restored by a
cross with the Yorkshires and New Leicesters. The stock thus
obtained was bred from, and the result was a superior race, which
keeps up annually a brisk trade. With regard to the objections
that have been made to crossing a breed, it will be sufficient to
say that want of success has resulted from inattention to the most
elementary laws of physiology; and this happened particularly
when an attempt was made to mix the blood of the English horse
with all our breeds of horses.
However cautious we may be in drawing comparisons between
men and animals, we think the subject is worth consideration;
since, on the whole, the physical organization and physiological
functions of the two species are very analogous.
The task I have undertaken is finished. In studying the
question of the Unity of the Human Race from an anthropological
point of view, I have endeavoured to defend by scientific arguments a noble cause, which had been long ago defended religiously
and devotedly at every sacrifice.
If I have succeeded, in presence of the sad strife against liberty
and in behalf of slavery, in proving, by facts drawn from physical
organization and physiology, the legitimacy of the doctrine of
the human family, the proof of which exists in the family itself,
if I have placed beyond doubt the principle of equality and
reciprocity of the races of mankind, I shall be sufficiently recompensed for my labours, and for the numerous researches which
my want of knowledge on these matters has compelled me to
make.
4S4 THE STATUS OF CRIME IN 1859.
M. Lamarche, advocating also the doctrine of unity, has treated
the subject with the authority of his talent and of the experience
derived from his long course of political, philosophical, and moral
studies.* We cannot follow him upon that ground, which is
forbidden to us. Oar field is less extensive ; but we are both
children of that France which has never shrunk from shedding its
purest blood in defence of the rights of humanity. Under the
flag which she now bears so high aloft, captains and soldiers
must close their ranks, and yield each other mutual support, and
fight according to their ability. This is what is expressed by Dr.
Livingstone, in the following terms, at the end of his work which
has been so ably translated by Mdme. Loreau:?"Each one in
his place, wittingly or unwittingly, accomplishes the wish of our
Father who is in Heaven; the man of science, when he discovers
hidden laws whose application draws people to one another, and
cements their union ; the soldier, when he fights for right against
tyranny; the sailor, when he rescues numerous victims from the
insatiable greed of soulless traffickers; the merchant, by circulating his country's produce, and teaching nations that they
depend on one another:?all working for the amelioration and
well-being of their fellow-creatures."
* On the day on which the proof-sheets of this work were sent me, I heard of
the death of this excellent man, who had been the promoter of these inquiries. It
was, in fact, from hearing him express his opinions respecting the Unity of the
Human Race, at the Medical Society at the Pantheon, that I gathered my materials.
After my lecture, he expressed to me warmly his intention to make use of my
documents in the new edition of his work. I take this opportunity of acknowledging his kindness, and I regret him the more that there is among the press but one
opinion concerning the virtues of M. Lamarche.
