Modern Magicians and Mediomaniacs
==================================

Art. X.?
It is a huge mistake to imagine that the magicians of our own
days are in any respect inferior to those of tin earlier date. If
there be any so utterly ignorant that they had believed that ma-
gicians were, at least so far as Europe was concerned, peculiari-
ties of times long past, to them we would especially commend
this paper, which is neither more nor less than a contributory
waif to the psychological history of our own time. It may be
that the magicians of a former and remote period exercised a
greater influence over the minds of the people at large than those
who exist now. Not, however, because the latter have drunk less
deeply from the fountain of the occult sciences, or that they wield
less potent powers, or have less faith in them, but because they
have not escaped from the mollifying influence of an advancing
civilization, and have thus become less fitted to deal with, and
perhaps more heedless of, the increasing perversity and unbelief
of the vulgar herd (although, by the way, the ingestive capacity
of this in the matter of mystical odds and ends is by no means
mediocre, witness for example, spirit-rapping). The exercitations
of the occult brotherhood are, notwithstanding, of far too great
an interest as illustrations of the psychical eccentricities of the
present epoch to be lost sight of, and we propose to cull a few
examples to this end from the latest specimen which has come to
light, to wit, the History of Magic * by Eliphas Levi. This
name is a pseudonym, and it may be translated, associated in
Gocl's ivork. The author is, we believe, a priest; consequently
* Histoire de la Magic ; avec une Exposition claire et precise de ses Procedcs, dc
ses Rites, et de ses Mysteres. Par Eliphas Ldvi, auteur de Dogma et Ritucl de la
haute Magie. Paris. I860,
MODERN MAGICIANS AND MEDIOMANIACS. 247
the pseudonym may be looked upon as a double hit, applying on
the one hand to his actual duties, on the other to his labours in
conjunction with others in the cause of magic. He has inscribed
on the title-page of his book, Khunrath's definition of a great work
? Opus Hierarchiciim et Catliolicum.
The construction of the work is one befitting its subject, as the
framework is built up out of the science itself of which the book
treats. It must be premised that the present work is the second
instalment of a complete course of magic, to be terminated in three
parts. The first portion, published in 1856, treats of the Dogmas
and Ritual of High Magic ; the second portion is the one now
under consideration ; and the third, to be entitled the Key to the
Great Mysteries, will be forthcoming sooner or later.
This threefold division of our author's lucubrations has been
determined, it would appear, by magical rule and precept. The
discovery of the great mysteries of magic rests entirely, he tells
us, upon the signification attached to numbers by the ancient
hierophants. Three was regarded by them as the generative
number, and in teaching any doctrine they first considered the
theory, next the realization, then the adaptation to every possible
usage. " Thus," writes the so-called Eliphas Levi, " are formed
dogmas, whether philosophical or religious. For example, the
dogmatic synthesis of Christianity, inherited from the Magi, im-
poses upon our faith three Persons in one God, and three mys-
teries in the universal religion."?(p. 5.)
Our author, therefore, follows in the primary divisions of his
work the ternary plan laid down by the Cabbalah, " that is to
say, the foremost tradition of the occult sciences." Further, he
is guided in the subdivisions of his writings also by the mysteries
of numbers. Thus the Dogma and Ritual are each divided into
twenty-two chapters marked by the twenty-two letters of the
Hebrew alphabet. He places at the head of each chapter the
letter which belongs to it, adding " the Latin words which, ac-
cording to the best authors, indicate the signification of the hiero-
glyphic." Thus he heads the first chapter in this manner :?
I N A
Le Kecipiendaire,
Disciplina,
Ensopli,
Keter.
"We are instructed that the letter aleph, of which the equiva-
lent in Latin and French is A, and the numerical value 1, signi-
fies the candidate, the man about to be initiated, the dexterous
individual (the card-juggler?le bateleur du tarot). It signifies
the dogmatic syllepsis (disciplina); Being (letre) in its primary
218 MODERN MAGICIANS AND MEDIOM AN I ACS.
and general conception (Ensoph); finally, the first and obscure
idea of tlie divinity expressed by Keter (the crown) in the cabba-
listic theology. " The chapter is the development of the title,
and the title contains hieroglyphically all the chapter. The
entire book is composed according to this combination."
The History of Magic, the book which immediately concerns
us, recounts and explains the realizations of the science in the
course of ages, and it is arranged according to the number seven
this being the representative of the week of Creation, and of
the divine consummation.
The Key to the Great Mysteries is to be based upon the num-
ber four, this it appears being that of the enigmatical forms of
the Sphynx and of the elementary manifestations. In this book,
we are told, will be fully explained the enigma of the Sphynx,
and will also be presented the key to those things which have
been hidden since the beginning of the world.
Let us then learn from this new (Edipus somewhat of the
wondrous science by which these marvels may be wrought. It
is evident that he may justly exclaim with Mephistopheles, when
he seated himself among the Sphynxes?
" How easily I make myself at home!
I understand each spirit's tongue around me."
Magic, then, " is the science of the ancient Magi; and the
Christian religion, which has silenced the lying oracles and put
an end to the prestiges of false gods, itself reveres those Magi
who came from the East, guided by a star, to adore the Saviour
of the world in his cradle." Tradition has given to these Magi
the titles of kings, " because (mark the reasons) the initiation into
magic constitutes a true royalty, and because the great art of the
Magi is termed by all its adepts the royal art, or the holy king-
dom, sanctum regnum."?(p. 2.)
Magic unites in one and the same science all that is certain in
philosophy and all that is infallible and eternal in religion. It
links together perfectly and incontestably faith and reason, science
and belief, authority and freedom?forms which at first seem so
opposed. " It gives to the human mind an instrument of philoso-
phical and religious certitude exact as mathematics, and explains
the infallibility of mathematics themselves."?(p. 2.)
We shall quickly have an opportunity of seeing this wonderful
instrument tested.
Thus, then, we learn, that there is an absolute in the matters
-which concern intelligence and faith. Supreme reason does not suffer
the gleams of the human understanding to be blown about by the
puffs of every idle wind. There does exist an incontestable truth,
and by means of this truth, once seized upon, men who take it
MODERN" MAGICIANS AND MEDIOMANIACS. 249
for their guide can give to their volition " a sovereign puissance
which will render them masters of all things inferior to them, and of
all wandering spirits, that is to say, arbiters and kings of the
world."?(p. 3.)
Well may we ask, guided by our author, if it be thus, how
comes it that this science is unknown ? How can we imagine that
so glorious a sun exists in a heaven that we know to be most
obscure ? How ? Alas ! that the brimming cup should be dashed
to the ground the moment we attempt to raise it to our lips.
But so it is. The " lofty science," we are told, " has always been
known, but solely by those understandings which belong to tho
olite, and who have comprehended the necessity of being silent
and of waiting. If an able surgeon were, in the middle of the night,
to give sight to one who was blind, how could he comprehend
before the morning had dawned the existence and nature of the
sun ?"
Again, we are taught that this science can never be vulgarized,
" ? Because it is hierarchical, and because anarchy alone flatters the
prejudices of the multitude. Absolute truths are not necessary for the
masses, otherwise progress would be arrested, and life would cease in
humanity, the hither-and-thither of contrary ideas, the shock of
opinions, the passions of the world, determined always by the dreams
of the moment, are necessary to the intellectual increase of nations.
(How charming is this candour of the elite I They possess bread, but
we must rest content with stones.) The multitudes do not lack feel-
ing, and it is for this reason that they abandon so willingly the chair
of the professor in order to hasten to the trestle of the charlatan.
Men even who are supposed to occupy themselves especially with phi-
losophy, resemble almost always children who amuse themselves with
enigmas, and who invariably send away first those who may chance to
know the solution, lest these should put an end to the game by destroy-
ing all the interest which appertains to the embarrassment excited by
the questions."?(p. 6.)
It is always thus with these men of transcendental knowledge,
like Ralpho's " New Light"?
" 'Tis a dark lanthorn of the spirit
Which none see by but those that bear it
Although they promise strange and great
Discoveries of things far fet,
They are but idle dreams and fancies,
And savour strongly of the ganzas.
Tell me but what's the natural cause
Why on a sign no painter draws
The full moon ever, but the half?
Resolve that with your Jacob's staff;
250 MODERN MAGICIANS AND MEDIOMANIACS.
Or why the wolves raise hubbub at her,
And dogs howl when she shines in water'?
And I shall freely give my vote,
You may know something more remote."
It is well, however, that we should seek to know somewhat
more precise respecting the potency of magical science ; and seek-
ing, we find, that if we conform ourselves to the rules of the
eternal force (whatever that may be), man can assimilate himself
to the creative power and become creator and conservator like
unto it. God?our author is pre-eminently religious after a
fashion, and he has a habit of tagging a Scriptural illustration or
quotation to the opinions he emits?God, it would seem, has
not restricted to a limited number the steps of Jacob's luminous
ladder. Whatever exists in nature inferior to man is submitted
to him, and to him belongs the faculty of increasing indefinitely
liis dominion in always ascending :?
" Thus the length and even the perpetuity of life, the atmosphere
and its storms, the earth and its metallic veins, light and its prodigious
mirages, night and its dreams, death and its phantoms, all these obey
the royal sceptre of the Magi, the pastoral staff of Jacob, and the
terrible rod of Moses. The adept becomes king of the elements, a
metamorphoser of metals, arbiter of visions, director of oracles, and
master of life, according to the mathematical order of nature, and con-
formably to the will of the supreme intelligence. There is magic in
all its glory! But who will dare, in our age, to give faith to our
words ? Those who desire loyally to study and frankly to learn ;
because we shall no longer hide the truth under the veil of parables or
of hieroglyphical signs, the time has come when all should be made
known, and we propose to do it."?(p. 9.)
If the right apprehension of this knowledge is, however, re-
served for the elect, it is to be feared that we shall profit as little
by an explanation of the modes in which it is to be attained,
as Jessica did from Lorenzo's disquisition on the music of the
spheres:?
" For while this muddy vesture of decay
Doth grossly close us in we cannot hear it."
M. Levi's account of the power possessed by the modern
magician, magniloquent though it may be, scarcely satisfies us.
It certainly does not fail in assigning to magical science a suffi-
ciency of power; but we still want something a little more
definite; we want, in short, a few subsidiary details. We shall
turn, therefore, for a few moments to M. Cahagnet's confession
of faith, he being a contemporary of M. Levi, and one who
reposes trust in animal magnetism. But both he and M. Levi
mean the same thing, and go over pretty much the same ground.
MODERN MAGICIANS AND MEDIOMANIACS. 251
M. Levi is, however, much the more honest and praiseworthy
writer of the two, for he frankly adopts magic as a science, while
M. Cahagnet seeks to smuggle into favour the phenomena of
magic under the guise of a pseudo-science.
M. Cahagnet's confession is given in the form of question and
answer, and lest we should be thought guilty of gross exaggera-
tion, we must transcribe it literally :?
" Can we produce a cataleptic state by the action of human mag-
netism ??Yes.
. " Can we subtract or triple the powers of a magnetic subject sub-
mitted to our action ??Yes.
" Can we produce upon this subject those effects of attraction, which
every magnetizer assures us have been produced, not only upon animated
beings, but upon inanimate bodies ??Yes.
" Can we by means of this attraction occasion the suspension of
natural bodies ??Yes.
" Can certain subjects in the magnetic state execute gymnastic move-
ments, as well as movements inadmissible by the laws of anatomy ??
Yes.
" Can an individual in this state attain a taller growth than na-
tural ???Yes.
" Can he walk upon points d'appui contrary to the constitution of
his being, and to the laws of equilibrium ??Yes.
" Can he produce upon his person boundless local and general in-
flammations ??Yes.
" Can he in this state see, the eyes being closed, either by the neck,
the stomach, or the fingers, at incommensurable distances, and hear
what is said there ??Yes.
" Can the so-called spirit separated from matter, have material
affinities ??Yes.
" Can the lucid speak many languages which are unknown to him,
as well as acquire a knowledge of science of which he was always igno-
rant ??Yes.
" Can he in this state defy the action of fire and poisons ??Yes.
" Can he communicate with the dead, speak to them, and ascertain
from them useful things ??Yes.
" Can he, in his turn, fascinate his magnetizer by rendering himself,
or such objects as he wishes, invisible at his will ??Yes.
"Can the magnetizer possess his subject by sounds which he makes
him hear from a distance, work upon him the effects of attraction also at
a distance, produce apparitions of beings or fantastic objects, and force
him thus to do things against his repose, morality, and honour p?Yes.
" Can the magnetizer in this manner render any one idiotic or mad,
or even kill, without any traces being visible, the victim submitted to
his action ??Yes.
" Can he induce any malady whatsoever, or destroy the use of a
limb ??Yes.
" Can he give blows from very great distances ??Yes.
" Can he lead persons astray, cause them to leap ditches, or to drink
252 MODERN MAGICIANS AND MEDIOMANIACS.
au cJialumeau* create obstacles in straight roads, and occasion the
appearance as it were of robbers or ferocious animals ??Yes.
" Can he throw stones into places afar off, without being seen, and
bewitch lands, gardens, beasts, and men, as all books on sorcery aver ?
?Yes.
" Can he cause multitudes, at one and the same time, to see,
touch, and eat productions real in appearance, but ideal in reality ??
Yes.
* " Can he have spirits, freed from matter, at his orders, and receive
from them services??Yes.
* " Can he bring about rain, winds, hail, or cause these natural pheno-
mena to cease, at his will ??Yes."t
Thus far M. Cahagnet, and happy it is for us that the magi-
cians of our days know how to temper their power with a
merciful kindness, and that they must be men of like sound-
feeling as M. Levi, else who could escape from mischief at their
hands ? M. Levi instructs us that he
" ? Willingly gives lessons to serious individuals and teaches those
who ask to be taught, but it is necessary that, in good faith, he should
forewarn his readers that he does not inculcate fortune-telling or
divination, neither does he make predictions, nor fabricate love-potions,
nor lend himself to any sorcery or evocation. He is a man of science
and not a juggler. He condemns energetically ever}'thing that re-
ligion reproves, and consequently he ought not to be confounded with
those men who, without fear, advertise themselves and their science for-
dangerous and illicit uses."?(p. viii.)
But supposing for a moment that one or more of the magical
confraternity would come forward and lend the world, without hesi-
tation, his or their aid in doing some good or other for a short
time. Surely so all-powerful a science ought to help somewhat more'
efficiently than it does our blundering efforts to leave the world
around us a little better than we found it. But it is singulaiy
that when these professors of the occult art speak of the amazing
good flowing or which ought to flow from it, it is simply good in
the abstract, and that the concrete examples which are paraded
* To drink au chalumeau is a little procedure of sorcery, by which we may
quench our thirst or indulge a taste for vinous fluids at the expense of our neigh-
bours. A straw or other convenient tube is rested, by one extremity, against the
wall of a cellar, or dairy, or a hole is made in the wall. Certain words of power
are next uttered, and then, at will, the wine in the.cellar or the milk in the
dairy may be subtracted through the pipe or the hole. It is pretended, M. Ca-
hagnet remarks, that this subtraction is real, but he very properly doubts this. He
can produce the same phenomenon, but it is an ideal one. He proceeds in the
manner we have detailed, but " the wine (or the milk) which issues from his mag-
netic points, exists only for the sensitive subject in whom he has created this
particular spiritual appreciation."?{Op. cit. p. 461.)
The termination of the drinking-scene in Faust, when Mephistopheles produces
wine from gimlet-holes in the table, is a true drinking au clialumeau.
.. + Magie Magnetique. Par L. A. Cahagnet. Paris. 1854. Pp. 26-29.
MODERN MAGICIANS AND MEDIOMANIACS. 253
in illustration of the power of magic, under whatever name found,
are invariably of a useless and evil tendency.
And this reminds us of a question which we had well-nigh
overlooked. Our author tells us that many readers believe that
magic is the science of the prince of darkness. He avows candidly
that he himself entertains no fear of Satan. " I fear only those
who fear the devil," was a remark of Saint Theresa's. But we are
cautioned that railleries on this subject would be much misplaced,
and M. Levi then proceeds to discuss the relation which exists
between the devil and science, or rather to consider the former
from a scientific point of view. He deals with the personality
of Satan even less respectfully than St. Dunstan, for at one bold
stroke he pounds Satan into an impalpable powder, and then
blows this irrecoverably to the wind. " It is a lamentable truth
that moral evil exists ; it reigns in certain minds, it is incarnated
in certain men; it is then personified, then demons come to light,
and the most wicked of these demons is Satan. This is all that
I wish you to admit, and this it will not be difficult for you to ac-
cord to me." (p. 11.)
" Every man
Conjures the fiend of hell into himself
When passion chokes or blinds him."
" All are devils to themselves ;
And every man his own great foe."
This is what science teaches us anent the fallen one?"the'
science unpolluted and most pure (Vierge et mere), the science
of which Mary is the sweet and luminous image, was it not
predestined to crush also the head of the ancient serpent ?"?~
(P* 1L) ... ,
It follows, therefore, that if magic ever tend to ill, it is from
the vileness of the wielder of the art, not of the science itself.
It is high time that we began to learn how it comes to pass
that the wondrous things we have set forth can be possible.
" How is all this possible ? Because there exists a mixed agent, a
natural and divine agent, corporal and spiritual, an universal plastic in-
termedium (mediateur), a common receptacle of the vibrations of mover
ment and of the images of form, a mind and a force that may, in
some sort, be called the imagination of nature. By this force all
nervous organisms communicate secretly together ; from it arise sym-
pathy and antipathy; from it come dreams; by it are produced the
phenomena of second-sight and of extra-natural vision. This universal
agent of the works of nature, is the oil of the Hebrews and Chevalier
Keichenbach (just so : our readers will now more clearly perceive why,
a few sentences back, we classed the imaginations of the animal mag-
netizer and the magician proper together, as belonging to one and the
same category, although expressed in different terms), it is the astral
No, XVIII. NEW SERIES. S
254 MODERN MAGICIANS AND MEDIOMANIACS.
(light of the Martinists, and we prefer this last appellation as being the
most explicit one.
" The existence and possible usage of this force form the great
arcanum of practical magic. It is this force which constitutes the
wand of the thaumaturgist and the clavicle of black magic.
" It was the serpent in Eden which transmitted to Eve the seduc-
tions of a fallen angel.
" The astral light magnetizes, heats, enlightens, electrifies, attracts,
repulses, vivifies, destroys, coagulates, separates, breaks to pieces, col-
lects together any and everything under the impression of powerful
volitions.
" God created it on the first day when he said Fiat Lux !
" This explains already all the theory of prodigies and miracles.
How, in reality, could the good and the wicked be able to compel nature
to make manifest exceptional forces F How could there be divine
miracles and diabolical miracles ? How could a reprobate, wan-
dering, loose spirit have more force in certain circumstances than a
just one, so puissant in its simplicity and wisdom, if we were not to
suppose an instrument of which all may make use, under certain con-
ditions, some for the greatest good, others for the greatest evil ?"?
(p. 19.)
Ask us not to expound, dear reader, these sentences. Because,
frankly to confess, we belong to those unlearned, who, to use an apt
simile of Tristram Shandy, Esquire, are busied in getting,
down to the bottom of the well, where Truth, keeps her little
court, while M. Levi belongs to those learned who, in their way,
are as busy in pumping her up through the conduit of dialectic
induction, and who concern themselves not with facts, but icith
reason.
There is, however, one application of this hypothesis of astral
light, in M. Levi's work, which we imagine will interest highly
the present generation, and which will serve partly as an exposi-
tion of the method in which the force operates. To get to this
portion of M. Levi's book we have to pass over the greater bulk
of it untouched, and to plunge at once into the latter days of the
nineteenth century. It would not be just to the author to skip
over thus much of his labours without some comment, and we
may remark, that we know no history of magic which surpasses
M. Levi's historical exercitations, and few that equal them in in-
terest. The an*angement is good, the illustrations apt and strik-
ing, and many curious mystical drawings are scattered through
the book. It is written by a man who is enthusiastic in his
subject, and his enthusiasm and confiding faith imbue the writ-
ing. To those who are interested in studying eccentric and ab-
normal developments of thought, we can promise much interest
and no slight instruction if they take up M. Levi's book.
The example to which we have just referred as an illustration
of the mode of action of the astral light, is Table-turni?ig. M.
MODERN MAGICIANS AND MEDIOMANIACS. 255
Levi assumes, without even manifesting the ghost of a doubt,
that under the influence of human magnetization the heaviest
masses can be raised from the ground, and promenaded in space.
Nay, he speaks of articles of furniture delivering themselves at
the same time as somnambulists, to frensied dances, and becoming
fatigued, and even smashing their fragile members in the mad
career, while the ladies suffered nothing, and were, indeed, all the
better for the exercise.
But how can these things happen ? Listen !
" Weight exists only by reason of the equilibrium of the two
forces (attraction and repulsion) of the astral light; augment the action
of one of them, and the other will at once yield. Now, if the ner-
vous apparatus (system) aspires and inspires this light in rendering it
positive or negative (it is a custom of these gentlemen to pilfer terms
from the experimental sciences, and to stalk under their cover when
practicable), according to the personal hyper-excitations of the subject,
all inert bodies submitted to its action, and impregnated with its life
will become lighter or heavier, according to the flux and reflux of the
light which carries along with it in the new equilibrium of its move-
ment porous bodies and bad conductors around a new living centre, in
the same manner as the stars are balanced, and projected, gravitating
around the sun."?(p. 494.)
What follows is really a most interesting addition to our
knowledge of psychical abnormities, and the novel designation
made use of by our author may, from its aptness, be legitimately
admitted into scientific usage.
He continues:?
(.Mediomaniacs.)
" This eccentric power of attraction or of projection always sup-
poses a sickly state in the individual who is the subject of it. All
mediums are eccentric and badly balanced beings; viediomania presup-
poses or occasions a succession of other nervous manias, fixed ideas, dis-
tempered desires, vicious erotomania, penchants to murder or suicide.
Among persons thus affected, moral responsibility seems no longer to
exist; they act wrong, not knowing what is right; they weep with
piety in the church, and yet give themselves up to hideous bacchanal
revels ; they have one mode of explaining everything, to wit, they are
possessed by the devil. What would you have ? What do you re-
quire ? They no longer live in themselves ; they are animated by a
mysterious being, it is he who acts, not themselves, and his name is
Legion!
" The reiterated essays of a healthy individual to create the faculties
of a medium, occasion fatigue or illness, and may derange the reason.
This has happened to Victor Hennequin, formerly editor of the Demo-
cratie l?acijiqiie, and a member, after 1848, of the National Assembly.
He was a young advocate of fluent and facile speech, he did not lack
either instruction or talent, but he was infatuated with the works of
S 2
256 MODERN MAGICIANS AND MEDIOMANIACS.
Fourrier. Exiled after the 2nd December, he gave himself up during
his idleness to experiments on table-turning. Presently he was at-
tacked with mediomania, and believed himself to be the instrument of
revelations of the soul of the earth. He published a book entitled
Sauvons le genre humaine, which was a melange of phalansterian re-
membrances and Christian reminiscences, a last flicker of the dying
reason. He persisted in his experiments, and insanity triumphed. In
a last work, of which the first volume has been alone published, Victor
Hennequin represents God as an immense polyp fixed in the centre of
the earth, with antennae and tentacles twisted gimlet-fashion, which
pierced hither and thither through his brain, and that of his wife
Octavia. Soon after this Victor Hennequin died in a lunatic asylum,
in consequence of an access of furious dementia.
""VVe have heard speak of a fashionable lady who yielded herself to
conversations with the pretended spirits of her furniture, and who,
being scandalized beyond measure by the unbecoming answers of her
candlestick-stand (gueridon), went to Kome in order to submit the
heretic piece of furniture to the holy seat. She carried with her the
culpable article, and made an auto-da-fe of it in the capital of the
Christian world. Better to burn the furniture there than become
mad, and truly for this lady the danger was imminent.
" Let us not laugh at these things, children of a rational age or of
serious men, as the Count de Mirville attributes to the devil the in-
explicable phenomena of nature."?(pp. 494?6.)
We may laugh, however, at an account which M. Levi gives,
in all faith, of a certain Henri Delaage, who possesses the gift of
ubiquity, and who at times exercises so beneficial an influence
upon those who have the good fortune to be thrown into contact
with him, that when influenza raged in the winter, a little while
ago, he had but to present himself in a room where any of the
unhappy sufferers from the disorder were present, to effect an
immediate cure. The waft of his presence alone sufficed for this,
but sad to relate, the disease which he drove from others, clung
most revengefully to himself, and has never since left him.
Would that we could conjure the presence of this healing man
into our library at this moment, for now, while we write, the con-
duits of our nostrils are streaming, our eyes distil tears, our
throat is raked by a teasing cough, while the innermost recesses of
the brain are ever and anon pounded by horrific sternutations.
M. Levi's description of mediomania and mediomaniacs is in
truth so vivid and good that it may at once, justly, be transferred
to our text-books of psychological medicine, and it is none the
less valuable that it comes from an unprofessional source.
Hasten -we now to seek a few specimens of the concentrated
wisdom of the "lofty science."
Magic, it would seem, " is the absolute science of equili-
brium." It is, however, an essentially religious science, and it
" presided over the formation of the dogmas of the ancient
MODERN MAGICIANS AND MEDIOMANIACS. 257
world, and"?the conclusion of the sentence may he commended
to Mr. Buckle's notice, as calculated to facilitate his labours?
" has been thus the foster-mother of all civilizations. Mother,
chaste and mysterious, who, whilst suckling with poesy and inspi-
ration nascent generations, covers her face and her breast!"
Before everything, the " lofty science" teaches us to believe in
God, and to adore him without seeking to define him, because it
often happens that with us (a consequence of our imperfection)
a defined God is in some degree a finite God.
After God, it gives us to know the sovereign principles of things,
the eternal mathematics, and the balanced forces. " It is written
in the Bible that God has disposed everything by weight, number,
and measure. Here is the text: Omnia in jpondera et numere et
mensura disposuit Deus. Thus, weight, that is to say equilibrium,
number, quantity, and measure, that is to say proportion: such
are the eternal or divine foundations of the science of nature.
The formula of equilibrium is this: "Harmony results from the
analogy of contraries."
Then, we hear, that the letters of the sacred alphabet, as
expounded by the ancient hierophants, contain potentially all the
secrets of nature. By sundry arrangements of this alphabet,
every possible combination of natural forms can be discovered.
Further, we are told, that God, as it is recorded in Genesis, made
man in his own image. "Now man being the living resume of
creation, it follows that creation also is in the image of God.
There are in the universe three things: spirit, the plastic inter-
medium, and matter." The ancients rightly symbolized these by
sulphur, mercury, and salt. But the three constituents of the
Universe unite in one, light; " Light, positive or igneous, the
volatile sulphur ; light, negative or rendered visible by the vibra-
tion of fire, the fluid ethereal mercury; and light neutralized, or
shade, mixed, coagulated, or fixed under the form of earth or
salt."? (p. 531.)
This must suffice; for it cannot be but that this bathos of
wisdom is as painful to read as tedious to write.
It remains to us now but to illustrate the certitude of magical
science as an instrument of philosophical and religious inquiry.
We have already said that it renders "reason as infallible as
mathematics."
Towards the close of his book, M. Levi proposes and boldly
grapples with the following questions:?
1. Can we escape death ?
2. Does the philosophers stone exist, and in what manner can
we find it ?
3. Can we cause spirits to serve us ?
4. What is the clavicle, ring, and seal of Solomon ?
5. Can we foretell the future with certainty ?
258 MODERN MAGICIANS AND MEDIOMANIACS.
G. Can we cause good or evil at will by magical influence ?
- 7. What is needful to constitute a true magician ?
8. In what do the forces of black magic precisely consist ?
Of course we can escape death, and in two manners, " in time
and in eternity. In time by curing all maladies and evading the
infirmities of old age: in eternity, in perpetuating the memory of
our personal identity through the transformations of existence."
Theprinciples upon which these conclusions are framed, are summed
up, but we naturally hasten on to seek at least in what fashion
we can effect the escape from death in time; but as may be
imagined, no such information is forthcoming. We are over-
whelmed instead beneath avalanches of abstractions. We are
further told, that the philosopher's stone most certainly exists
" in theory," and that if we would find it (it has not yet been
found, by the way,) " it is indispensable that we should seek it,
at least it will not be found by chance. We (M. Levi) have said
sufficient to facilitate and direct researches."
And yet these responses are about the clearest given, but they,
by no means correspond with the magnificent promises with which
we started. Those who wish to know anything of Solomon's
clavicle, ring, and seal, had much better turn to Lane's edition of
the Arabian Nights, and read the tales in which the said occult
articles figure. One portion of the answer to the eighth question
must, indeed, be quoted. It is an unique specimen of Gallic
blasphemy :?
" Between Jesus Christ and Napoleon, the world of the marvellous
remained void. Napoleon, the Word of war, this armed Messiah, came
fatally, without knowing it, to complete the Christian world. The
Christian revelation taught us but to die; the Napoleonic civilization
ought to teach us to vanquish. Of these two and apparently contra-
dictory words, devotion and victory, to suffer, to die, to combat, to
conquer, is formed the great arcanum, Honour !"
Could we desire a better illustration of chronic national
mania 1
We might, perhaps, with propriety lay down our pen here. We
have, we think, satisfactorily established the proposition with
which we started, that our modern magicians are by no means
inferior (at least in professions) to those of an earlier date. We
liave also achieved what we intended?the contribution of a waif
of information on the psychical eccentricities, or abnormities, if
you will, of the present period. We cannot, however, resist the
temptation to tag a moral to our recital.
It can need only a hint to our readers (if the thought has
not been painfully present to them during the whole of their
reading) to direct their attention, and to lead them at once to
MODERN MAGICIANS AND MEDIOMANIACS. 259
apprehend that the principles and practices taught by M. Levi
are but a phase of that pseudo-scientific delusion, animal mag-
netism,* which has settled into a chronic state among us, as well
as of the epidemic delusions of table-turning and spirit-rapping
which have so recently prevailed in this country. We are too
apt to forget that the cessation of the two latter delusions as
epidemics by no means implies their total cessation. It would
be easy to prove, if it were needful, that both delusions, as well
as that of animal magnetism, exist in a chronic form. Now,
it must be evident to those who have carefully watched the pro-
gress of the delusions in question, and who have noted (as we
may observe, for one example, in M. Levi's book) the manner in
which the believers in any one of the delusions named seize upon,
as confirmatory of their peculiar form of belief, whatever turns
up in any other form of a congenerous character, that the
condition of mind which leads the possessor so greatly astray,
must be very similar in every instance. Further, it will also be
comprehended that the determination to this or that peculiar
form of delusion depends, most probably, upon the point and the
circumstances from which the believer started on his quest into
the marvellous.
We assume that the substratum of these wide-spread delusions
and their congeners chiefly results from a fundamental error of
education, both of the emotions and intellect, in early life, and
that this substratum and the causes engendering it are pretty
much the same in every case. We are not going to dogmatize on
the precise nature either of the substratum or its causes. These
cannot be dealt with at the fag-end of an article, and they have
often been treated by abler pens than ours. Our object is bounded
here to impressing on the minds of those who may glance
their eye over these words, that the recrudescence of delusions
such as we have specified, and their chronic character, deci-
sively indicate that the sources from which they are developed
are both wide-spread and but little inferior in intensity, although,
we have little doubt, less injurious in character and less extended
in their operation, than the superstitious delusions of the middle
ages.
If we would endeavour earnestly to break up the delusional sub-
stratum of which we have spoken, this, we aver, is to be done
during the interval of the epidemic outbreaks, and not at the
time of their occurrence. Then the mischief has been done. We
cry out loudly, Wolf! wolf! but before help arrives, the wolf has
devoured many a hapless lamb, which, while the sun shone
brightly, and the birds chirped loudly, and the leaves trembled
* It would be more correct to say that animal magnetism is but a phase of
magic, the latter being of more ancient date.
260 MODERN MAGICIANS AND MEDIOMANIACS.
into additional life in the cheering breeze, we suffered to dally
?with itself in idle play,* while that we reposed upon the green-
sward, haply dreaming of Arcadia. We hold, therefore, that it is
an important duty to watch during times of repose from delusions,
their ordinary every-day course, and to ascertain their actual
Standing. By so doing we always hold in sight the deleterious
mental poison, and not only so, but by having its natural de-
velopment before us, we run less danger of under-estimating those
slight indications of its presence which form a sure sign of pre-
disposition to its epidemic influence. Each individual who has
escaped the insidious poison?how insidious, we have surely suf-
ficiently seen in the book we have just analysed, in which we
behold one in holy orders tainting with vain imaginations Gospel
truths to their very source?each individual, we say, who has
escaped from the infection may thus be tempted to inquire for
himself in what the predisposition to be affected by these modern
superstitions consists. If he do so, he will doubtless learn much,,
and, perhaps, do more to prevent its development, as well in him-
self as in those around him, than if a shower of right precepts
and happy truisms were cast at him.
If it be said that this our didactic method may be fittingly
compared to a guide-post, the inscriptions on which have been
partially effaced, and can only be deciphered with difficulty, we
admit the charge implied, and standing reproved, we will throw
into our teaching a postscript which, in a concrete form, pierces
pretty nigh to the root of the whole matter.
The sagacious father of Tristram Shandy, Esquire, has ex-
pressed an opinion that " there is a north-west passage to the
intellectual world." A somewhat similar opinion, expressed or
understood, exists very widely among men as to the world of
natural science, and they seek to carry it to fruition much in the
same way as the aforementioned gentleman thought was practicable
in regard to the intellectual world?to wit, by the aid of the
auxiliary verbs. " The use of auxiliaries," he asserts, " is at once
to set the soul agoing by herself upon the materials as they are
brought to her, and by the versatility of the great engine round
which they are twisted, to open new tracts of inquiry, and make
every idea engender millions." The wisdom of this opinion is
profound, but, as Bacon would have said,+ Mr. Shandy, senior,
while admiring and extolling the powers of the human mind, did
not search for its real helps. Thus the man who has learned to
know the value of the auxiliaries, without at the same time be-
Poor hapless ones
That leaye their mother's milk
To dally with themselves in idle play."?Dante.
f Novum Urganum, Aph. y.
FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE 261
coming acquainted with the errors that heset their use, is apt, as
Mr. Shandy would have put it, to adopt a form of ratiocination
on any given subject, somewhat like this :?Is it so ? Was it so 1
Will it be so ? Gould it be so ? Would it be so ? May it be so ?
Might it be so ??and the imagination gaining strength with this
capital exercise, soon adopts the affirmative formulae, It is so : It
was so: It ought to be so : It must be so: It shall be so. If
the inquirer have early learned, however, that these auxiliary forms
have their peculiar pitfalls and stumbling-blocks, he will not be any
the less an inquirer, but he will learn to look modestly upon his
own powers, and having this modesty he will be placed in a more
favourable position for escaping the rampant pseudo-scientific
follies which haunt the world.
