103
Art. VII.?
THE STATE OF LUNACY IN IRELAND*
Twelye months ago, when examining the Report of the Royal Com-
mission, appointed in 1856 to inquire into the state of Lunacy affairs
in Ireland, we had occasion to express the opinion that the Commis-
sioners had dealt but scanty justice towards the asylums of that portion
of the kingdom, and their management. It appeared to us that the
Commissioners had adopted a standard of comparison which was scarcely
applicable under the circumstances, and that, in consequence, existing
and presumed faults were presented in a somewhat exaggerated light.
We turned, therefore, with more than ordinary interest, to the first
Report which has been published by the Irish Lunacy Inspectors, since
the appearance of the Report of the Royal Commissioners; for we
expected to learn much from the former Report in confirmation or cor-
rection of the opinions we had formed concerning the latter one.
We have not been disappointed, and we are glad to add that our favour-
able impressions are abundantly supported.
The present Report of the Irish Lunacy Inspectors is not merely of
local interest; it is a most carefully digested work, of much practical
and scientific value, apart from its more immediate object. It admirably
fulfils its special purpose, and yet it claims the attention of all persons
interested in the welfare of lunatics, and who are wishful to advance
our knowledge of mental alienation. The statistical Appendix to the
Report is of great interest, and the tables may be instanced as types of
asylum returns.
The Report refers to the two years ending 31st March, 1859, and
from it we learn that the working of the asylums during that period
has been highly successful, as evinced by a greater number of recoveries
in them, and by a less mortality than lias been observed elsewhere in
kindred institutions.
In Ireland, as in other parts of the kingdom, the great difficulty to
be contended with is the provision of increased accommodation for the
care of the lunatic poor. The asylums are choked with chronic cases,
and the space at disposal for recent ones is necessarily brought within
a narrow verge, while there is still outside the asylum walls a large
lunatic population for whom accommodation is required. The asylums
opened within recent years have not been sufficient in number to effect
much change in this state of affairs, although sensibly relieving the
localities in which they have been erected, from the more pressing neces-
sities felt with regard to their lunatic inhabitants. There is, in fact,
a great deficiency of asylum accommodation in Ireland, and this throws
serious, and, in some instances, insuperable difficulties in'the way of
effective improvement in the state of the floating lunatic population.
The defects experienced in the provision for the insane are, indeed,
similar in kind, but differing in degree, from those felt in England and
Scotland, and the great problem with the Irish Lunacy Board, as with
* The Ninth Report of the District, Criminal, and Private Lunatic Asylums in
Ireland. Blue Book. 1859.
]04 THE STATE OF LUNACY IN IRELAND.
the English and Scotch Boards, is the most practicable mode of pro-
viding increased asylum accommodation. In Ireland, however, the
stress is more severely felt than in other portions of the kingdom, and
it is requisite to have recourse to the gaols for the security of many
lunatics. In some instances, as in both ridings of Tipperary, the
prisons contain almost as many lunatics as ordinary convicts.
Asylum management, and the care of lunatics generally, under cir-
cumstances such as these, are questions of considerable complexity, and
it redounds in no small degree to the credit of the Irish Inspectors,
that they have been able to effect, year by year, a steady and peristent
improvement in the condition of the insane.
The chief aim of the Inspectors, for the present, seems to be centred
in the provision of new asylum accommodation; for without this, any
further marked improvement in the condition of the lunatic poor cannot
well be anticipated. Regarding the nature of the accommodation
required, their views coincide with those of the English and Scotch
Commissioners. They would divide the insane into two classes. In
the first, they would include urgent and curable cases, as well as cases
which, though not admitting any reasonable hope of recovery, still
require peculiar treatment, whether from dangerous tendencies, violence,
or peculiarity of habits ; in the second, they would include the idiotic,
tb^ great majority of epileptics, and the domestic, whose mental and
corporeal powers decline pari passu, but who cannot be rightly cared
for except in establishments solely devoted to their use. For the former
a more expensive organization is required in regard to staff, building,
and appliances ; for the latter plan, airy, inexpensive, but commodious
buildings, with ample means of occupation, both in and out of doors,
would be sufficient.
In what manner these suggestions might be best carried out is care-
fully and clearly considered by the Commissioners, the obstacles lying
in the way being fully noted. This the most important portion of the
Report in its local bearing is of least interest to the English reader, as
it would require a certain degree of familiarity with local, fiscal, and
territorial arrangements, in order rightly to appreciate the details given
by the Inspectors. There seems to be good reason for hoping that the
principles of improvement laid down, and the legislative changes which
would be requisite for their fulfilment, will be eventually carried out.
One very important piece of knowledge possessed by the Inspectors
is this: an accurate acquaintance with the sum total of lunacy, and of
the condition of all the lunatics in Ireland,* so that the amount of
additional asylum accommodation required may be calculated with
precision.
It is worthy of remark, that on account of the unbroken prosperity
of Ireland for some years, together with a diminished agricultural
population, many union workhouses have become comparatively un-
tenanted. It has been proposed to make these buildings available as
asylums for the idiotic and epileptic. Again, it has been suggested
that plain, substantial buildings should be erected for the class of
* See Vol. XI. of this Journal, p. 107.
THE STATE OF LUNACY IN IRELAND. 105
patients named, in close proximity to existing asylums. By this
arrangement one staff could take the charge of both buildings, at a
considerable saving of expense, and many improvements be effected in
common. The Commissioners think that the first proposition could be
carried out with advantage in a few instances, it being understood that
the house should be entirely appropriated to lunatics, and properly
fitted up for them. They doubt whether this scheme would be as
economical as it appears, as the buildings would have to be gutted and
refitted properly, and the expense would doubtless be little inferior to
the better scheme of erecting special buildings contiguous to other
asylums.
On the whole, it would appear that the current rate of asylum ex-
penditure in Ireland is less " (probably by 30 per cent.) than what
obtains generally throughout England, where, no doubt, the interior
fittings and arrangements of hospitals for the insane being adapted to
the habitual comforts of its population, are more expensive, but, con-
sidering the social condition of the two countries, not affording to
their inmates greater relative advantages. It cannot, therefore, but be
gratifying to us [continue the Inspectors] to be enabled to assure your
Excellency that while all our public asylums are steadily progressing,
and from day to day assuming, from in and out door improvements, an
air of neatness and of culture, many of them, in point ui~ cleanliness,
regularity, and order, notwithstanding the domestic deprivations and
former mode of living of three-fourths of the patients, are highly com-
mendable. In some institutions a more liberal spirit pervades the minds
of the governors, particularly in regard to articles which cannot perhaps
be said to be absolutely necessary to the well-being of the inmates, but
the granting of which materially tends to both their comforts and
amusements."?(P. 8.)
The total number of patients under treatment in the district asylums,
during the two years, amounted to 10,420. Of these, 594 died, and
1738 were discharged, of whom 1267 had recovered, and 345 were
improved. The proportion of cures during the same period, calculated
upon admissions, amounted to 48*71 per cent., as against 36*99 in Scot-
land, and 38*49 in England. Independent of the recoveries in the
asylums, " there were also discharged, improved, 13*26 per cent, of the
admissions, representing, under both heads, 62 per cent. Of the daily
average, 16 per cent, recovered, and 4*20 improved ; and in like manner,
on the total under treatment, 12*15 and 3*30 respectively."?(P. 11.)
The figures also tell in favour of the Irish asylums, if they be cal-
culated upon the daily average number under treatment, or on the
total number in hospital during the year, as well as on the admissions.
It would appear also that the average of cures in the Irish asylums is
" nearly three per cent., or, in the abstract, relatively speaking, almost
a filth over those of France."?(P. 11.)
The mortality in the district asylums during the last two years
amounted to 7*42 per cent., as compared with 8*37 in the Scotch, and
10*30 per cent, in English asylums. In this respect the Irish district
asylums have again the advantage. Eight of the deaths were of a
suicidal, and one of a homicidal, nature. " Heretofore such fatal
106 THE STATE OF LUNACY IN IRELAND.
occurrences as those just stated, or casualties terminating in the loss
of life, have been almost unknown in district asylums, averaging for
the last eight years little more than two annually, or one in the pro-
portion of every 2300 patients under treatment."?(p. 11.) The
annual average of deaths from violence and suicide in English asylums
during four years, as reported in 1857 and 1858, amounted to 31.
The proportion to patients under treatment is not given, but the Com-
missioners remark:?
" It may appear extraordinary that in an excitable race, as the Irish are
generally reputed to be, deaths by violence should be so few. It may probably
be owing to the circumstance that the more openly dangerous and uncontrol-
lable the patients, the more they are watched. We have reason to believe
that the parties who attempt to injure themselves or others, being apparently
the most tranquil and amenable, are frequently allowed a greater latitude of
ireedom than their companions in confinement?hence too much care cannot
be employed in the selection of persons of intelligence as attendants on the in-
sane, who, to guard against accidents, require unceasing supervision."?(p. 12.)
The Commissioners also add, in reference to the comparative statis-
tics they have given, the following observations :?
" It is, we trust, unnecessary to state that, in making the preceding obser-
vations wet are not influenced by a desire to draw any invidious contrasts,
being fully aware how much the success of asylum management depends on
circumstances, and that no professional or moral treatment, however judicious,
can overcome certain forms of mental disease. Still it may be pardonable in
us to compare generally the results obtained in the asylums of other countries
with those under our immediate control, and refer thereby to the more suc-
cessful issue of the latter, and their consequent utility; not that we mean to
deny the existence in them of numerous faults and imperfections, but which it
is to be hoped will gradually disappear." (p. 12.)
In reference to the assigned causes of insanity, the Commissioners
state that of 2003 cases, no less than 755 were traceable to hereditary
transmission or intemperance. They also remark that moral predo-
minate over physical causes among women, adding in reference to
puerperal mania, that they are disposed to regard this form of insanity
as being " almost as much a matter of legal as of medical investigation,
from the fact that no inconsiderable proportion of the cases registered
on the books of asylums under that denomination had been already
subjected to inquiry in courts of justice." (p. 12.)
Illustrative of the degrees of relationship existing at times between
lunatics in asylums, the following facts are mentioned. Within the
two years there were admitted into the Limerick Asylum ten, and into
the Waterford six individuals having the relationship of brothers and
sisters; and into the Carlow Asylum nineteen persons in the relation
of first-cousins.
The sanitary condition of the Asylums was very favourable through-
out the two years. The cases of relapse amounted to about one in
six of the admissions. " They were not, however, from recoveries
within any particular period, many of them having been discharged
from asylums from three to ten years before. We mention this cir-
cumstance as showing the liability to a relapse after a long interval of
THE STATE OF LUNACY IN IRELAND. 107
sanity. The longest that has come officially within our knowledge
was eighteen years, during which the party enjoyed the best health
hoth mental and bodily. The second was a severe and protracted
attack, followed, however, by a perfect recovery." (p. IB.)
The Commissioners lay stress upon the advantages derived from
religious ministrations in the asylums, and point out the necessity
which exists for legislation in order to secure the same.
The bill providing for the superannuation of managers and servants
works well, and the non-professional superintendents of asylums have
been gradually superseded by professional men, one of the former only
now remaining. The Commissioners urge the importance of establishing
clinical instruction in the asylums; and look upon the appointment of
visiting Physicians as important, particularly from giving confidence
to the public in the management of these institutions. The success
arising from the encouragement of literary pursuits in the Irish
Asylums has not been great, from the deficiency of preliminary
instruction among the patients; prints, pictures, and ornaments
attached to the walls of the corridors are, however, found to be to the
taste of the inmates.
The poor-houses, as with us, are stated to be unsatisfactory domi-
ciles for the insane, and for the same reasons ; and many disadvantages
arise from the committal of lunatics to gaols. The Central Criminal
Asylum works well; and speaking of the general habits of the patients,
the Commissioners say:?
"It maybe remarked that they scarcely ever allude to their own offences, or
to the nature of the institution itself, by drawing a distinction between it and
others. Strong objections exist, and perhaps justly, to convicted thieves and
felons, who become insane in prison, being mixed up with ordinary lunatics in
County Asylums, as the morale of the institution, and the self-respect of
untainted parties, might be injuriously affected by the association. Even were
there no other reason, from this consideration alone we would recognise the
advantages of a central establishment such as that at Dundruin. No doubt
mdividuals committing offences very different in degree are detained in it, but
practically no inconvenience has arisen therefrom. The lesser and greater cri-
minals, if criminals they be, meet together, and never feel themselves so exempt
from blame as to cast reproach on others. The sane no doubt suffer from a
protracted intercourse with their maniacal and idiotic companions, an inconve-
nience which can only be obviated by fostering the hope that though their
detention is rendered necessary by a due regard to public prejudice and the
public safety, their liberation is to be dependent upon their own good conduct,
the principal difficulty to contend with arises from a perversity of disposition dis-
played by convicts, principally on admission. They give a bad example to
their fellows, so much so, that the resident physician would, if the arrangement
of the house admitted it, have them placed apart ill probationary wards?a
practical suggestion which may be of much value in the future construction of
similar establishments."?(p. 21.)
The condition of private asylums is reported to be in several in-
stances very creditable, in others much improved. The mortality in
these establishments during the two years has been remarkably low,
Counting only to 6"50 per cent, on the average under treatment;
aud the proportion of recoveries very satisfactory, being 36'59 per cent.
108 THE STATE OF LUNACY IN IRELAND.
as calculated upon admissions. In two instances only liave special
investigations been necessary, and in both they had reference to the
escape of patients. The sources of complaint by the Commissioners
respecting patients in private asylums rest principally on the same
grounds as with us, to wit, the neglect exhibited towards patients by
relatives; want of sufficient care in filling up certificates by medical
men, even in well-marked cases; and the inability of permitting
patients to leave the asylum on probation. The want of accommoda-
tion for persons of limited means is also much felt. The Commissioners
direct attention, moreover, to the anomalous state of the law regarding
lunacy inquisitions, and suggest a modification of the same.
In concluding our notice of this Report we would again direct atten-
tion to the valuable statistical appendix. We shall not enter into any
details upon this portion of the Report, as comparatively recently we
had occasion to present to our readers a summary of Irish Lunacy
Statistics, and we shall, sooner or later, have to recur to the subject.
We would, however, point out a defect in the tables which we think
might be readily remedied in the preparation of other Reports, adding
thus to their value, as well as to the comfort of readers. We allude to
the want of summaries of the different tables, as well as of a summary
of the results of previous years. By the latter addition a comparison
of results would be practicable, accuracy would be secured, and the
scientific value of the tables increased; by the former much labour
would be saved which is now needlessly entailed upon readers, and
which might be avoided by a slight additional expenditure of type on
the part of the printer, and of calculation or writing on the part of the
compiler.
From the whole of the Report we conclude that there is a steady
and most gratifying improvement in all that relates to lunacy matters
in Ireland, with one exception. The prime workers in the improve-
ment, and the men upon whom it most depends, seem to have been
forgotten ; we allude to the Inspectors in Lunacy. Their salaries are
quits incommensurate with the duties they perform, and as compared
with those attached to several legal posts of secondary importance in
the Irish Government, or with those of our own Commissioners in
Lunacy, they are most parsimonious. We have had to allude to this
subject on previous occasions, and we regret to find that there is still
no appearance of justice being done in this respect to the Irish Inspec-
tors in Lunacy.
