The State Of Lunacy In Scotland
=================================

Art. VI.-
The Second Annual Report of the Scotch Commissioners in
Lunacy, now before the public, contains much of interest, as
well general as special.
The Commissioners state that, notwithstanding the difficulties
which have impeded the effective carrying out of the provisions
of the lunacy statute, the treatment of the insane in Scot-
land " has already undergone a manifest improvement."
The difficulties referred to chiefly arose from imperfec-
tions in the phraseology and drawing-up of the statute, as we
pretty fully set forth in our analysis of the First Annual Report
378 THE STATE OF LUNACY IN SCOTLAND.
of the Commissioners * We then remarked, that " never was an
Act more ingeniously worded for rendering nugatory the pre-
sumed intentions of its framers ; never was a Board created to
carry out the intentions of an Act, more impressed with the
spirit, yet more perplexed with the letter of the law, than the
General Board of Commissioners in Lunacy for Scotland." It
is consoling, therefore, to find that the Commissioners, notwith-
standing the obstacles which have beset them in the performance
of their onerous and delicate duties, are able to report a material
improvement in the condition of the insane under their obser-
vation.
The Commissioners express the fear that there is a steady and
serious increase of lunacy in Scotland. On the 1st of January,
1858, the pauper lunatics amounted to 4737 ; on the 1st of
January, 1859, to 4890. "We have no means," the Commis-
sioners state, " of obtaining reliable returns of the numbers of
the private insane, with the exception of those placed in asylums,
but there is good reason to fear that they are increasing in a
similar ratio."?(p. ii.) We shall recur presently to this question
of the increase of insanity.
The number of insane under care in Scotland, on the 1st of
January, 1859, was 7878?3829 being males, and 4049 females.
The distribution of these patients, the manner in which they are
supported, and their increase or decrease in number, since the pre-
vious returns, in public and private asylums, workhouses, and
as single patients, were as follows :?
Public and District Asylums.?Number of patients, 249G ;
males, 1271, females, 1225 ; increase, 11G : supported by private
funds, 809, by parish rates, 1087.
Private Asylums.?Number of patients, 821 ; males, 351,
females, 470; increase, 76: supported by private funds, 200, by
parish rates, 621.
Poor-houses.?Number of patients, 797 ; males, 328, females,
469 ; decrease, 42. All the patients except two, were maintained
by their parishes.
" The decrease in the number of patients in poor-houses is clue to the
withdrawal from the roll of pauper lunatics of a considerable number
of demented and imbecile persons placed in the ordinary wards of these
establishments ; but who, though formerly reported as fatuous to the
Board of Supervision, are now certified . by the parochial surgeon as
not coming within the provisions of the Lunacy Act." (p. ii.)
Single Patients.?The number of pauper lunatics placed as
single patients amounted to 1877?838 being males, and 1039
females. " Of these, 688 men and 791 women were living with
* See vol. xii. of this Journal, p. 429.
THE STATE OF LUNACY IN SCOTLAND. 379
relatives; 133 men and 197 women were placed with strangers;
and 17 men and 48 women were living alone." (p. 5.)
Only 27 private single patients?12 men and 15 women?
were reported to the Commissioners in obedience to the require-
ments of the Act. The Board were, however, through the
reports of the Visiting Commissioners, cognizant of the existence
of 1887 single patients?1041 men and 84G women; hut the
majority of these patients were living under the care of relations,
and, consequently, did not fall under the provisions of the Act.
Large as is the number of private single patients known to the
Commissioners, they think that it falls considerably short of the
number actually existing.
From these figures, then, it would appear that of the 7878
known lunatics in Scotland, 2898 are supported by private funds
and 4980 by parochial rates. Further, it would seem that a pre-
ference is given, by the friends of private patients to public
asylums, 809 patients of this class being placed in these institu-
tions and only 200 in licensed houses. This, the Commissioners
think, " affords a strong argument in favour of providing accom-
modation of a superior kind in connexion with the district
asylums." (p. iii.)
It is reported, however, in addition, that?
" A very large proportion of the non-parochial patients who are in
private houses belong to families so little removed above pauperism,
that many of them are detained at home entirely from the inability of
friends to pay for their maintenance in asylums. This is a fact of very
grave import, and should be constantly borne in mind in all arrangements
for providing a national system of asylum accommodation." (p. iii.)
The Commissioners now recur to the question of the increase
of insanity, and remark :?
" The experience of all countries has shown, that the numbers of
the insane increase so rapidly, that the accommodation provided, how-
ever sufficient it may at first have appeared, has in a short time been
found inadequate. In France, for instance, the numbers of the insane
in public and private asylums amounted, on 1st January, 1835, to
10,539; whereas, on 1st January, 1854, they had increased to 24,524.
In England and Wales, the number of pauper lunatics amounted, in
August, 1843, to 16,764 ; of whom 3525 were in county asylums,
2298 in licensed houses, and 4063 in workhouses. On 1st January,
1859, the number of pauper lunatics had increased to 30,318; of
whom 14,481 were placed in county or borough asylums, 2076 in
registered hospitals and licensed houses, and 7963 in workhouses. It
thus appears that in sixteen years the number of pauper lunatics in
England and Wales had nearly doubled, and that in 1859 nearly as
many were in public and private asylums as were on the roll in 1843.
In Scotland we find similar results. According to the returns of the
Board of Supervision, the number of insane poor relieved during the
S80 THE STATE OF LUNACY IN SCOTLAND
year ended 14th May, 1847, amounted to 2945, and to 5564 for the
year ended 14th May, 1858; thus showing an increase of 2619 in
eleven years. These numbers refer to the pauper lunatics relieved
during the year; but supposing that the moderate deduction of ten
per cent, be made to determine the numbers on any stated day, we
shall have 2650 as the actual number of insane poor in Scotland on
14th May, 1847. Reference to the preceding table will show, that on
1st January, 1859, there were 2308 pauper lunatics in public and
private asylums, and 795 in the lunatic wards of poor-houses. That
is, there were in lunatic establishments, in 1859, no less than 3103
pauper patients, or 453 more than the total number of the insane
poor in 1847. From the investigations undertaken with the view of
determining the amount of accommodation that should be provided
in district asylums, we arrived at the conclusion that provision would
be required for 4353 pauper lunatics; and, on mature consideration,
we are not inclined to consider this estimate as excessive. On the
contrary, were we to draw our conclusions from past experience, we
should have only too great reason to fear that it would soon prove
insufficient. The estimate, it may be well to point out, is founded on
the supposition that all pauper lunaties are to be accommodated in
district asylums, or asylums recognised as efficient substitutes, and
presupposes the extinction of all licensed houses and lunatic wards of
poor-houses. On this supposition, additional accommodation would be
required for 2666 patients, as this number, with the 1687 in public
asylums on 1st January, 1859, makes up the estimate of 4353. But,
during 1859, additional accommodation for about 400 patients has
been provided by the opening of the new asylum of Montrose, and the
enlargement of the Southern Counties Asylum at Dumfries; so that
the further accommodation now absolutely required, supposing the old
asylum at Montrose to remain in permanent operation, is only for
2266 patients. Of these 2266, however, 1416 are already in licensed
houses and lunatic wards of poor-houses, so that the actual deficiency
of any kind of accommodation is only for 850," (pp. iii., iv.)
Subsequent remarks of the Commissioners show that they are
aware that the foregoing figures cannot be looked upon as in-
dicating positively an absolute increase in the number of insane
in Scotland. The increase spoken of actually refers, on the one
hand, to the augmentation of pauperism from insanity, on the
other, to the increased number of known lunatics. There does
not seem to be in Scotland, any more than in England, trust-
worthy data from which a correct notion of the status of
lunacy among the population at large may be gathered; and
the rate of increase of provision for the insane in both countries
lias never been sufficient to exhaust the substratum of chronic
cases of insanity for which provision is required. The Scotch
statistics of lunacy confirm the opinion, that we have oftentimes
expressed, of the great importance of adopting some means of deter-
mining the actual amount of lunacy in the country at large, and of
THE STATE OF LUNACY IN SCOTLAND. 381
the chief causes which foster it among the impoverished classes, if
we would effectively deal with the great public questions of the
care of lunatics and prevention of lunacy.
The Commissioners reiterate their objections to the residence
of pauper lunatics in licensed houses and poorhouses, and^iey
revert to the imperfect and perplexing definition of lunacy in the
Statute?a subject fully discussed by them in their first report,
and which we examined at length in the analysis of that report
already referred to. The question, however, is one which cannot
be kept too prominently before the public, and we do not hesitate
to quote the following additional remarks:?
" Many persons who are totally unfit, from mental aberration or
mental deficiency, to take care of themselves, and who, in a court of
law, would not be held responsible for their actions, are not regarded
by some medical men as coming within its meaning. According to
these practitioners, insanity must be of a dangerous character to come
within the statutory definition; but it is often extremely difficult to
determine what patients should be considered as so affected; for the
question of danger is a relative one, and must be determined as much
by the circumstances in which the lunatic is placed, as by his peculiar
mental condition. Accordingly, many patients who, when in asylums,
are very properly regarded as not dangerous, from being under effec-
tive surveillance and control, become dangerous as soon as they are
discharged, and are allowed to follow the bent of their diseased imagi-
nations. It is in regard to this class of the insane that much trouble
is frequently experienced by the superintendents of asylums; for it is
often no easy matter to convince the relatives of such patients that
the improvement observable in their condition is due, not so much to
any essential change in the character of their malady, as to the con-
tinuous discipline to which they are subjected in the asylum. When,
therefore, a medical practitioner grants a certificate that an insane
person is ' not a lunatic in the meaning of the Act,' it is obvious
that he thereby incurs a double responsibility, as he must be held to
give an opinion, first, in regard to the mental state of the patient,
and secondly, as to the appropriate nature of the circumstances in
which he is placed. It is, at the same time, evident, that a certificate
to the effect that any one is ' not a lunatic in the meaning of the
Act,' does not necessarily imply that the person is of sane mind.
Indeed, it is frequently expressly understood that the certificate is not
intended to convey this meaning, but is granted merely as an expres-
sion of opinion that the patient is not likely to commit an act dan-
gerous to himself or others." (p. v.)
The unfortunate operation of the definition, acted upon in the
fashion just recounted, has been already illustrated in one re-
spect, in the paragraph containing the summary of the number of
lunatics in poor-houses.
The distribution of pauper lunatics in different districts is
382 THE STATE OF LUNACY IN SCOTLAND.
illustrated by a series of elaborate tables, the data contained in
which show that easy access to asylums greatly influences the
distribution of the cases. The Commissioners would set it down
as an axiom that "the number of patients sent to asylums
diminishes in a ratio corresponding to the distance, and that the
number of those which remain at home increases in a similar
degree."?(p. ix.) Thus in the Forfarshire, Edinburgh, Glasgow,
and Renfrewshire districts, which are those most fully provided
with accommodation, 83 per cent, of the pauper lunatics are
placed in asylums or the lunatic wards of poor-houses ; but in the
destitute districts of Inverness and Argyle, only 34 per cent, of
the pauper lunatics are so disposed of. A further examination of
the figures in the tables clearly shows that these differences in the
number of pauper lunatics placed under care in the different dis-
tricts, depends entirely upon the facilities afforded, by easy com-
munication, to placing patients in asylums, and the Commissioners
conclude that " small asylums in convenient situations will more
satisfactorily meet the wants of the country than large central
establishments, which must necessarily be remote from consider-
able portions of the extensive districts which they are designed
to accommodate." (p. x.)
Another question examined in the first report, the difficulty
of determining the proportion of patients who should be placed
in asylums, and of those who should be left at home, is again
touched upon by the Commissioners. They hold tbat a much
larger proportion of lunatics may be properly left at home in
rural than urban districts. They remark :?
" This result chiefly depends on the greater difficulty of affording
insane persons exercise and recreation, and in otherwise providing for
their proper care and treatment, in the town than in the country ; and
herein lies the reason why, in reality, urban parishes have comparatively
so few pauper lunatics placed as single patients. The city of Glasgow
parish, for example, has only 23 out of 293 pauper lunatics so dis-
posed of; the Barony Parish, 22 out of 151; Edinburgh City Parish,
8 out of 196 ; and St. Cuthbert's Parish, 22 out of 171. And if we
extend our inquiries to England, we find that of the 4G(31 pauper
lunatics chargeable to the parishes of the metropolis on the 1st
January, 1859, only 129 were left in charge of relatives, or were
boarded with strangers." (pp. x., xi.)
The Commissioners then add :?
" In all probability, a much larger proportion of the insane poor of
these urban parishes would, under different circumstances, have been
left at home ; and if this be the ease, it follows, that in populous dis-
tricts many patients are placed in asylums, not so much from a regard
to their comfort or welfare, as to the convenience of those who have to
provide for their maintenance. These patients demand no special
THE STATE OF LUNACY IN SCOTLAND. 383
curative treatment, but simply such medical and general care as is
required by their decayed mental and physical condition. On the
other hand, however, there can be no doubt that in rural districts many
patients are left at home in pitiable wretchedness, whose condition is
capable of great improvement by removal. There is thus a considerable
number of lunatics, comprehending, in the first place, those who in
cities are sent to asylums, but who, if in rural districts, might with
propriety have been left at home ; and, in the second place, those in
rural districts who are beyond the hope of cure, but whose neglected
and miserable condition demands that they should be placed under
care, for whom we are of opinion that some kind of modified asylum
accommodation should be provided. We strongly object to lunatic
wards in poorhouses being used for this purpose, chiefly on the ground
that the primary object of poorhouses is to afford a test for poverty, and to
provide for the poor in the most economical manner. The fundamental
principle on which these establishments are conducted is thus
antagonistic to that which ought to regulate the treatment of lunatics,
and which, briefly stated, is the provision of every comfort which can
reasonably be demanded to lighten the burden of perhaps the greatest
calamity which can afflict humanity." (p. xi.)
The progress of the District Lunacy Boards, in providing
accommodation for the insane poor, it would appear, is not
altogether satisfactory. The Commissioners record the proceed-
ings of the different boards within the period over which the
report extends.
The expenditure for pauper lunatics is next discussed, and
sundry items of highly interesting information are to be found
under tliis head. It is reported that the highest average rate of
maintenance occurs in the county of Nairn, where it amounts to
221. 17s. 2d., while the lowest'is found in Shetland, the sum
being there only 10L 2s. 9d. No useful comparison between
the condition of patients in different counties can, however, be
founded upon a mere statement of the money expenditure. The
total expenditure by parochial boards on account of pauper
lunatics, for the year 1858, was upwards of 81,000Z. The average
expenditure for each lunatic was 1GZ. 5s. 4\d., being at the
rate of 271. 19s. 1 ^d. for each 1000 of the population,
according to the census of 1851. The average cost of maintenance
for each pauper-patient in asylums was 211. 18s. 2\d. ; in poor-
houses, 131. 13s. IOcL ; and in private houses, 71. 12s. lOci.
But the rough averages last quoted are not, it would seem, to
be received as presenting an accurate idea of the comparative
cost of lunatics in asylums and poor-houses. This is the first
attempt that has been made to estimate the cost of pauper lunacy
in Scotland ; but the parochial accounts not having been kept
with a view of distinguishing between the expenditure for sane
and insane persons, the results presented by the Commissioners
384 THE STATE OF LUNACY IN SCOTLAND.
are not to be looked upon as free from doubt. Taking, however,
the returns of expenditure as they stand, some curious and unex-
pected results are obtained from them, having a most important
bearing upon the debated question of the economy of trans-
ferring lunatics from poor-houses to asylums. The Commis-
sioners institute the following comparative examination of expen-
diture for pauper lunatics in several parishes :?
" There are certain parishes, for example, which send all their
lunatics to asylums, with the exception of those exempted as single
patients. There are others which place them preferentially in the
lunatic wards of poorliouses; and others, again, which divide them
between asylums and poorhouses,?sending to the former the recent
and unmanageable cases, and placing in the latter the chronic and
more tractable. To the first class belong the parishes of Dumfries, Dun-
dee, Elgin, Liff and Benvie, and Montrose. To the second, the parishes
of the Abbey and Burgh, Paisley, and those of the Barony, Falkirk,
and Greenock ; and to the third, the parishes of Aberdeen, Edinburgh,
Glasgow, Old Machar, St. Cuthbert's, and South Leith. In this list,
we have comprehended only those parishes which are similarly placed
as to the facility of obtaining accommodation, whatever its nature may
be ; and have purposelyT excluded such parishes as Inverness and Perth,
where distance or other circumstances would have introduced disturb-
ing elements. Inverness, for instance, is altogether dependent for
asylum accommodation on remote establishments ; and Perth, with a
public asylum close at hand, sends 30 patients to distant licensed
houses. It is therefore obvious that they are placed in exceptional
positions." (p. xxvii.)
Now the general average cost per head of the pauper lunatics
of the first class of parishes amounts to 15Z. 7s. U.d. (maximum
average, 22I. lGs. Id., minimum, lli. 3s. Gd.) ; of the second
class of parishes, 19I. 4s. 11 ^d. (maximum average, 20I. 13s. Ad.
minimum, 181. 0s. S^d.) ; of the third class of parishes,
171. Is. 5ffZ. (maximum average, 1 SI. lGs. S\d., minimum,
151, lis. U.)
The Commissioners remark that,?
" These results are extremely important as indicating that asylum
treatment is really more economical than poorhouse treatment. They
show that parishes which take the entire charge of their pauper
lunatics, and treat those requiring segregation entirely in the lunatic
wards of poorhouses, maintain the whole at an average rate of
19/. 4^. lli^. per head; that those parishes which place only the
more manageable of their patients requiring segregation in poorhouses,
and send the rest to asylums, maintain the whole at an average rate
of 171. Is. 5}cl.; and lastly, that those parishes which trust entirely
to asylums for the care and treatment of such of their lunatics as
require to be placed in establishments, maintain the whole at an
average rate of 151. 7s. 2d.
THE STATE OF LUNACY IN SCOTLAND. 385
" It is occasionally difficult to account for the differences in^ the
returns made by parishes which, to all appearance, are in precisely
similar circumstances. Thus, we are quite unable to adduce any satis-
factory reason for the great difference which exists between the cost of
the pauper lunatics of the parish of Dundee and that of Liff and
Benvie. These parishes are contiguous, and equally conveniently
situated in regard to the Dundee Asylum, to which both have right
of admission for their pauper lunatics at privileged rates ; yet there is
a difference of not less than 61. in the average cost of their pauper
lunatics, that for Liff and Benvie being 221. 16s. Id.?a sum which
is 21. 0s. Id. above the rate of maintenance charged by the asylum.
Accordingly, in making the foregoing comparisons, we wish it to be
distinctly understood that we regard the results as by no means free
from doubt. In the first place, as already stated, the parochial
accounts are generally so kept that no distinction is made in the ex-
penditure for sane and insane paupers. In a great measure, then, the
returns sent us must be founded on probable estimates; which may be
near the truth, but, on the other hand, may be very inaccurate. In the
second place, the rate of maintenance, in the case of some poorhouses,
comprises a charge for rent, which is an item not included in asylum
rates, or only to a partial extent in the shape of interest on debt.
Nevertheless, after making due allowance for all possible sources of
error, it appears tolerably certain that not only does no economical
advantage accrue to a parish by converting part of its poorhouse into
lunatic wards, but that the practice entails a positive loss, which
becomes the greater, the more exclusively such wards are had recourse
to. And it should likewise be borne in mind, that this result is not
compensated by any gain to the patients. On the contrary, they are
deprived of many comforts and sources of occupation and amusement
which they enjoy in asylums." (p. xxviii.)
Much misconception existing as to the probable future expen-
diture for pauper lunatics, the Commissioners examine the
question, and come to the conclusion that the cost, after the
establishment of district asylums, will probably not exceed the
present amount.
The Commissioners have adopted a system of statistics
which they hope will ultimately give correcter results than
those usually obtained, of the influence of treatment upon, and
the increase of lunacy.* The method they have put into ope-
ration is?
" To determine the number of patients admitted each year into all
* The Commissioners correct an error in the report of the Irish Lunacy Inspectors
for 1859, which it is requisite to note, as we quoted the error in our review of that
report. The Irish Inspectors " contrasted the absolute cures in Irish asylums,
estimated at 48'71 per cent, on the admissions, with those in the Scotch asylums
estimated at 36'99 per cent. The estimate, however, as regards the latter esta-
blishments, is correct only for 1858, in which year the transfers of incurable
patients were very numerous, and of course reduced in a corresponding degree
the proportion of recoveries in the asylums receiving them." (p. xxxii.) &
386 THE STATE OF LUNACY IN SCOTLAND.
asylums, distinguishing between recent and chronic cases, that is,
between cases which for the first time were admitted into asylums, and
those which had previously been under treatment in such establish-
ments. For a few years the admissions of cases regarded as recent
will necessarily include a certain number of patients who had been in
asylums before the Statute under which we act came into operation,
and of whose previous history we have no record. But in the course
of time, this source of fallacy will gradually become less, and we shall
then be able to draw a tolerably accurate line between recent and
chronic cases We propose keeping the results of each year
apart, so as to be able to determine the number of patients who became
insane in each year, and the relative proportions of those who were
cured, were discharged unrecovered, or who died in that or in any fol-
lowing year. We shall thus be enabled to follow the history of all the
patients who became insane in any given year, or rather, who were
then, for the first time, admitted into any asylum in Scotland, through
all subsequent changes, until they are finally disposed of by recovery,
removal, or death." (p. xxxiii.)
The following tables contain the results thus obtained for
1858 and 1859
Progressive History of Patients admitted for the first time into Asylums
in 1858.
Results of 1858.
New Patients admitted in 1858 . 1308
Of these there were re-admitted
during the course of the same
year 30
Results of 1859.
Remainder at 1st January, 1859,
of the 1308 new Patients ad-
mitted during 1858 .... 824
Patients re-admitted during 1859
of the original 1308 cases of 1858 74
'H ^ 1
^ C3 ! C)
j" > ? fl &
tJD I -g o K
-T3.S
? e b
Ph <3
O
f-* ? 0)
m
1338
898
Ph o ?
O-q bfi
U <0 S3
<D
?s s s
0 o
338
c ? 2
'sts
Z. tJt'a
a> rt ^
???? s
C 5 l>
68
194 28
108
77
824
599
* The numbers under the heads of Re-admissions and Discharges refer to the
number of individual patients re-admitted and discharged, and do not show how
often the same patient may have been admitted and discharged. For instance, of
the thirty patients re-admitted in 1858, some of them have been discharged and re-
admitted twice, or even thrice; but in the columns of re-admissions and discharges,
all discharges and re-admissions of the same patient count only once. This method
THE STATE OF LUNACY IN SCOTLAND. 387
Progressive History of Patients admitted for the first time into Asylums
in 1859.
Results of 1859.
New Patients admitted into Asy-
lums in 1859   1226
Of these there were re-admitted
during the course of the same
year 29
-S "C.~
Ph 3 3
I'll
1255
o ""d
t, o a
o tx-r
S ja'0
3 g
302
u u "
o cs-a
-2-S ?
S g ?
76 105
? o
772
TABLE showing the changes which occurred in the numbers and condition of
PAUPER LUNATICS registered as SINGLE PATIENTS during the year
1858
.2 O CO
bL 02 ?0
.5 2
33 ?? *
5m g ^
? 3 S
3
.r 3 -
New cases regis-
tered during year.
1784
390
> a S
ill
C3 <)
40
?&?
2214
Removed from Register during year by
?3 0
II
112
Ph
104 i 46 25
1?3
S? 3
s ?
? ?
0 ?lj
SI'S
1 2 J
6 a
<v
49
S SjD
CJ o
3 s
337
Although, as we have already stated, the condition of the
insane in Scotland has undergone a manifest improvement since
the formation of the Lunacy Board, the Commissioners state that
that condition is still far from satisfactory; and after giving
certain details illustrative of the extent of their visitations in the
kingdom and the degree of improvement effected by them,
they offer several suggestions of great interest respecting the
future provision for lunatics. We shall quote these suggestions
in full, the subject they deal with being perhaps the most difficult
of the many difficult questions which beset lunacy legislation and
management.
has been adopted to make the numbers remaining at the end of the year tally with
the numbers withdrawn. Had each discharge or re-admission been counted as a
separate case, it is obvious that the numbers at the end of the year would have
stood in no relation to the original numbers, and that great confusion would have
ensued.
* There is no statutory requirement for inspectors to give intimation of removal
from Roll; and in many cases, accordingly, we learn the fact only by the omission
of the names in the next annual return. It is probable that death is the chief
cause of the removals under this head.
388 THE STATE OF LUNACY IN SCOTLAND.
" "While thus adverting to the benefits accruing from visitation, we
do not conceal from ourselves the difficulty, we may almost say the
impossibility, of exercising sufficient surveillance over patients who are
scattered over the whole country. That all cases of insanity should
be placed in asylums is a proposition which we cannot entertain ; the
welfare of the patients would not thereby be promoted, while the
expense to the country would undoubtedly be greatly increased. But
neither are we disposed to consider it a judicious arrangement that so-
called harmless or fatuous patients should be congregated together in
the lunatic wards of poorhouses. All great aggregations of permanently
diseased minds are evils which should as much as possible be avoided,
as their tendency is undoubtedly to lower and degrade each constituent
member of the mass. Yiewed in a certain light, then, asylums may
be regarded as necessary evils; but in no view, save in the doubtful
one of economy, can the establishment of lunatic wards in poorhouses,
in which only chronic or fatuous patients shall be received, be regarded
as otherwise than injudicious. These poorhouse wards are simply
convenient receptacles for patients affected with chronic insanity or
imbecility, in which their physical wants are more or less adequately
supplied, but in which little or nothing is attempted, by means cal-
culated to exercise the limited faculties which yet remain to them,
to break the weary monotony of prolonged confinement. Many
lunatics and imbeciles, though with perverted intelligence or deficient
mental powers, have still warm affections, and are capable of deriving
enjoyment from social intercourse. Others, again, though wayward
and capricious, are much more likely to be manageable in small com-
munities, than where, in large numbers, they are confided to the care
of attendants, frequently of an inferior class, who have neither the will
nor the capacity to make allowance for their peculiarities.
" We have already alluded to the statutory enactment, that not more
than one lunatic shall be placed in any house which is not licensed.
As the licence fee amounts to 15Z. 10s. per annum, this provision is an
effectual obstacle against the introduction of a more home-like system of
accommodation than that at present in use. We are very anxious, there-
fore,to see some change effected in this respect; andwe are of opinion that,
were the restriction alluded to removed, an efficient system of domestic
accommodation would gradually be developed for such of the insane as
were not proper patients for asylums. On this account we should
gladly see it enacted, that any number of patients not exceeding four
might be received into a private house, without the necessity for a
licence, provided the board made previous inquiry into the nature of
each case, and granted their sanction according to special forms
for the admission of each individual patient. Under some such pro-
vision we feel satisfied a system of cottage accommodation would
gradually spring up, which would not only furnish more fitting accom-
modation for chronic patients than the lunatic wards of poorhouses,
but would also be calculated to prove a valuable adjunct to asylums.
The practical advantages of such a system would be, first, increased
comfort to the patients; secondly, greater economy to the parishes;
and thirdly, diminished labour of visitation to the Commissioners.
THE STATE OF LUNACY IN SCOTLAND. 389
Were we to decide on the first point simply by the wishes of the
patients themselves, or by those of their relatives, we could have no
hesitation in at once accepting it as proved; but, apart from these
considerations, we are satisfied from observation, that cottage accom-
modation, if placed under efficient supervision, would be found to pos-
sess many advantages over poorhouses. These advantages are chiefly
the greater amount of liberty accorded to the patients; their more
domestic treatment ; and their more thoroughly recognised indivi-
duality. In regard to the point of economy, we have only to recall
the fact, that in poorhouses the annual average cost is 13Z. 13s. \0d.
for each pauper lunatic ; and that for four patients the amount would
thus be 54Z. 15s. 4d. Now, our returns show that the annual average
cost per head of pauper lunatics placed singly is only 71. 12s. 10d., or
30Z. lis. 4<d. for four. This sum, however, we consider as quite inade-
quate for the entire maintenance of a patient, and in reality it must
generally be regarded only as a subsidy given by the parish to assist
in his support. But we are of opinion, that from 12I. to 151, a head,
where three or four patients are placed together, would prove induce-
ment sufficient to bi'ing forward persons of respectable character to
undertake their entire care and support; and, as has been stated, it is
on the introduction of this system that we ground our hopes of so
restricting the number of patients in asylums as to keep the general
expenditure for pauper lunatics within 100,000Z. per annum. We cal-
culate that about one-fifth of the total number would still be left with
relatives at an average rate of 81., so that any diminution in the expen-
diture would be the result of the development of the cottage system,
and its application to cases at present retained in asylums. By its
adoption economy would ensue, not only from the smaller cost of
maintenance, but also from the diminished necessity for providing \
expensive asylums, as we have no doubt that appropriate cottage
accommodation would cost materially less. We do not, however, con-
ceal from ourselves the obstacles likely to be encountered in introducing
a system such as that proposed ; but we are, at the same time, con-
vinced that these would be found by no means insurmountable, and
that the result would be most beneficial to the country. We are
not, however, desirous for any sudden or sweeping alteration of the
present system, but simply for the removal of the legal difficulties
which prevent the reception of more than one patient without a license.
To the Visiting Commissioners the advantages would also be great.
By placing three or four patients together, the number of houses
requiring visitation would be greatly lessened; and the labour of in-
spection would be further diminished were the cottages generally
grouped together. If, as we hoped would be the case, they were
usually erected in the neighbourhood of asylums, an interchange of
patients would naturally and easily take place, whenever any alteration
in the character of the mental or bodily condition of the patients ren-
dered it desirable. Indeed, under such circumstances, the cottages
might be regarded simply as an out-lying part of the asylum.
In these remarks we refer more especially to pauper lunatics ; but
we believe there are many private lunatics who might be accommodated
NO. XIX.?NEW SERIES. D D
390 THE STATE OF LUNACY IN SCOTLAND.
in a like manner, greatly to the relief of relatives, and with increase of
comfort to the patients. We are aware of the existence of 1887
private patients not in asylums, of whom a very large proportion are
in indigent or even in destitute circumstances. In many cases, the
relatives of these patients struggle on without applying for parochial
relief; and, in many others, application is made only to be refused, and
much misery is thus endured. We are aware that the proper mode of
affording relief to the poor forms one of the most difficult problems in
economic science ; and this question, moreover, is one which it does
not fall within our province to determine. It is, however, our duty to
point out the many evils which a refusal of relief too often entails upon
the patient and his relatives. In the first place, the malady is allowed
to pass into an incurable form, and the patient is rendered unproductive
for life. In the second place, the small means of the family are gra-
j dually dissipated in the struggle, and the whole are reduced to the con-
dition of paupers. Finally, the habitual presence of an insane person
is apt to induce the disease in others, especially when there happens to
, be a hereditary tendency. The comfort of the household is destroyed;
\ habits of regularity and industry are broken through; and, not un-
frequently, the constant sight of the sufferer engenders a feeling
of despair, and induces the habitual resort to intoxicating liquors."
(pp. xli.?xiv.)
These suggestions are well worthy of serious consideration.
They indicate one mode of providing for lunatics of a certain
class, which both medically and economically commends itself to
our approbation, and which would appear to be feasible. An
additional interest is given to the suggestions of the Scotch
Lunacy Commissioners, when they are compared with Dr. Parigot's (
observations on the Belgian "free air system" of treating lunatics, )
contained in a paper on the reform of lunatic asylums, to be
found in the present number of this Journal.
The impediments cast in the way of the Commissioners, in the
performance of their duties, by parish authorities, although des-
canted upon by them, need but a passing notice from us. Beadle-
dom is the same all the world over. But we are much interested
in a comparison which the Commissioners institute between the
public asylums of Scotland and England, seeing that the chartered
asylums of the former country have been so recently held up by
the Chairman of our Lunacy Board, the Earl of Shaftesbury, in
his official capacity, for imitation by us. The Scotch Lunacy
Commissioners say:?
" During the past year the condition of the public asylums has, on
the whole, continued to improve, although, in several respects, it falls
considerably below the general standard of English county asylums.
But in making this comparison, we must direct attention to the fact,
that in one very essential respect the Scotch asylums do not occupy
nearly so favourable a position as those of England. In the latter
country, the necessary funds are raised by assessment; and an asylum,
THE STATE OF LUNACY IN SCOTLAND. 391
calculated to afford accommodation for all the patients of tlie county,
and supplied with all the necessary appliances, is at once provided.
Should this accommodation he afterwards found to he insufficient, a
further assessment is made and additional buildings are erected. In
Scotland, on the other hand, the directors of the public asylums possess
no compulsory powers of raising funds. The houses have been built
with money derived from legacies, charitable donations, and subscrip-
tions ; and their extension chiefly provided for by the payments made
for patients. The cost of the original building, and its subsequent
extension, have thus both been defrayed from uncertain sources ; and a
considerable portion of the payments for patients has been diverted
from the more legitimate object of providing for the proper treatment
and comfort of those on whose account they were made, into furnish-
ing accommodation for others. In this way, a large proportion of the
public asylum accommodation in Scotland has been provided from
monies levied directly on the friends of the insane, by making the
payments on their account considerably exceed the expenditure ;
instead of by the fairer course of assessing the community. This pro-
cedure is well illustrated by the history of the Dundee Asylum. A
sum, amounting to 77061. 10s. 8d., having been raised by charitable
contributions, the asylum was erected at a cost of 8493Z. 9s. d^d.
Accordingly, when opened for the reception of patients in 1820, a
debt had been contracted of 786/. 18s. 10^. In 1859, the sum ex-
pended on land and buildings had increased to 35,262Z. 3s. 2d., of
which sum 5640Z. Is. 4\d. had been obtained through further charit-
able contributions, and 4144Z. 8s. 9d. had been borrowed. It thus
appears that during the 39 years which have elapsed since the opening
of the asylum, the patients have contributed 17,771Z. 2s. 4\d. beyond
the cost of their maintenance; and this sum has been spent, not for
the special benefit of these patients, but in providing accommodation
for the district. In other words, a public want has been supplied
from the private funds of those who, perhaps of all the community,
were the least able to afford the sacrifice." (p. lii.)
The following remarks concerning the celebrated Crichton In-
stitution, at Dumfries, also deserve to he noted, as bearing upon
the same subject.
" The plan of the building of the Crichton Institution is such that
? many of the galleries must necessarily have a dark and gloomy appear-
ance ; nevertheless, they are capable of being rendered much more
cheerful than they are. There is especially room for improvement of
the furniture, in which there is a pervading bareness, both in quantity
and quality, throughout the establishment. It is generally objected
to private asylums that the principle of profit is allowed to interfere
with the comforts of the patients; but in the present case, it appears
that the necessity for providing funds for the extension of the pauper
departments of the asylum is permitted to swallow up an undue share
of the payments made for private patients. The apartments of the
highest class of patients, though comfortably furnished in essential
respects, are scarcely fitted up in accordance with the previous habits
D D 2
392 THE STATE OF LUNACY IN SCOTLAND.
of the patients, or their position in society; but it is in the lower
galleries that the want of articles necessary, even for comfort is most
apparent. The flagged day-rooms there have neither matting nor
carpeting; the lowest rate at which patients are now admitted is 501.
a year." (p. lviii.)
The Commissioners report at length on the condition of the
different public and private asylums in Scotland, and on criminal
and alien lunatics; and they terminate their report with a few
comments on the property of lunatics.
Affixed to the report are several appendices containing
returns and tables showing the number and distribution of
lunatics in the different asylums and poorliouses in Scotland, the
cost of pauper lunatics, pecuniary allowances to single patients
in private houses, &c., and the movement of patients in asylums ;
also the general reports of the Visiting Commissioners on the
condition of single patients.
The tables which refer to the movement of patients in asylums,
show the results for 1858 and 1859, and include returns of
the monthly admissions, discharges, and deaths in public and pri-
vate asylums and poorliouses; also of the length of residence
of those who had recovered and those who had died, as well as of
the causes of death. These returns, continued over a few years,
will furnish a vast body of useful information.
The general reports of the Visiting Commissioners contain
much matter of interest. We extract several paragraphs from
these documents illustrative of one of the most important modes
in which mental, moral, and physical degradation is fostered
among the impoverished and lower classes of the population.
The subject is one which cannot be too much dinned into the
ears of the public.
Mr. Cockburn writes:?
" In the county of Banff there is also evidence of improvement in
the condition of the pauper lunatics since last visitation. This is more
particularly seen in the better house and sleeping accommodation, and
in the increase of the money allowances. Their condition, however,
still requires much amelioration. Nine patients, in particular, were
found in a very unsatisfactory state, and appropriate changes have
been recommended. Among these are two illegitimate idiot sisters
living under charge of an imbecile mother and of an aunt who is
periodically insane. This arrangement I cannot but regard as highly
unsatisfactory, if not unsafe. Their dying grandmother is also in the
house, the general aspect of which was squalid and bare. Another
somewhat similar case, in respect of the guardian not being a suitable
person, is that of the begging imbecile J. C., who lives with a thrift-
less sister said to drink, and whose bed and home were found in a
filthy and comfortless state." (p. 191.)
THE STATE OF LUNACY IN SCOTLAND. 393
Dr. Browne writes of the lunatics at large in the southern part
of Ayrshire :?
" When viewed in their moral aspect, it is found that these classes
[idiots, imbeciles, chronic lunatics, 260 in number?111 females, 149
males, chiefly living with relatives or strangers] include 3 individuals
who nudify ; 12 prostitutes, or idiots and imbeciles who have borne
illegitimate children ; and 11 drunkards. It is not for the reporter
to attempt to determine how much of moral turpitude, and how much
of mental infirmity, may enter into such diseased minds; but the
obvious union of these elements produces such an amount of de-
gradation, such an outrage upon decency, as to tax belief. There
is, for example, a case among several others, where a squinting,
hideous, dirty, drunken imbecile has borne three illegitimate chil-
dren, all of whom were idiots, to different fathers. One of them,
still lower in the intellectual scale than his parent, is in the poor-
house ; another was burned to death; the fate of the third could not
be ascertained. The mother is supposed still to prostitute herself, and
to share the wages of her iniquity with her mother, in whose house
she lives. It has been most erroneously supposed that a disposition
existed to urge too stringently the seclusion of cases where neither
danger nor violence was apprehended. The accusation should be
reversed, and blame attached either to the Act or to the Board of
Lunacy for sanctioning the continued liberty of such an individual as
the one described. The limited powers of the Board may be well
illustrated by the fact that this vvoman, undoubtedly insane, living
upon charity and crime, procreating idiots worse than herself, is
beyond their control from not being at present in receipt of parochial
relief." (p. 198.)
Mr. Cockburn again writes :?
" In the parish of W., an illegitimate girl, aged eleven, a pauper, is
boarded with, and is under the entire charge of her grandmother, M.
T., an irascible, peculiar woman, who is on the roll as a pauper lunatic.
She will not allow the child to attend school, nor at any time to go out
alone. When the grandmother goes out herself, the girl is locked
into the house. The girl is healthy and intelligent, but growing up
uneducated, and in the society of a fatuous old woman and an aunt
with an infant bastard. M. T. was in prison six years ago on sus-
picion of child murder, by putting another bastard grandchild under
the ice." (p. 203.)
Mr. Mitchell writes :?
" The Zetlanders, as a general characteristic, are a sober and
virtuous people. Nevertheless I have reported on the cases of seven
fatuous mothers, who had borne illegitimate children. The child of
A. F., one of these women, is an idiot; and J. M., who is herself
illegitimate, has borne three bastard children ; one of the three being
a complete idiot, and a second one imbecile. Of the third I know
nothing. Altogether 1 have reported on five fatuous persons, who are
394 POPULAR PHYSIOLOGY.?THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
the illegitimate offspring of fatuous mothers, some of these last being
now dead." (p. 21).
Other illustrations of the same class may he found in these
reports ; but we here close our analysis of the very valuable
Second Annual Report of the Scotch Lunacy Commissioners.
