Psychological Quarterly Retrospect
===================================

It is recorded of Heimdall, tlie warder of the Scandinavian gods,
that the subtlety of his ear was so great that he could hear the grass
growing in the meadows, and the wool on the hacks of the sheep.
There is a segment of society who, lacking this acuteness of sense and
perception, deny or doubt the progressive intellectual and moral growth
of the nation. They cannot trace this growth from day to day; nay, so
far as their observation extends, the nation appears to be, if anything,
deteriorating. This, it is said or implied, may be gathered from the experience of a single life-time. Whom have we now comparable with the
mental giants who lived in the days of our childhood ? When did
society ever exhibit such signs of rottenness at the core as it now does?
The policeman culls his choicest criminals freely from the most favoured
classes?nay,even from the elect among them; andSirCresswell Cresswell
enacting, as it were, the part of Asmodeus, unveils before us almost
daily a picture of our domestic morality?a picture of the inner workings of the moral life of society, which is abnormal in the highest
degree. These objections are about as pertinent as if a farmer were to
deny the progressive development of his crops, or the thickening of the
fleeces on his sheep, because he could not mark distinctly from hour to
hour, or day to day, the growth of each individual blade of grass or corn,
or of every lock of wool; or if, as he advanced in experience and knowledge, and became more apt in distinguishing defects or diseases in his
fields and herds, he were to conclude, that therefore these defects and
diseases were on the increase; or if, finally, he were to assert that the
farming of his childhood and of his forefathers was more rational than
the present system. The farmer knows that the splendid beeves which
traverse his meadows are not the result of one generation's development ; that the crop does not come to maturity coincidently with the
tilling of the ground and the scattering of the seed; but that its
growth and ripening are matters of time and season. And so of the
moral and intellectual growth of nations. This is not a question of a
life-time, but of generations. He who thinks that he may mark off
the effects of mental culture on a race year by year, is in a state of ignorance as deep, but, truly, not so happy as that of the child whose
imagination being warmed by the wondrous adventures of the glorious
Jack surnamed of the Beanstalk, throws a bean out of the window
when it goes to bed at night, expecting when it rises in the morning
to see the plant grown even up to the heavens.
b 2
ii TIIE SOCIAL SCIENCE ASSOCIATION.
This is, indeed, the stamp of thinker who indulges in incredulous
sneers at the various movements tending towards the mental and
physical culture of the people, represented by the Social Science Association. And yet the Association itself, both in its history and objects,
might have been expected to check any such immature thinking. The
society is only three years old, and it constitutes the first practical attempt to give coherency of aim to the many elements which are requisite
to raise man's moral and intellectual standard. It is a means to an end,
and its formation was only practicable when its necessity became felt.
It took many years' labour before that necessity was appreciated among
even the educated classes ; hence when the Association was formed, it
was the sign of an important advance made. The formation, moreover,
and the objects of the Association implied a want of unison, and a consequent deficiency in power, in the efforts it represented, and to facilitate and perfect the operation of which it was constituted. The
Association, in short, marks the termination of the nonage of the great
efforts which are being made for the physical and intellectual culture
of the people, and ^f itself should have been a sufficient caution against
liasty conclusions to those writers who have neglected history, to
judge of the progress of a nation by the gauge of their individual
experience.
If we would rightly estimate the moral and intellectual growth or
decadence of a nation, we must turn to history, and in that of our
own country we may read a story of persistent growth throughout
many centuries in all that is noblest in humanity?a growth which we
have just reason to believe is more vigorous now than at any previous
period of the nation's existence.
At the last meeting of the Social Science Association, Sir J. K.
Shuttleworth read a paper on Social Economy, in which he recounted
the history of Civilization in England. By this history he endeavoured to show that the progress of nations, like that of nature, is
characterized by successive eras of development. " Each era," he said,
" is marked by the operation of some new force on our domestic and
social habits, internal organization, civil or religious policy?all tending
to produce that form of civilization which we now enjoy." He supported this thesis to demonstration by a masterly and invaluable
epitome of the histoiy of social econom}'' in the kingdom. It is
impossible to give any abstract of Sir J. I\. Shuttleworth's paper, but
we quote a protion of his account of the last stage of social growth
which the nation has manifested :?
"Two strong tendencies liavc accompanied the growth of the population from
6,000,000 in 1700 in England and Wales to upwards of 20,000,000 at the
present time. The first lias been the growth of great towns (some of which
SIR J. K. SHUTTLEWORTH ON CIVILIZATION. ill
have increased their population six or eightfold), the aggregation of the people
on the coal-fields, by migration from the agricultural and moorland districts and
from Ireland, as well as by the ext raordinary stimulus given to natural increase
by higher wages, early employment, and early marriages. The second has
been that hitherto the sudden chccks in commercial prosperity caused by wars,
by defective harvests, by the errors of our commercial legislation, by the very
eagerness of enterprise, blindly glutting foreign markets, have all been met by
the silent influence of colonization, which in dangerous crises have enriched our
colonies and the United States with the transiently surplus labour of the
United Kingdom. There is scarcely a more touching incident in our national
history than the fact that the Irish emigrants to North America have, since
the failure of the potato crop and the famine of IS 10, sent 9,000,000/. sterling
to their relations m Ireland to enable them to follow. The migration, immigration, and vast increase in the numbers of the people?their gathering from
comparative isolation in rural districts to close aggregation on the coal-fields
under the stimulus of higher wages?began at a period when the schooling of
the common people had been uncared for. llaikes commenced his Sunday
school in Gloucester in the latter end of the last century. The people, during
fifty years of the last, and twenty of the present century, were chiefly educated
in the workshop. To the training of skilled work was superadded, with the
growth of the factory system, that organization for the division of labour requiring a subordination of ranks in every mill according to capacity and skill.
Hence grew habits of punctuality, order, the economy of time, the strict care
of property, and exact obedience to discipline. Every factory has resembled in
those respects a regiment; but it has included more gradations of rank, and a
still more complicated system of submission to authority. The hand, the eye,
the mind, have been trained to the most rapid manipulations; the character of
the people has been gradually moulded by the great institutions of industry.
This in part explains the comparative order with which such vast social changes
have occurred among an otherwise rude and uninstructed people. The Legislature was ignorant of the true principles of finance and of commercial legislation to such an extent that, but a century ago, it prohibited by sumptuary laws
the wearing of printed calicoes; and, with a limited area of culture, until a
very recent period, deprived our vast mechanical force of the opportunity to
purchase cheap bread. We should not, then, wonder at those outbursts of the
fury of a population whom we had neglected to instruct, and who met each
severe though transient embarrassment in the labour market by the " Luddite"
riots of Yorkshire, and the successive efforts to destroy the spinning-jenny, the
carding-machine, and the power-loom in Lancashire. Our workpeople, taught
rather by the press, by the influence of public opinion, and by personal experience, than as yet acquainted with any abstract principles, are ready now to protect the machines which they formerly destroyed. In like manner, the attempt
to regulate wages by associations of workmen has, under similar influences,
undergone successive forms of amelioration. Secret associations, bound by
terrible oaths, and issuing orders of assassination, arc apparently not extinct, if
the recently reported attempts in Sheffield are to be received as evidence of the
existence of these ruthless gangs. But the recent strikes in Preston and other
parts of Lancashire have passed off without tumult and without the picketing
of nulls. There remain forms of interference with personal freedom of workmen
almost as effectual. Moral intimidation has succeeded to violence, the isolation
of the 'knobstick' or 'black sheep' who will not join the union, is substituted
for personal assaults ; the Trades Unions attempt to dominate in their own class
by refusing to work with ' knobsticks' or ' black sheep,' and thus to subordinate the whole body of the workmen in any trade to the orders of the directing
committee. If the representative system of such associations were perfect; if
the committee were always disinterested and pure; and if they had a more comIV SIR J. K. SHUTTLEWORTH ON C1VILIZATIOX.
preliensive knowledge of general principles than tliev have ever shown, it i&
clear that this social control of individual action would constitute at best that
tyranny of the majority which Dc Tocqueville has conclusively shown to
be the fatal crime against public and private liberty of any purely
democratic constitution. But I have not only an unwavering confidence
that these are transient forms of evil, they are even signs of 'an advancing
civilization. They are irregular and disturbing movements of a great social
force, slowly, but with the certainty which marks the great operations of
nature, adjusting the relations of labour and capital, so as to be consistent
with that partnership between the free and intelligent workman and his
employer for which step by step our whole history has been a preparation.
Nevertheless, great evils remain to be corrected. The first effect of a rise of
wages among a rude people has commonly been the increase of the coarser
forms of sensual enjoyment. Thus, Mr. Porter, some years ago, estimated the
amount of beer, spirits, and tobacco consumed by working men in the United
Kingdom at 53,411,015?.; the spirits amounting to 20,8l0,20SZ., the beer
and porter to 25,383,105/., and the tobacco and snuff to 7,218,242?. 'Now,'
says Mr. C. Morrison, 'without going the same length as those who would
proscribe stimulants altogether, it may be assumed without much contradiction
that nine-tenths of the spirits stated in this estimate, one half the beer and
porter, and half the tobacco and snuff, were either actually pernicious in the
use, or, at least, superfluous.5 (p. 43.) The evidences of the amount of crime
and pauperism fluctuate so much with the state of the law and its administration, that probably no standard of the moral and intellectual condition of our
population is so sure as this inordinate and unnecessary use of intoxicating
drinks and tobacco. This is fatal proof that, though the pauper bound by the
law of settlement is cur last actual slave, some of the worst consequences of
serfdom remain. The workman is free to emigrate from the moorland cottage,,
or the hut in the fens, or the mud hovel in a stagnating agricultural district, or
from an Irish bog. He may settle in the midst of the vigorous life of the
English coalfields. He may be trained gradually with better food, lodging,
and clothing, by the discipline of toil, till he has a muscular, energetic frame
for outdoor work, or has gained a wiry, highly nervous organization for the
skilled manipulation of the factory. He may submit his will to the regulated
system of the division of labour and to the influence of opinion on society. He
may combine with perfect respect to the law to adjust the relations of labour
and capital. But, though in all this there is gain, the animal nature of the
ancient serf reappears. Ages ago his progenitor was a beast of burden, sold
as a chattel ofhis owner, when life was subject even to his caprice. He
lias not risen to real freedom until he has acquired self-control. Emancipated
from the mind of his lord, he has become his own master without the power to
control his appetites. In his new life the mind of the workman is mainly
developed by his industrial and social training. The workshop and the presshave done more for him than any other agency, and, next to these, the Sunday
School. But it is to be confessed that that portion of the workmen who spend
their evenings in sensual excesses have not yet become freemen. The tendencies to democratic changes are so obvious, and are so strongly indicated by
the origin, history, and theory of our constitution, that they are in some form
ultimately irresistible. We have, therefore, to determine for ourselves whether
we value the personal liberty of opinion and action which we enjoy under the mixed
political power of this country, and whether we cannot preserve it, while we proceed to fulfil the apparent destiny of our race, by completing the freedom of the
mass of our countrymen, by raising them to the dignity of freemen in the power of'
self-control, and to the intelligent exercise of the rights of freemen by the recognition of their claim as a class to a more direct influence in our representative
SIR J. K. SIIUTTLEWORTH ON CIVILIZATION. V
system. Something has been clone towards this result. The cities, towns, and
villages of our coalfields into which in the last century the population have
migrated, were irregularly constructed, impaved, unsewered, the houses often
rude and unhealthy. There was bad scavenging, little lighting, no sufficient,
water supply. Though we had suffered from the warnings of typhus and of an
excessive infantile mortality, we needed to be aroused by the visitation of
cholera to the condition of our towns. That disease shocks by the appalling
mystery which shrouds its advance, the rapidity of its action, and by the suddenness with which it ravages the population. The singular manner with
which it marks by its path where the foulest squalor, the thickest miasm from
filth attacks the frame wasted with want, and the deepest moral degradation,
combined with the lowest physical condition, herd together, attracted
public attention to the sanitary regulation of our towns. Great advance
has been made daring the last twenty years in these forms of improvement both in town and country. The physical condition of the
people has also been greatly ameliorated by the cheapening of food
and clothing and all the other necessaries of iife, while their habitations
and wages have improved. The protection of women and children under
thirteen from excessive hours of labour, the prohibition of the employment of women in mines, have had a practical effect beyond the mere letter of
the law. Excessive hours of work for men are discountenanced by public
opinion; factories and mines are subject to regulations for the protection of life
and health; and what the law does not require, an intelligent sense of Christian
duty often effects. The new hamlets, villages, and towns have in the last half
century, and especially in the last twenty-five years, been organized as centres
of Christian influence by the building of churches, and chapels, and schools.
We have spent many millions on these buildings. We probably now expend
about 2.000,000/. annually on the education of the people. In the last quarter
of a century literature has been cheapened for the use of the masses by such
societies as that for diffusing useful knowledge, over which Lord Brougham has
presided since its origin. The press has become the great instructor of the
people in all social and political topics. An earnest practical effort has been
within the same period made to foster in the working population habits of
prudence by savings-banks, in which 30,000,000/. are accumulated ; by building
and benefit societies, in which large funds have been accumulated; by the
possession of cottages and small freeholds; by temperance leagues ; by societies
of mutual improvement and mechanics' institutions; by advice, remonstrance,
and example. The chief object of this brief review of the social history of the
most numerous class of our fellow-countrymen will have been attained if it
tend to inspire a lively faith in their destiny; if it teach us to recognise in our
history how all the elements of our social state inevitably react on each other -r
how each advance in order, in peace, in social polity, in civil and religious
freedom, in the power of mind over matter, and especially in the divine
influence of Christian charity, has slowly but surely emancipated our humblest
classes from serfdom, from villenage, from pauperism, and now tends to lift
them.up to the enjoyment of all the privileges of intelligent freemen. Nor
have I been without hope that while such a review may thus strengthen our
faith in the beneficent tendency of all providential laws, we may in contemplating their operation learn to restrain a short-sighted impatience. 1500 years
have elapsed in our history, and yet the theory of our Saxon constitution
is only partially realized. The schools of Edward Yl. and Elizabeth only
partially educate our middle class. Some generations must pass before home
education in the cottage will generally worthily co-operate with the elementary
school. IIow long a time will be required before the vast annual waste on
intemperance is converted either into a means of rational enjoyment, domestic
VI THE "TIMES ON CIVILIZATION.
comfort, or into capital for the elevation of those who work with their hands !
Whatever be the time required, we have to maintain our faith in the beneficent
tendency of all great providential laws, whether in the great eras of material
forces and animal life, or in the epochs of social change. All history teaches us
that as the earth was in the vast ages of geological development slowly prepared
by one great design for the habitation of man, so in the history of our race
whatever have been the catastrophes which have overwhelmed empires?the
internal ferments which have appeared for a time to cause a social chaos?slowly
but surely, in the eye of Him with whom a thousand years are but as one day,
man has been making a conquest of nature, asserting and exercising the
dominion of mind over matter, emancipating himself from debasing animal
instincts, raising class after class from serfdom, ignorance, and brutishness,
and preparing for that reign of Christ in the hearts and institutions of mankind,
when every man shall sit under his own vine and his. own figtree, none daring
to make him afraid."
The comments of the Times (October 19tli) upon Sir J. Iv. Sliuttleworth's paper form too instructive a pendant to be omitted in our
Retrospect.
"It must be remarked that history has the infallible result of making a
nation self-contemplative. The kind of retrospect which we have in this paper
is the act of a nation thinking of itself, reviewing its own career, estimating
its own success, and drawing its own character. What is the difference, then,
between this self-estimating stage in Great Britain in 1859 and the same stage
in the Athens of Pericles or the Rome of Augustus ? There comes in the
history of every nation, after a long course of action, in which it has done
wonderful feats of all kinds, a reflective epoch, when it begins to be conscious
that it has done all these great things, and to repose with self-congratulation
on the sense of its own greatness. When Nebuchadnezzar looked down
from the loftiest walls of the habitable world, and said, " Is not this great
Babylon that I have built ?' that was a national reflective act, for the monarch
probably represented the pride of a nation, as Louis XIY. did. So Rome in
the age of Virgil and Horace is always talking about herself, always indulging
in historical vistas and the sense ot her own majesty, always prophesying her
own eternity. But this self-contemplative epoch in nations has generally been
the sign of ebbing action?the fatal mark of corruption, effeminacy, and
weakness having set in, of a nation being quite satisfied with what it has
done, thinking it has done enough, and resting on its oars till some strong
race that has yet to win its way pounces down upon it. What is the difference
in our own case if, as we trust we may say, this is not the result with us?if
the self-contemplative stage with us is not an effeminate one, but as active as
any stage before it?if the self-congratulating look on the past is no omen of a
feeble future ?
" The difference is, that the civilization of these nations of the Old World was a
very imperfect civilization, and, in fact, very little better than a mask for barbarism. It was founded on one single narrow virtue, and that is military
virtue. The civilization that rose upon such a basis simply meant that a nation,
having robbed every one about it right and left, and heaped up a huge mass of
splendour and magnificence as the fruit of its spoil, began to indulge in gold
vessels and marble baths, and to form some new experiences and tastes of
a more delicate kind, such as the possession of wealth and leisure leads to. Such
a civilization as this in its very formation totters upon a precipice, and becomes
in the very next age what the historian calls ' luxury,'?that is, a corruption
of the national spirit. When conquest is over, no other stimulus to exertion is
left, and the monster, gorged with prey and soothed by repose, is ready for the
THE "TIMES ON CIVILIZATION. Til
dart. But the great characteristic of modem, at any rate of English
civilization?and it is one which Sir J. Shuttle worth's paper exhibits strikingly
?is the variety in its basis?that it has so many strings to its bow?conquest,
freedom, labour?which have all contributed to produce our national progress.
Conquest has united and concentrated us; freedom has organized us; labour
has given us our wealth, and our leisure, so necessary to intellectual advancement. But the cardinal distinction lies in the last of these three?that our
civilization has been a civilization of labour, and that is the great moral of
Sir J. Shuttleworth's paper. He describes a triumphal march of labour,
taking advantage of every openinsr, and never allowing itself to be absorbed in
military show. Here is a natural principle, then, for civilization to rise upon,
an ordinance of Providence, and not a mere stimulus of vanity, like the pursuit
of conquest for its own sake. And the advantage of such a principle is that
it supplies a permanent motive to human exertion. The love of work never
loses its strength and charm as a motive : it has no natural limit, as conquest
has; it goes on after it has built up the most enormous national capital, to
found fresh aud fresh capital; it is an indomitable motive, and it is a motive
which always has a field for its gratification.
That is the reason, then, why our modern civilization does not verge upon
national decay, as ancient civilization always did, and that we Englishmen in
this year 185*9 can indulge the sclf-reficctive act, not as an idle triumph and
effeminate repose in the past, but as the pledge of a future of action. Our
civilization is one of natural labour, and there is no reason why we should ever
leave off' natural work. The field we have chosen is inexhaustible; it can
occupy industrial Alexanders and Cajsars ad infinitum. There is not the slightest
fear that we shall have more suns than we can do with, and that when conquest wants to go on worlds will stop. We have indeed some depressing
mementos even in the midst of these cheerful and active prospects; the prophet's eye sees some clouds in the horizon, and some melancholy notes escape
from his instrument while he is in the very process of encouraging and congratulating us. It would seem such a civilization as ours has its difficulties,
and that the principle of laboui-, judging from the actual facts attending the trial
of it, has not shown itself hitherto adequate to the task of producing a perfect
civilization of the whole mass. It puts a great obstruction in the way of
education, absorbing the youth of the country, and carrying them off from the
school before they have fully mastered even the rudiments of knowledge. Sir
J. Shuttleworth evidently looks forward to a long struggle of education with
labour when he says " Some generations must pass away before home education in the cottage will worthily co-operate with the elementary school." But
labour has a worse defect even than this. It does not tame the coarse sensuality of man, but leaves him too often a barbarian in the sense of living a prey
to gross vices. " The operative," says Sir James, " may submit his will to
the regulated system of division of labour; he may combine with perfect
respect to the law to adjust the relations of labour and capital; but though
in all this there is gain, the animal nature of the ancient serf reappears."
Drinking is the curse of the working man. We may reasonably hope, however, that as the idea of education and of its necessity spreads in the lower
classes, which it is now gradually doing, botli education itself will advance aud
a powerful moral auxiliary will be gained against low sensuality; and that
thus two additional triumphs, which are unhappily at present wanting to it, will
be gained for English civilization."
Notwithstanding this hopeful, and we think truthful view of future
triumphs of English civilization, the Times itself, bewildered with the
complex details with which it is requisite to pave the way to, or to secure
viii THE "times" on the reformation of criminals.
the prospective successes, lias not altogether avoided the error which
we commented on at the beginning of the retrospect. The mist of
the present will at times becloud the light of history. But a few days
after the article we have just quoted, the Times (October 27) wrote
thus, respecting the charge of the Recorder of Birmingham.
"The charge of Mr. M. D. Hill to the Grand Jury at Birmingham will be
fountain another portion of our columns this day. There are many excellent
and highly competent persons in this country who devote their attention to the
culture.ot criminals, cxactly as Dutch horticulturists give themselves up to the
cultivation of tulips. The tulip fanciers as yet have had the best of it, although
they have not succeeded in producing that black specimen which is the chief
object of their desires. Still they have had the best of it, although, from the
days of the illustrious Howard to our own, England can show a bright list of
philanthropists who have devoted every energy of their lives and every faculty
of their minds to this sacred cause. The good they have effected is great; the
mischief not inconsiderable, perhaps, but unavoidable. When we burst loose
from the old theory, so dear to the heart of the late Lord Ellenborough, that the
only method of dealing with crimes was to hang, banish, Hog, or imprison the
criminal, our course was a very simple one. The old cry was " More crime,
more hc-mp?more hemp, more crime!" That was the good old system of the
hanging1 Lords, who were never in want of the fag end of a'verse from Leviticus
to justify their wholesale strangulations. The whole system was so dreadful,
so entirely calculated to defeat its own ends, that men of this generation can
only wonder that 110 one rose, up before Romilly to protest against it. It
became evident at last that we were dealing with the symptom,?not with the
disease itself. The more wc strangled our fellow-countrymen, the more they
would filch pocket-handkerchiefs; it was very astonishing, but so it was. W hat
wonder, after the wholesale executions which disgraced the practice of our
fathers, if the wheel in our hands has llown too much round in the opposite
direction P Where they tortured and slaughtered persons who had been guilty
of some very trifling offence, wc have taken atrocious criminals, and dealt with
them as though they were little lambkins who had gone astray; we have
endeavoured to work upon their sensibilities and pampered them in comfortable
lodgings which had nothing about them of a prison but the name. So great
and so deplorable was the reaction against the course pursued by the judges of
the Ellenborough school. It would, however, be too much to say that the
criminal population have been entirely the gainers, considering the commission
of crime only as a matter calculated to promote their own immediate comfort.
When it bccame clear that neither Draco .-or Jean Marie Farina was the right
person to deal with our criminals, we handed them over to one experimentalist
after another, who engaged to wash our Ethiops white, and to conjure the spots
from the backs of our social leopards. In many of these attempts?well and
humanely intended as they, 110 doubt, were?they have inflicted greater misery
upon their patients than the old practitioners, who knew but one remedy?the
sudden infliction of physical pain, and the deprivation of life. \\e have tried
silent systems, solitary systems, systems with instruction, systems^ with premiums for good conduct", and systems where cant was at a premium. We
have endeavoured to keep the old and the young apart, to separate the novice
from the hardened offender. Except in very extreme cases, we now retain
our criminals at home, and make them the subject of one experiment after
another. Eor all this the principles of the science are as yet scarcely established.
Among the gentlemen who have honourably distinguished themselves in
these humane and praiseworthy attempts to deal scientifically with our great
THE "TIMES" ON THE REFORMATION OF CRIMINALS. ix
social plague, Mr. M. D. Hill, tlic Recorder of Birmingham, occupics a very
prominent place. We know of no one who has shown greater patience and
perseverance in this cause, and who has more entirely devoted his life to it,
than Mr. Hill. Now, let any one read his charge carefully?we print it to-day
?and he will find that after all the experiments that have been tried, all the
efforts that have been made, and with all the advantages of long experience to
guide him, Mr. Hill arrives at the conclusion which was already familiar to
simpler men. Just as the preacher at the end of his career wrote "Vanity,
vanity, all is vanity," so Mr. Hill tells us, as the result of his mature reflections upon this subject, "Drunkenness, drunkenness, all is drunkenness." Keep
the poorer classes from the abuse of intoxicating liquors, and you will cheat
the hangman of half his work, and be enabled to diminish your gaols by about
eighty per ccnt. When Model Prisons and Reformatories and what not have
done all that could be expected from them, and every philanthropist has tried
his favourite panacea, we have this great black fact staring us in the face?that
drunkenness is still the great " causa cuusaas" of English crime. Mr. Hill
besides this, adverted to another point well worthy of the attention of all persons who are investigating this painful subject. It is undoubtedly a truth
that in certain respects crime and destitution go hand in hand. In hard times
with low wages and scanty employment, certain crimes proportionately increase.
The law appears to be as iixed as any natural one. There is a large portion of
our population just oscillating between destitution and a bare sufficiency.
W hen they have this bare sufficiency they remain honest; when they are
stricken with destitution they pilfer and thieve. So it was twenty years ago,
so it was ten years ago, so it was one year ago, and so it is now. While we
are discussing the subject of crime and the treatment of criminals we must,
then, never lose sight of these two cardinal points?that lie is the best criminal
reformer who can do aught to promote sobriety among the humbler classes,
and in any way help forward the general prosperity of the country. The
gentlemen who assisted in the repeal of the restrictive laws upon food were
great criminal reformers?the persons who have led our poor misguided
artisans into this wretched system of Strikes frightfully the reverse.
We would, then, impress these two points upon the attention of our criminal
reformers as the alpha and the omega of the science they have taken in hand.
Deal with these, and you deal with the roots of the evil. Other measures may
be very useful and very necesssary, but they are merely palliatives. We are
glad to hear from Mr. Hill's lips that reformatories have ell'ectcd all the good
that could be expected from them, and we hope that it is so. He tells us,
also, that the magistrates in the manufacturing districts have found out by
practical experience that the system of short sentences is more calculated to
promote than to check crime. The inference is, that long sentences are found
to check the commission of crime, and so far the result is satisfactory enough.
When we add to this that Mr. Hill's practical experience has shown him that
there must be a liberal scale for payment to witnesses and others engaged in
criminal prosecutions, we have pretty well exhausted the leading points of his
charge. He deals, indeed, with a few minor matters, and gives some
recommendations which may be considered the stereotyped formulae in use
among criminal judges when the occasion arises for their use. Mr. Hill,
however, in the course of his charge mentions that in his district?Birmingham
?and, indeed, throughout the country, there is a diminution of fifteenper cent,
in the convictions. All necessary allowances being made for confusion between
the number of convictions obtained and of crimes committed, Mr. Hill has
satisfied himself that there is an actual diminution of crime in his district.
This lie thinks due to improved methods of dealing with the criminal population, and not merely to transitory causes. It would seem at last, after all
the noise which has been made about the treatment of our criminals, that we
X THE DECADENCE OF QUAKERISM.
have arrived at a sound principle or two. Such a result was much wanted, for
there was a growing spirit of disbelief in the value of exertions which had
been so long continued without any apparent effect.
Has our experience in these things been so long that it justifies a
serious doubt ? Has not our anxiety to witness the results we hope
for rather led our anticipations beyond legitimate bounds ? Have we
not too often confounded the reformation of criminals with the reformation of the sources from which they come ? We may congratulate
ourselves, we think, that our efforts are beginning to tell effectively
upon the actual criminal, and to restrain the criminal population within
certain bounds. This we learn from our judicial statistics, and what
more could be anticipated from our prisons and police, which act only
upon overt crime and not, except indirectly, upon the substratum
from which it springs. We now see our way more clearly to act
directly upon this. We learn from every trustworthy source that
intemperance is one of the most important fertilizing causes of crime.
Here there is one spring to be stopped up, but we have already been told
by Sir J. K. Shuttleworth that this will probably be a labour of generations, not of the moment. We must learn, as he has admirably said,
to restrain a short-sighted impatience. It will be long before we can
control intemperance, but " whatever be the time required, we have to
maintain our faith in the beneficial tendency of all great providential
laws, whether in the great eras of material forces and animal life, or in
the epochs of social change."
It is an easier task to note the changes which, occur, and the circumstances which induce them, in isolated segments of, than in an entire
nation. The questions presented are less complex but not less important, because their solution affords those fundamental data without
which our attempts to solve the vaster problems of social changes would
be futile. We have now lying before us a recent work* on the asserted decadence of Quakerism which is of considerable interest from this
point of view. The work is of a controversial rather than of a scientific
character, but the sources to which the decay of the society is attributed by the author are of considerable interest to the psychologist.
These are as follows :?
" 1. The visionary, inappreciable, and yet dangerous, character of
the fundamental doctrine of the society, which gives precedence to the
' inward testimony of the Spirit,' and not to the ' revealed scriptures.'
" 2. The rejection of an organized and paid ministry ; and the recognition of the immediate inspiration of male and female preachers, for
the various occasions of devotional assembling.
1 " A Fallen Faith, being a Historical, Religious, and Socio-Political Sketch of
the Society of Friends." By Edgar Sheppard, M.D. London. 1859.
\
THE DECADENCE OF QUAKERISM. XI
"3. The unsatisfying ancl unsubstantial characterA of the society's
form of worship.
i "4. An absolute physical, mental, ancl moral deterioration, arising
from the combined effects of frequent intermarriages, morbid ? seriousness,' and a too emotional and introverting religion.
"5. The singularly obstructive character of the society's sociopolitical relationship to the world?comprising the questions of
the lawfulness of oaths, of war, and of ecclesiastical imposts; the
peculiarities of dress, language, ami deportment; the prohibition of
sports and amusements; the non-recognition of distinctive social
inequalities, and the prohibitions placed upon trade.
" 0. A general recognition on the part of the best Friends of the
necessity of a higher educational standard, adapted to the requirements
and the progressive spirit of the age ; this recognition involving, as a
matter of course, a repudiation of their ' ancient principles,' a fraternization with the world, and a consequent separation from themselves.
" 7. The exclusive character of the society, and the system of
disowning members for breach of discipline ; and its non-proselytism.
" 8. A growing conviction on the part of the most educated and
enlightened Quakers, that the notorious material prosperity of the
society does not accord with its exalted spiritual profession, though it
does not absolutely militate against the moral character of individual
members."
Dr. Sheppard lays considerable stress upon the mental deterioration
of the Quakers and the insanity resulting from it; and although his
remarks are chiefly based on a priori reasoning, they are very suggestive. Whether or not they may prompt the society, which holds
so honourable a position in the history of the non-restraint system of
treating lunatics, to test their accuracy or not, we cannot say. "VVe know
too well from harsh experience how difficult a task it is to determine
any body of individuals, as well as the public at large, to look at these
matters with common practical good sense. It usually requires
something of a cataclysmal nature to provoke a large society of individuals or a people to self-reflection upon subjects which are not
immediately within the reach of all apprehensions. We would fain
hope that certain recent grave events will have the good effect of
rousing the press and the public to more sober reasoning and conclusions respecting insanity at least.
In our last Retrospect we recorded the horrible murder of a young
girl by a gentleman named Pownall, who had been a few days before
the event discharged from a private asylum. In our present
retrospect we have to record another murder which was perpetrated
under somewhat similar circumstances. On the 28th November
Xll HOMICIDAL MANIACS AT LAKGE.
last, an operative named James Moore, murdered his wife (in Finsbury),
and defaced the body in a most frightful manner. On his trial it was
deposed that he had been discharged from a lunatic asylum about a
fortnight or three weeks before the deed. The following medical
evidence was given during the trial.
Mr. Dixon, tlie medical attendant of Hoxton Lunatic Asylum, deposed that
the prisoner was under his care from August, 1858, until November, 1S59,
when he was discharged as curcd, and, in his opinion, at that time the prisoner
was perfectly sane. The prisoner, when he first saw him, was labouring under
mania _ and had several delusions, one of which was that he had a steam-engine
in his inside. For a considerable time lie was prone to violence, quarrelsome,
and easily excited. He began to get better in September, and was very
anxious to be discharged, in order that lie might work for the support of his
wife and family. The deceased used to visit the prisoner once or twice a week
while he was confined in the asylum, and he appeared very kind and affectionate
to her, and seemed very anxious to be discharged, in order that he might work
for her support.
Mr. Gibson, the surgeon of Newgate, was then examined, and he stated that
the prisoner had been under his observation for more than a fortnight, and the
opinion he had formed of him was that he was of unsound mind when he was
brought into the prison, and had remained so ever since. He had some conversation with the prisoner relating to his crime, and in the course of it he
asked him if he did not regret what had occurred. He replied that he did
not, and he said he believed it was only part of a plan to get him back into the
lunatic asylum.
In answer to a question put by Mr. Sleigh,
Mr. Gibson said that from what he had seen of the prisoner and the
other facts in the case, he had formed the conclusion that when the prisoner
committed this act lie was not of sound mind.
The conclusion of the case is thus stated :?
The prisoner, having insisted upon addressing the jury, made a long
rambling and incoherent statement, the principal object of which appeared to
be to show that he was of perfectly sound mind. He said that when he was
originally sentenced to nine months' imprisonment lie was healthy and strong,
and able to bear the punishment; and nobody had a right to send him to a
lunatic asylum. As to the crime of which he was accused, he said that 110
one saw him' do it, and with regard to the evidence as to the blood on his
clothes, they were second-hand clothes, and the blood might have been on them
when they were purchased.
Mr. Baron Watson having summed up,
The jury retired for a few minutes to deliberate upon their verdict, and 011
their return into court they gave a verdict of Not Guilty, on the ground of
insanitv.
The learned Judge ordered the prisoner to be detained during Her Majesty's
pleasure. He was evidently very much displeased at the result, and
seemed anxious again to address the jury, when he was removed from
the bar.
The early history of Mr. Pownall's case, as made known during his
trial, and related by the Times, was as follows :?
The prisoner at the time of the unfortunate occurrence was residing
in the house of Mr. Leete, a surgeon at Lydney. He had only been
recently liberated from the lunatic asylum at 'North.woods as "cured,' and,
as our readers may recollect, lie got up early one morning and cut
HOMICIDAL MANIACS AT LARGE. Xill
ahe throat of one of the maid servants with a razor, and so caused her death
within two or three minutes. As the main question now was as to the state
of the prisoner's mind at the time he did the act, we give only a brief narrative
of the facts as proved by the evidence, beginning with the early history of the
prisoner, as detailed by the witnesses calJed for the defence. It was stated
that the prisoner had been several times in lunatic asylums, but it was thought
necessary to trace his history only from the month of March last. The prisoner
was then residing at Wroughtou, near Swindon, with his wife and sister, and
wife's mother, an old lady between eighty and ninety years of age. In that
month he was seized witli what the doctors callcd homicidal and suicidal mania.
He attacked his aged mother-in-law, and beat her about the head with a poker,
till he had nearly killed her, and then attempted to destroy himself. Dr.
Morris, a physician at Swindon, was called in, and found the prisoner, Dr.
Pownall, sitting in a chair in the kitchen in a state of insensibility, and suffering from the effects of some narcotic poison, which, from a bottle which was
shown to him, the witness believed to be chloroform. External and internal
stimulants were used, and the prisoner became sensible. The same day Dr.
Morris saw him again, when the prisoner said he was better, and that, unfortunately, he had taken chloroform, but he was sorry for what he had done,
and wished it not to be mentioned. He said he had been annoyed by Mrs.
Pownall and had met with pecuniary losses, and his object was to destroy
himself. He also said they excited and upset him, and he hit the old woman
on the head. From what the witness saw and was told by Mrs. Pownall, he
signed a certificate for his admission into Dr. Davey's asylum at Northwoods.
This witness, in answer to questions from the learned judge, explained that in
homicidal and suicidal mania the impulses arc sudden, and are often followed
by tranquillity as soon as the impulse has been gratified. The other medical
man who signed the certificate was a Mr. Gay, but lie was not called as a
witness. Charles Bonliam said, lie was called in and saw the cuts 011 the head
of the old lady, and arranged to sit up at night with the prisoner. One night
he was sitting up with him, with Dr. Davey's son and a keeper, and it
appeared the prisoner overheard some conversation which had taken place, and
observed that he saw through the trick. He then went into a long statement,
complaining of the conduct of his family to him, and continually complained of
his food being drugged. He became much cxcited when he knew that Dr.
Davey's son and the keeper had come, and managed to get out of the room,
under pretence of calling for some water, and returned with a double-barrelled
gun " "Mnd his back, and rushed with it to the room where his wife, sister, and
mother-in-law were, and pointed the gun at them. His sister seized the gun
by the muzzle and lifted it up, and the keepers laying hold of him behind, the
gun, which was loaded, was taken from him without any injury being done.
The next day the prisoner was taken away to Dr. Davey's asylum, at Northwoods. Dr. Davey was examined, and said he received the prisoner with a
certificate, which stated that he was labouring under homicidal mania, and he
treated him accordingly. In about three weeks he appeared considerably
improved, so much so that on the 17th of May Dr. Davey wrote a letter, in
which he said he thought he was in that state of mind in which he would be
improved if he were restored to his liberty, but lie (Dr. Davey) found an unwillingness on the part of the prisoner's family to his being restored to liberty.
Some correspondence ensued with her Majesty's Lunacy Commissioners, who
wrote a letter to Dr. Davey, which he had destroyed, but in which, he said, the
Commissioners required that the prisoner should be restored only, under leave
of absence, under a keeper. The family wished the prisoner to be removed to
the asylum at Coton Hill, near Stafford, but Dr. Davey said he could not give
a certificate of insanity for him to go there. The. prisoner was detained at
Northwoods till a suitable attendant could be engaged to go with him; but this
xiv HOMICIDAL MANIACS AT LAEGE.
difficulty being at length got over, the prisoner was taken by his new keeper
named Richard Pook, to the house of Mr. Leete, at Lydney. When l)r. Davey
discharged the prisoner, lie gave him a certificate in tlie following form :?
" ' North woods, near Bristol, lGtli of August, 1859.
" ' I hereby certify that Dr. Pownall has been under my care hero for some
four months, that he is now quite recovered, and is this day discharged cured.
" ' J. G. Davey, M.D.'
" Dr. Davey said lie had no doubt that the prisoner, when in lii3 asylum, had
been suffering from homicidal mania, and that when he committed the act now
in question he was suffering from a paroxysm of that disease, and was unable
at the time to distinguish right from wrong. He said he gave the certificate
above referred to to the prisoner, in order to influence his mind hopefully and
cheerfully, and so to put him in the best possible state for recovery. He never
allowed the prisoner to have razors, and lie did not think it necessary to give
Mr. Leete any cautiou on that point, as lie supposed the prisoner was going ta
be placed under the care of a gentleman conversant with cases of insanity, who
would not allow his patient to have razors. Dr. Davey also said that at the
same time that he gave the prisoner the certificate that he was 'quite recovered' and ' cured,' lie also gave him a letter of introduction to Mr. Lecter
containing certain hints 'to put Mr. Leete on his guard.' Instead, however,,
of sending this letter by the post, Dr. Davey gave it to the prisoner, who produced the certificate to Mr. Leete, but said nothing about the letter of introduction, and nothing more was seen of it till it was found among the prisoner's,
papers in his bedroom, after the dreadful tragedy had been enacted. The
prisoner arrived at Mr. Leete's, at Lydney, on the 10th of August, and
soon gave Mr. Leete to understand that as he had got a certificate of cure he
was a free agent, and would not be under control, and,.on the 23rd of August,
he dismissed his keeper, telling Mr. Leete that he did not want him (the
keeper), and that lie himself was going to London in a few days to settle some
business. The prisoner had always borrowed a razor of his keeper, who used
to lock it up immediately it was done with, but after the prisoner had discharged
his keeper, his razors were given to him. The prisoner's friends, when applied
to on the subject, objected to his having them; but cnthe 8th of August Mr.
Leete wrote them a letter, in which he said, ' I consider all the precautions
requested to be taken with respect to Mr. Pownall to be perfectly unnecessary.' The razors were accordingly given him, and, as lie had money, the
prisoner was allowed to go in and out, and to conduct himself entirely as if he
were a free man and in his perfect senses."
The subsequent history of the case we gave in our last Retrospect.
Mr. Pownall was acquitted on tlie ground of insanity.
Now we confess that we are not mucli surprised at the occurrence of
these murders. The tone of public opinion in reference to the detention
of lunatics in private asylums, and the mode in which that opinion has
been manifested once or twice in courts of law during the last three or four
vears, has been well calculated to bring about such results as those witnessed in the cases of James Moore and Mr. Pownall. It was hardly to
be anticipated that the anathemas which have been again and again
launched by the press of late, against the supposed unjust detention or unrighteous admission of individuals into private asylums ; the persistent
vilification of medical men practising in insanity and of the proprietors of
HOMICIDAL MANIACS AT LARGE. XV
asylums; and tlie manifest influence which this popular clamour exercised
upon the pleadings at the bar in oases where the question of lunacy was
raised, upon juries, and even upon the bench, would not have a
greater or less influence upon the conduct of medical men and of the
proprietors of asylums. It might have been expected, as a natural
result of the tendency of public feeling, that the proprietors of
asylums would become very chary of detaining a lunatic one moment
longer under care than was absolutely necessary; and that a medical
man would not be in haste to give a certificate of insanity unless there
were symptoms present which might satisfy a jury. This latter course of
action became, indeed, almost a necessity after the Eight Hon. the Earl
of Shaftesbury, the Chairman of the Lunacy Board, had authoritatively
stated before a Parliamentary Committee, a few months ago, that the
opinion of a man of ordinary observation was better than that of a
medical man in determining the question of insanity. Under these
?circumstances, if a professional man would keep clear of a sharp
lawyer and the possibility of being sued for damages for illegal
detention of an individual, or for signing a certificate unjustifiably, it was necessary that he should adapt an}r public manifestation of his knowledge of insanity to the level of information
possessed by the bulk of the people, and that he should detain
no case under care in which symptoms were not present that could
not be readily made apparent to a jury, and which did not approximate
to the popular notions of insanity. This has in reality come to pass.
Medical men and the proprietors of asylums have been obliged to give
way for the moment to the popular clamour; and as a result we know
that, for the necessary security of the proprietor, it lias been requisite
to dismiss from asylums and from superintendence, eases of insanity
accompanied with dangerous and destructive tendencies, but which cases
have been characterized by long fits of intermission. James Moore's
case constitutes the third instance of murder committed by individuals
recently discharged from asylums, within a period of eighteen months
in this kingdom. In the first of these cases the dismissal of the lunatic
arose solely from the necessity occasioned by the popular feeling.
The man was dismissed, and although he had been several months in
the asylum previous to dismission without manifesting any sign of insanity (his detention resting solelyupon the fact of the known dangerous
nature of his delirious paroxysms when they occurred), within fourteen
days after dismissal he had stabbed a man mortally in the public street.
We cannot help regarding the dismissal of Moore and Pownall from the
asylums where they had been under care, as having been brought about
in no small degree by the influence of the popular outcry to which we
have referred. But, alas! murder is one only, and the rarest, of the
c
xvi the plea of insanity.
evils induced by a too early dismissal of a lunatic from charge. Who
can tell the domestic misery and ruin which have been too often
occasioned by the revengeful or extravagant lunatic, who, quasirational andhaimless within the walls of an asylum, has at once manifested his insane fancies and feelings when restored again to his family
and to self-control ? The indiscriminate reprobation which has of
late been heaped upon private asylums, so far from tending to remove
such evils as may still belong to them, has, we believe, given rise to
several additional and even graver evils.
Accustomed as we have been to the animadversions of the public,
and the sneers of the bench upon the so-called crotchets of medical
men, who, from time to time, have come forward in order to rescue
a lunatic from the scaffold, it is refreshing to find a judge publicly
admitting that an attempt to save a man from being hanged on the
ground of insanity may really arise from a most worthy motive. The
instance perhaps smacks somewhat of the principle?
" That iu the captain's but a choleric word,
"Which iu the soldier is flat blasphemy."
A short time ago a Portuguese sailor named Charles Annois committed a diabolical and most inexplicable murder in a British ship on
the high seas. He was tried at the Central Criminal Court, and sentenced to death. The motiveless character of the deed, and almost entire
ignorance of the man's history previous to his joining the ship at
Lisbon, which was but a very short time before the murder, led,
however, to the suspicion that he might be a lunatic. Apart from
the circumstances attending the deed, no traces of insanity could be
detected, but there was some reason to believe that the man had
been confined as a lunatic at Lisbon. After the trial and sentence,
the prosecuting advocate, Mr. Sleigh, waited upon Mr. Justice Williams, and submitted to him certain doubts, " and asked him if he
considered it would be acting in any way unbecoming his position,
if he were to wait upon the Home Secretary, and have some
communication with him in reference to the fate of the unhappy
prisoner. Mr. Justice Williams stated that it appeared to him that,
so far from the interference of the learned counsel being in any way
unbecoming or improper, he considered that the interest he took in the
fate of the unfortunate prisoner was highly creditable to his humanity,
and honourable to him in his position as an advocate ; and that if he felt
tlwt the prisoner's, life should be spared, it was his duty to put the
Secretary of State in possession of every information that would justify
him in coming to that conclusion." When shall we hear a judge
address such language to the medical man who, as a matter of dutyr
THE PLEA OF INSANITY. XVII
comes forward to testify to sueli things as, in liis opinion, prove the
criminal irresponsibility of a person who may have been guilty of an
illegal deed ? Mr. Sleigh had an interview with the Secretary of State,
and the murderer is now under respite until some account of his life
previous to his being shipped on board the British barque can be
obtained.
The legal progress of this case, and the popular estimate of it have
been altogether curious. The Times (Oct. 28) had the following
comments upon it:?
"A Portuguese seaman was convicted the day before yesterday at the Central
Criminal Court of the wilful murder of his captain. The murder occurred on
board a British ship called the Margaret; she was eleven days out, oil her way
from Lisbon to a port in North America, when the crime was committed. The
facts of the case are very simple, and we will presently give a brief recapitulation of them. The oniy noteworthy point in the trial, beyond the interest
necessarily inseparable from the details of so atrocious an act, turned upon the
question of the sanity or insanity of the prisoner at the time. The act was the
act of an insane person, but for all that appeared in evidence the prisoner's
antecedents were in no wise tainted with insanity. Argue from the prisoner's
life until the moment when he committed the crime, and lie was sane enough;
argue from the act itself, and lie was as clearly insane as any lunatic prisoner
now confined in Bedlam. The history of his previous life was certainly not
known in a satisfactory manner, for he appears only to have come on board the
ship on the 28th of July last, and 011 the 21st of August he committed the
crime for which lie was condemned. Under what circumstances his previous
life had been passed, whether or not tokens of insanity had cropped out during
his youth and early manhood?lie is but twenty-five years of age,?there was
nothing to show. The jury under these circumstances took the common-sense
view of the case, overruled the plea of insanity, and found him guilty of murder.
It would, of course, have been more satisfactory if wc could have obtained some
knowledge of the details of his previous life; but the criminal is a native of Rio
Janeiro, and we presume there were insuperable difficulties in the way, or this
line would have been taken for the dcfcnce. Wc cannot but regard the finding
of the jury with satisfaction; for there has been of late years far too much of
maudlin sympathy with heinous olfenders, far too great a tendency in jurymen
to shirk the responsibilities of their position, far too great a readiness to compromise between their feelings and their judgment, by bringing in a verdict
which, at the same time that it spares them the necessity of consigning a human
being to the scaffold, will, as they suppose, preserve society from any repetition
of offences committed, at least, by that one hand. . .
" Of course, the only doubt could be as to the condition of Annois'
mind at the time the murder was committed. The ancient rule of English
law is, that a man is not criminally answerable for any act he commits
if he be not capable of distinguishing between right and wrong. More
than this, any delusion entertained by a prisoner must be proved to influence the act, or it is not material. The defence appears to have been
that the crime was of so atrocious a character that the prisoner must have
been mad when he committed it. This, however, would be a most dangerous
precedent, for the bare atrocity of an offence would then carry impunity with
it. Now, there is not one word of evidence to show that the prisoner was
not aware of the difference between right and wrong, or innocence and guilt.
When questioned, the day after the crime, what motive had induccd him to
XV111 THE PLEA OF INSANITY.
commit it, lie stated it as liis reason that the captain had given him too much
work. All the witnesses most distinctly swore that they had not observed in
him any indication of insanity previous to the murder of Captain Barker.
Equally important perhaps is it to remark that the prisoner's counsel did not
pretend that he was of insane mind at the time of his trial, or that he had
given proot ol insanity in the interval between the murder and the trial. If
The man was mad, he was mad 011 the night of the 21st of August last?neither
before nor since. The jury, happily, would not listen to such a plea; their
sympathies were of a more wholesome kind than those which too commonly
have influence with the jury-box. Their pity was not for the murderer, but
lor the innocent victim of his revenge."
The question of sympathy with the murderer, or the murdered, is a
matter of feeling which need not trouble us here, as we have simply to
deal with the matter of fact. Was the murderer a lunatic or not? It
is an axiom in law and in physic, that the act of murder or suicide, ?per
se, cannot be received as a proof of mental unsoundness. But it is not
the less true that the character of the act?the mode of its perpetration?may lead one to suspect insanity. This was manifestly the case
in Annois' ease, as shown by Mr. Sleigh's subsequent conduct. When
the suspicion arises, it would appear to be plain that we should
inquire carefully into the antecedents of the murderer, in order
that the doubt should be solved. This seems to be a simple commonsense proceeding enough, but who can fathom the profundities of the
law ? Annois was brought to trial, tried, and condemned to death;
advocate, judge, and jury being alike totally ignorant of the history
of the man previous to the murder! This is startling enough, but
what follows would be supreme in its whimsical eccentricity if the
subject were rot so serious. The leading journal sings an Io Paean over
the case, as a crucial instance of justice; and as a climax the advocate
who had successfully prosecuted the case, and secured the conviction
and sentence of the murderer, immediately afterwards seeks a respite
for him lest he should be a lunatic ! Would not the law have had a
more decent aspect, and have borne a greater similitude to justice, if
the trial had been postponed, and information necessary to determine
the question of lunacy obtained first ?
4
'
