The Modern Dkama: A Contribution to Mental Dietetics
======================================================

Art. IV.?
.f
If a new Jeremy Collier were now to arise, his picture of tlie
" profaneness and immorality" of the English stage would neces-
sarily be much more subdued in tone than that which aroused so
much anger and indignation among our poets and players at the
close of the seventeenth century. He could not charge our theatre
with gross immodesty and indecency, or bring forward the works
of Terence, Plautus, Seneca, iEscliylus, Sophocles, and Euripides,
to prove that the Pagan Greeks and Romans displayed greater
purity in their writings than Christian Englishmen. He could
not charge our dramatists with a fondness for profanity, or with
recognising cursing and swearing, coupled with abuse of religion,
as the distinguishing evidences of wit and good breeding. He
could not accuse them of systematic and scurrilous ridicule of the
+ The Eighth Commandment. By Charles Reade. London : Triibner and Co.
1860.
THE MODERN DRAMA.
503
clergy, or find any play of modern date in which a minister of
religion is spoken of, like Dominick in The Spanish Friar, as
" a parcel of holy guts and garbage," with "room in his belly for
his church steeple." He could not allege that, in the dramatic
works of the present day, all the principal characters are repre-
sented as worthless and vicious, and yet receive no punishment
at the end ; and if, in support of his censures against the stage,
he cited the high authority of Theophilus Antioclienus, Tertullian,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Minutius Foelix, St. Cyprian, St. Chry-
sostom, St. Hierom, or St. Augustine, readers would be apt to
smile at these hallowed names, and to question the propriety of
bringing forward the Fathers of the Church as authorities upon
the subject of the English theatre and the English drama of our
own time.
Has our stage grown so pure, then, it may be asked, in this
the middle of the nineteenth century, that it needs no castigation
at the hands of a modern censor? Have we no Drydens, no Con-
greves, no D'Urfeys, giving vice a modish, agreeable air, rendering
ribaldry fashionable, impure actions patterns for imitation, and
filthy witticisms standards of polite conversation ? In our
dramatic literature are there no reproductions of hove for Love,
The Mock Astrologer, The Provoked Wife, or The Old Bachelor ?
Have we quite cleared out the Augean stables and kept them so
carefully attended to ever since, that no fresh impurities have been
allowed to accumulate there ?
Undoubtedly, the English stage of the present day is free from
all the more glaring and obvious vices which prevailed when the
great nonjuring divine wrote his famous essay. We do not now
habitually make light of the marriage tie in our theatre. Adultery
is not now systematically elevated into a virtue it behoves all
dashing fellows of spirit to practise. If we wish to gain favour
for the fallen we take good care to throw around them, first of all, a
veil of sentiment and pathos. Our poets do not now put in-
decent verses into the mouths of women and young girls, or
indulge in equivocations and inuendo worthy only of prostitution
and the stews. The gallants of our stage do not, like the wits
and fine gentlemen described by Macaulay, unceasingly utter
ribaldry of which a porter would be ashamed, or call upon their
Maker every five minutes " to curse them, sink them, confound
them, blast them, and damn them."
No! our theatre has at least learnt good manners since the
glorious days of the Restoration, and is no longer a rendezvous
of profligacy or a recruiting ground for the brothel and the bear-
garden.
Yet we think it would not be difficult to show that the stage is
still far from reaching the high intellectual standard it ou^ht
LL 2 G
50-1 THE MODERN DRAMA.
to attain; that it by bo means exercises all the ethical or ossthetical
influence it ought to exercise; and that its shortcomings, innocent
as they may he when compared with its former vices, reflect no
great credit upon our literary reputation as a nation. We had
almost said that they cast a distinctive reproach upon it.
What should he the object of dramatic entertainment? Are
plays merely meant to gratify the senses, to please the eye with
dazzling colours, to divert the ear with amusing dialogues, to
tickle the fancy with ingenious stage combinations? Many,
doubtless, will be ready to reply with an unhesitating affirmative
to these questions. They will say?" We go to the theatre to be
amused, not to be sermonized; we go there as a relief from the
cares, the occupation, and the anxieties of daily life : if we want to
gain instruction, we can apply for it in our books ; and if our
consciences ever grow uneasy, the pulpit will restore them to
calmness. Let the theatre, therefore, be dedicated to our amuse-
ment, and to our amusement only."
Now we are not writing in the interests of cant, still less with
4 a view of slyly insinuating ourselves into the good graces of
Exeter Hall; let us, therefore, admit that the theatre is a place
of recreation, that it is a place where we go to seek distraction
amid the troubles and the labours of life, and furthermore let us
admit that in our opinion any attempt to make it too closely
resemble the conventicle or the lecture hall would be ill-judged
and absurd. Nothing, probably, would be more wearying and
insupportable than dramatic entertainments distinctly put forth
with an exclusive moral and "improving" object. Assuredly they
would not improve upon acquaintance. We had our mysteries
and moralities in other days, but even they were relieved by an
admixture of lighter matter. "It was a pretty part in the old
church plays," says Bishop Harsenet, " when the nimble Vice
would skip up nimbly like a Jack-an-Apes into the Devil's necke,
and ride the Devil a course, and belabour him with his wooden
dagger till lie made him roar, whereat the people would laugh to
see the Devil so vice-haunted." It was the " licentious pleasan-
tries," as Warton calls them, of these productions, together with
the extraordinary and romantic incidents with which they were
allied, that rendered The Fall of Lucifer, The Creation, The
Deluge, The Killing of Innocents, and similar entertainments, so
popular with the spectators who witnessed them. But then, as
now, dramatic productions written with the special intent of en-
forcing moral precepts, or of inculcating religious truths, must
almost inevitably have failed in that object, from the dulness in-
herent in all such anomalous and artificial compositions.
We see this in certain works of fiction occasionally published
m our own day. Written, not to depict human nature, to portray
THE MODERN DRAMA.
505
manners, or to reproduce with vivid colouring the events of an
historic past, but simply to illustrate a theory, to propound a
dogma, or to solve a problem, of social or political import, the
intent out of which they spring obtrudes itself so conspicuously
in every page, that the writer stands a very fair chance of ulti-
mately wearying rather than convincing?of losing disciples already
made rather than of gaining new converts. It was the great
artistic defect of Jerrold as a novelist, that the purpose with which
he wrote occupied his attention to the exclusion of almost all
other considerations, so that the characters of his fictions, and
often indeed of his plays, utter the author's thoughts rather than
their own.
If the stage is to prosper, then, and fulfil any mission at all,
let it eschew dramas written upon a roundhand text, and turn its
back upon all productions which are mere sermons in disguise.
That the moral should spring out of the play, well and good : but
we shall generally have a dreary prospect before us if the play
springs out of the moral. Morality cut to pattern is sure to be a
misfit.
We may heartily join our voices, therefore, with those who
claim the theatre as a place of amusement, and who ask for en-
tertainment within its walls. But this, after all, does not bind
us to the whole of their views. For amusement is of various
kinds, and according to its nature may be healthy or morbid,
elevated or degrading, useful or pernicious. Cock-fighting is an
amusement, and when the Whitehall pit basked under kingly
favour, it was considered a most fashionable and delightful
pastime. Bull-baiting is an amusement, and Paris Garden in its
day numbered patrons among the high-born and cultivated, as
well as among the plebeian and uninstructed. Hat worrying is
also an amusement, and to this day the sporting newspapers will
tell us in what direction to bend our steps if we wish to see some
vivacious terrier dispatch a certain number of subjects in a
certain number of minutes. Pugilistic encounters constitute an
amusement, favoured, too, as we saw on "a recent occasion, not
only by the lower classes, but by the best-bred people in the land,
and mentioned with tenderness by the most important organ of
public opinion we possess in this country. Amusement has ever
been, in fact, and must ever be, of the most diversified nature, as
different in its characteristics and organization as in its manifesta-
tions and tendencies.
It is impossible, therefore, to place all amusement on the samo
level, moral or intellectual. Does it make no difference whether
we pass an afternoon in gazing around the Salon Carre, or
spend it in witnessing a trial of physical prowess between Mr.
Sayers and Mr. Heenan ? Is the diversion the same whether
506
THE MODERN DRAMA.
we obtain it by pulling an oar or by impaling blue-bottles ? If
one man finds recreation in a visit to South Kensington, and
another in sitting over his beer amid the drunken tap-room
frequenters of the Dog and Bottle, are both their amusements
entitled to take rank in the same category ? Is one as commend-
able as the other, or as worthy of being followed ?
Now, what sort of amusement ought we to have in our theatre ?
Should it be elevating or degrading ? Should it refine or bru-
talize ? Should it teach us good manners, or corrupt us with evil
counsel ? or, lastly, should it exercise a purely neutral influence,
and, like the quack doctor's elixir, do us neither harm nor good ?
Certainly it would be better for the stage to operate thus pas-
sively rather than with an actively pernicious effect. But
ought we in the interests of art to be satisfied with this poor and
pitiful result ? If we merely wish to be diverted, let us call in
Jack Pudding from the street, pay him a shilling to swallow a
string of sausages, or to stand on his head, or to twist his mouth
from ear to ear, and surely we may laugh and roar to satiety
without stage or theatre at all. But if the drama is an art?and
that it is no one will deny?let us cultivate it like any other art,
like painting, like sculpture, like music, and strive our utmost to
develop it to the utmost. We may not even then reach our ideal;
but if we only distantly approach it we shall have made more
progress than is possible by simply standing still.
Once admit this principle, that the drama should be culti-
vated with the loving perseverance and artistic sympathy be-
stowed upon other arts, and we shall have no difficulty in seeing
that it cannot, when thus cultivated, exercise a purely negative
influence. It must, by the powerful agencies at its command, be
something more than a neutral agent. It must do something
more than raise a smile or fill up an hour of leisure. What it
should do we need not be long in determining. Jeremy Collier
showed himself possessed of no common amount of dramatic
insight when lie defined the true object and purpose of stage
representations?
" The Business of Plays," says he, in his quaint but forcible phraseo-
logy, " is to recommend Virtue and discountenance Vice. To show
the Uncertainty of Human greatness, the suddain Turns of Fate, and
the unhappy Conclusions of Violence and Injustice. 'Tis to expose
the singularities of Pride and Fancy, to make Folly and Falsehood
contemptible, and to bring everything that is 111 under Infamy and
Neglect. This design has been odly pursued by the English Stage.
Our Poets write with another View, and are gone into another Interest.
'Tis true were their Intentions fair they might be Serviceable to this
Purpose. They have in a great measure the Springs of Thought and
Inclination in their power. Show, Musick, Action, and Rhetorick,
THE MODERN DRAMA.
507
are moving Entertainments, and rightly employed wonld be very sig-
nificant."
Now, the great fault of the drama in our own day is its almost
negative character. It certainly does not lay itself open to the
censures of Jeremy Collier; but then how far it is from coming
up to the requirements of Jeremy Collier! It has no active
vices, perhaps, but its passive virtues are almost as reprehensible
in these days of moral and intellectual advancement. It is tame, flat,
conventional; it has no invention, no ingenuity, no intellectual
elevation, no independence, no vital energy. It scarcely takes
rank as an art. We are proud of our pictures, we are not ashamed
of our sculpture, we hold our general literature in high esteem;
but of our drama we make no mention. In a comparatively few
metropolitan circles, some interest is still felt in the stage, and
here and there the masterly acting of Mr. Webster in Janet Pride,
the life-like embodiment of Sir Pertinax Macsycophant by Mr.
Phelps, or the success of Mr. Ptobson in his latest character, con-
stitute subjects upon which conversation and colloquial criticism
grow animated. But how narrow is the world in which this
occurs ! The whole of the reading public will have something to
say about Adam Bede, or What will he do with It ? but directly
you have passed beyond certain metropolitan boundaries, you
may inquire in vain after the Overland Route, the Willow Copse,
or Daddy Hardacre.
And it is not merely among those who entertain objections to
the stage on religious grounds that our theatre is held in such
small account. The upper classes, as a body, have almost utterly
deserted it. Their amusement they find in the opera?not as
some have hastily supposed, because the opera is fashionable,
but simply because upon the lyric stage there is a completeness,
an affluence of resources, an evidence of managerial taste, and a
display of artistic excellence, such as are not to be met with in
any establishment where English plays are represented. If
Drury-lane could produce Macbeth or the School for Scandal
as Covent-garden can produce the Proplidte or the Barbiere, its
programme might be stereotyped for weeks, and not a private
box would be obtainable for love or money until the require
ments of Belgravia had been fully satisfied.
Nothing indeed can be more pitiable and crestfallen than the
stage under its present aspect. It once was full of life and
energy, revelling in a powerful influence, which it certainly abused,
but which nevertheless showed of what things it was capable.
Now the furious beast which Puritanism hunted and struggled
with, and which it momentarily overcame, walks abroad unfeared,
unheeded, in the public way. The lion has had its claws cut, its
teeth have been extracted, even its roar has been tempered to a
508 THE MODERN DRAMA.
whisper, and the formidable animal has become as harmless as a
lap-dog, and is held in much about the same estimation. The
stage has lost all confidence in itself, all courage, all capacity.
The broken-down merchant who becomes a messenger in the
establishment of which he was once the chief, is not more humble
in tone, or more obsequious in manner, than the theatre of the
present day. There is scarcely a subject lying out of the beaten
dramatic track which it dares to handle. It is afraid to meddle
with politics; it sliuns all allusion to the great questions which
may be agitating the public mind ; it shrinks from religion as a
poor man shrinks from the elegant and well-furnished church,
which he foolishly imagines he is not worthy to enter; it rarely
touches upon history, except with timid nervousness ; even the
manners of the day, the passing follies of the hour, the airy trifles
floating in the social atmosphere, and against which the polished
shaft of wit and ridicule have ever been directed?even these fail
to arouse its slumbering energies. It goes on at a jog-trot pace,
the embodiment of a commonplace respectability, which, in its
eagerness to offend no susceptibilities, to awaken no antagonism,
to pass beyond no established formula of thought and speech,
becomes pre-eminently tame, servile, humdrum, harmless, and
contemptible.
True, the stage, as though still in its teens, has a guardian, a
strange anomalous protector, called a censor, whose mission it is
to look after the little boy, and see that he does not use any bad
language, throw stones, get into evil company, or read Tom
Paine; and this fact, doubtless, accounts to some extent for the
timidity and tameness to which Ave have made allusion. But how
is it such an absurd officer is allowed to exist a day in free Eng-
land ? Why ! if the stage lad had any spirit, he would turn
round upon the protector by whom he is followed, hit out at that
well-dressed inculcator of propriety, and serve the official Mentor
exactly as Tom Brown served Slogger Williams. After a little
sparring, and very few rounds, we should hear no more of the
dramatic censor, depend upon it.
Fully nine-tenths of the works now brought out upon the
English stage are utterly colourless and conventional. They
reproduce conventional characters, they employ conventional
phraseology, they embody conventional ideas, they depend for the
interest they excite upon conventional incidents, developed
through the agency of conventional plots. Time advances, but
the stage stands still, and in this way it happens that the pictures
of life represented at the theatre apply neither to the past nor to
the present, nor, indeed, to any day. To paraphrase the eulogy
bestowed upon Shakespeare's masterpieces, they are not of an age,
but of no time.
/
.THE MODERN DRAMA. 509
Taking all these circumstances into account, it is strange to
find many people of by no means illiberal or narrow-minded
views, still shunning the theatre on principle ; shunning it in no
bigoted, sectarian spirit, but on the broad ground of morality and
Christian decorum ; believing it the same pest-house of iniquity
it is held to be in Puritan traditions; regardingit as Satan's own
playground, and feeling quite ready to disinherit son or daughter
of theirs, who should enter into its unhallowed precincts. Now,
we have no wish to treat such views with levity, or to throw
any ridicule upon convictions which we know are entertained in
full sincerity. Still we cannot help expressing the opinion that
those views and convictions rightly belong to another period, and
are not justified by the present condition of our stage.
Doubtless, there is to many minds a fascination in the theatre,
which, if unduly yielded to, would lead to no good result. But may
not the same be said of all amusements, even those which we find
ministers of religion openly and zealously advocating in the pre-
sent day ? Cricket, for instance, is a very exhilarating, beneficial,
and manly pastime, but if Master Bob or young Mr. William
were to give up all their time to it, neglect school studies for it,
and plainly show that their whole thoughts were absorbed in the
game, their father would assuredly be justified in pulling up the
wickets, burning the bats, and pitching the balls into a horse-
pond. Again, there is a fascination in the society of women,
more especially perhaps if they be young, pretty, intelligent,
accomplished, well-bred, amiable, and free from affectation. But
are we therefore to set it up as a rule of our lives, that we must
never enter the presence of these syrens, lest, once drawn across
the charmed circle, we find ourselves without power to return ?
The theatre, as an amusement, must of course be followed like
any other, with reason and in moderation, and when thus followed,
its results will assuredly not be of a kind to excite alarm.
But do the opponents of the stage really know what soi't of an
amusement it is which they hold in such deep abhorrence ? Let
them enter with us just for once into a good metropolitan theatre.
If they don't like the approaches to Wych-street, we will pass by
the Olympic, and go up the Strand to the Adelphi; and when at
that house, we can easily run along to the Haymarket, or take a
cab to the distant Princess's. It is immaterial which, so we will
enter the first we reach.
We look around, and see an audience as decorous and well
behaved as that which assembles in Exeter Hall. Hush ! Even
as we enter they call upon us not to break in upon the earnest
attention with which they are listening to what is passing upon
the stage. Our companions are evidently impressed, but not yet
quite at ease. They gaze in every direction, sweeping boxes, pit,
510 THE MODERN DRAMA.
and gallery alike with looks of mistrust and suspicion. Don't
be alarmed, gentlemen, the painted syren you expected to see is
not here; she has long since received her conge, long since has
ceased to have the run of the house. If she wants to ensnare
youth and innocence, she has no greater opportunities afforded her
here, than in your own churches and chapels. If she be here at
all, it is only by conforming to the same rules of decorum and
good behaviour, under favour of which she would at any time
obtain a free seat in your temples, or if nicely and unobtrusively
dressed, be ushered into a well hassocked pew. Cease your scrutiny,
therefore, gentlemen, and note what is passing upon the stage.
You heard that burst of satisfaction, followed by that long and
hearty round of applause. You wonder what occasioned it. Some
witticism in favour of profligate habits, or some ridicule bestowed
upon virtuous manners, you doubtless imagine. Not at all. That
poor man upon the stage, who you can see is in terrible misery has
been offered a large sum by a rich banker, not a member of the
bloated aristocracy, if he will perjure himself. The tempted has but
replied to the tempter: " No, sir, the pangs of poverty are hard
to bear, but the wealth purchased by crime would bring with it
even deeper agonyand the audience have expressed their
approval with that extravagance of gratification which wakes up so
many slumbering echoes. A very scandalous and vice-loving
audience, it is evident.
Another burst of applause. Surely that must have been occa-
sioned by some objectionable incident, or some improper speech.
No; the heroine hears the character of her father falsely stigmatised,
and is defending it with filial zeal. " 'Tis false. I am his child,"
are all the words she has uttered, and yet the pit is shedding tears
of sympathy, and in the gallery there is not a dry eye, or a pocket
handkerchief free from dampness.
. And now another manifestation of delight is expressed by peals
upon peals of laughter. .This time something ribald or profane
must assuredly have been uttered, or the entire audience would
not thus give vent to its mirth. Once more, No ! The comic
man has merely knocked down a free-and-easy fine gentleman, who
was persecuting an innocent young maid with his amorous imperti-
nence, and the spectators whom you thought utterly won over to the
wrong cause, and devoid of all sympathy with aught save evil cannot
contain themselves for joy. Have you seen enough, gentlemen,
or will you stay longer? If you do, you will witness nothing
but entertainments of much the same character; and though in
time you may get somewhat weary of them, as we are, you will
scarcely be able to charge them with any graver blemish than
their monotony and prosiness.
Whatever may be the faults of the stage, immorality cannot be
THE MODERN DRAMA.
511
said to form one of tliem. Run over the lists of pieces produced
in London during the last ten years. Here and there we shall
find one containing incidents which betray too decidedly their
French origin; hut, as a general rule, the works are utterly free
from noxious matter. It is the first occupation, indeed, of the
English playwright in adapting the dramas of France to our own
stage, to expunge from them all objectionable passages. He
knows that an English audience has no sympathy, for instance,
with adultery, under whatever cover of sentimentality it may be
introduced. Out, therefore, goes the luckless hero or heroine,
whose engaging frailties have seduced away the tears of the Am-
bigu or the Vaudeville. By the time hero or heroine appear before
British audiences, the driven snow is not fairer than their inno-
cence and purity. When the stage offends against any of the
moral laws, it would seem to do so from mere poverty of inven-
tion and dulness of judgment?not from any love of viciousness,
or any desire to corrupt. Its gi'eatest sins are blunders, and these,
it is only justice to say, are committed but seldom.
Here, perhaps, we shall be met by the question, If the stage is
thus pure and innocent, what more can you ask of it ? Jeremy
Collier merely expects it to recommend virtue, and discountenance
vice ; are you to be more exacting than he ? And if it already
fulfils these conditions, how can it be looked upon as falling short
of the requirements of its religious critic ? Our answer to these
objections is soon expressed. The purity and innocence of the
drama we look upon as simply negative merits. We expect these
qualities, as a matter of course, in the present day?as a result,
indeed, of the general tone of society, and the prevailing healthi-
ness of our literature. When our novelists and poets are distin-
guished by the delicacy and elevation of their sentiments, it would
be strange, indeed, if the stage were so far behind the age as to
be corrupt and vicious, intent only upon contaminating the public
mind. We claim from it, therefore, decency of expression and
soundness of purpose, as something we have an absolute right to
look for.
But have we not a right to look for something more? Are
we satisfied with a novel simply because it is full of excellent
sentiments and impregnated with the most amiable pietv ? Does
a poem take up the post of honour upon our bookshelves because
the author despises meanness, has a horror of guilt, and expresses
these laudable feelings in metrical slipshod ? Does the essay,
or even the sermon, pass muster, unless it contains something
more edifying than common-place views clumsily expressed and
badly arranged ? Assuredly not. In the novel, the poem, the
essay, even in the sermon, we look for literary merit, for origi-
nality, for force, for energy, for all the various qualities indeed
512
THE MODERN DRAMA,
which go to make up excellence in a work of art. And why
should we not look for the same in a tragedy, comedy, farce, bur-
lesque, or domestic drama ?
This, then, is our complaint against the stage?not that it is
immoral, but that it is tame, commonplace, and conventional.
The sermon is perfectly sound in doctrine, it inculcates nothing
but excellent precepts, it contains not an opinion from which we
can dissent, and yet its effect is sedative and unsatisfactory. The
similes limp with age, the sentences move awkwardly, the argu-
ments totter under the ever-increasing burden of words they are
compelled to bear. Not a bad sort of sermon, if listened to for
the first time, but coming rather flatly after being heard with a
few variations every Sunday from January to December.
It may fairly be said that every department of literature shows
signs of intellectual activity and of vital force, except that of the
stage. In history, biography, political economy, philosophy,
theology, the sciences, we have writers who labour with rare
earnestness and perseverance, and who bring to their work highly-
cultivated minds, besides talents of the first order. In fiction,
we have a host of authors whose works occupy no insignificant
position in our literature?Mrs. Gaskell, Miss Muloeh, George
Eliot, Charles Eeade, Kingsley, Antony Trollope,- Wilkie Collins,
Lever, besides the three great masters of their art?Bulwer,
Dickens, and Thackeray. But on the stage there is no mental
activity, no signs of intellectual life. A few years ago we might
have claimed Jerrold, Bulwer, Knowles, Talfourd, Lovell, Marston,
as writers who reflected honour upon our theatre ; now the list
must dwindle down into a single name, and in Tom Taylor we are
compelled to acknowledge we have almost the only distinguished
representative of our dramatic literature. Totus mundus cigit
histrionem, says Petronius, but where are we to find the
dramatists ?
In the preceding remarks, we have spoken of the drama with
special reference to the works represented in what are called the
West-end theatres, and which taken collectively may fairly be
said fco constitute the English stage. But we should leave the
subject incompletely developed, did we not allude to another class
of dramatic productions which form the staple amusement at
another class of theatres. For in these latter works we meet
with a fresh subject, the literature, such as it is, of the minor
stage.
When Charles Mathews published his witty but somewhat
flippant pamphlet upon the copyright treaty between France and
England, he gave in it a vivid description of one of our minor
theatres.
" The Victoria," says he, in his rattling, farcical manner, " is a
THE MODERN DRAMA.
513
model house, the type of a school to which it gives its name. It
is the incarnation of the English domestic drama, or rather of
the drama of English domestics. There you will always find the
truest picture of virtue in rags and vice in fine linen. There
flourish the choicest specimens of all the crimes which make life
hideous?robbery, rape, murder, suicide. It is a country abound-
ing in grand combats of four?a region peopled with angelic
maid-servants, comic housebreakers, heroic sailors, tyrannical
masters, poetical clodhoppers, and diabolical barons. The lower
orders rush there in mobs, and in shirt sleeves, applaud fran-
tically, drink ginger beer, munch apples, crack nuts, call the
actors by their Christian names, and throw them orange-peel and
apples by way of bouquets." Allowing for a little satirical colour-
ing, this is on the whole a by no means overcharged picture, and
with a few unimportant modifications, it might be accepted as
applying to the whole of our minor theatres. But there is one
point in the description upon which special emphasis must be
laid. It is the fondness of the minor stage for evil deeds. Not
that crime is applauded, or held up as a pattern to be imitated.
On the contrary, it is, as a rule, held up to detestation and
loathing. In the secondary theatres of the metropolis, as in the
theatres of superior rank, virtue generally meets with its due re
ward, and vice receives condign punishment. Pieces like Jack
Sheppard, in which the hero is a sentimental rogue, carrying
with him the sympathies of the audience, may fairly be set down
as exceptional. In almost every instance, the really bad cha-
racters are painted in the deepest black, and the really good appear
under an aspect of moral excellence utterly spotless in its purity.
Thus it becomes almost impossible for the sympathies of the
audience to flow in a wrong direction when they flow at all. The
virtuous peasant and servant girl proclaim their virtue in every
speech they utter, and in every action of their dramatic lives;
while the usurping baron and unscrupulous assassin never open
their lips without acknowledging their rascality, and letting the
spectators into the secret of all their evil deeds.
This, to a great extent, may be considered as the saving merit
of the minor drama. If it sentimentalized immorality, represented
crime under an sesthetical aspect, and appealed thus to the morbid
rather than to the healthy sympathies of its patrons, the effect
could not fail to be highly pernicious. In France, where un-
wholesome popular literature is the rule instead of the exception,
it is impossible not to believe that novelists and playwrights
count for something among the causes which lead to the diseased
tone of social sentiment, and ultimately to the development of
crime. We find, at all events, that those offences which indicate
strong morbid tendencies on the part of the perpetrators, flourish
514 THE MODERN DRAMA.
to a much greater extent among our neighbours than among our-
selves ; and we know that those tendencies must be encouraged
and strengthened by the novels and plays most generally admired.
Some serious crimes are, indeed, really common in France, while
in England they are compartively rare. Parricide and infanticide,,
for instance, occupy a very prominent place upon the French
criminal records, while upon our own they are completely in the
background. Serious crimes, too, against the person?such as
murder and attempts to murder?are committed in France, to
fully twice the extent they are committed in England. The same
results are exhibited in another and not less terrible class of
offences, viz., rape and attempts at rape. We do not put forward
these statistics in any dogmatic spirit of inference, or attach too
much importance to the support they may appear to give to our
views. Still the contrast supplied by a comparison of tbe criminal
balance-sheets of the two countries is at least worthy of mention
here, and its value is not diminished when we find that it is only
in the minor crimes?such as petty thefts, which do not carry
with them evidence of highly morbid tendencies, but rather of
want and hunger, or laziness?that England is conspicuously
in excess of France.
To say truth, the minor stage is too ignorant, stupid, bungling,
and unimaginative to do much harm. It long ago came to the
conclusion that its patrons delighted in bloodshed, and it has done
nothing but act upon that conclusion ever since. But it is only
in the hands of genius that a single theme can be manipulated
for any length of time without taking awkward and abnormal shapes.
At first, there was no doubt a terrible truthfulness and startling lite-
rality in the more painful and exciting incidents of the minor stage,
but ordinary minds could not for ever arrange new combinations
of horror, or always draw from the deep well of crime without ex-
hausting the supply at the bottom. Murder, suicide, burglary,
abduction, were so frequently made use of, that they grew at last
threadbare subjects. Even when patched up with a supernatural
lining they were found scarcely fit for service. From bad to worse
was thenceforth a natural transition. When horror of ordinary
quality lost its influence, horror above proof was resorted to. The
usual effect of exaggeration has followed. In the present day the
melo-dramatic horrors of the minor stage are merely melo-dramatic
absurdities. They scarcely interest the most uneducated audience,
while to the educated they are simply ridiculous. No greater
diversion can be imagined for those who love a hearty laugh than
is offered by a genuine A^ictoria or Surrey melo-drama, for both
productions are on about the same intellectual footing, when repre-
sented by a company accustomed to the work. The whole piece
is a mass of sanguinary puerility. The characters are not human
THE MODERN DRAMA.
515
beings, tliey are mere stage abstractions. They do not talk or
declaim, they rant and bawl. They come and go, they laugh and
scowl, they bless and anathematize, they poison and stab, tliey
shoot and garotte, they die and live; but whatever they do carries
with it a sense of falseness, of unreality, of right down absurdity.
The whole drama is a jumble, incoherent and meaningless. There
is no plan anywhere visible. Murders are committed, virtuous
deeds are performed, but they have no motive, no significance?
all is pell-mell or chaos. The drama of the minor stage is, in
fine, mere bloodthirsty balderdash, with scarce a glimmering of
real wit, humour, pathos, or invention, and, as an intellectual
emanation, would almost reflect disgrace even upon a metropolis
of Hottentots or Feejee Islanders?to say nothing of civilized
Englishmen.
Mr. Charles Eeade, in the curious work he has lately published
under the title of The Eighth Commandment, indicates what he
regards as the cause of our theatrical degradation, and points out
the remedy. According to this writer we have ceased to have a
drama worthy of the name, simply because we have ceased to pay
for it. What we used once to buy we now steal, and the French
stage is the affluent storehouse in which we commit our depre-
dations. The English dramatist has thus been driven out of the
field, and the English dramatic pirate or vampire hack has taken
his place. No man of education and ability can now afford to
write for the theatre, his productions being at once placed in unfair
competition with those which have cost a merely nominal amount
of time and mental labour. The whole question is thus one of
money. Offer a fair pecuniary inducement to good authors, and
the stage will soon give evidence of the intellectual vitality ob-
servable in other departments of literature. To show into what
a state of decay and discredit the art of the dramatist has fallen,
Mr. Reade gives a few figures of convincing significance, and the
accuracy of which cannot be questioned. Thus a recent trial
disclosed to us that the average price of a new play in many
flourishing London theatres is 41., but we also hear of five pieces
being sold for 31., and of three separate lists of plays being offered
to a manager fur thirty shillings and twenty shillings per annum.
These, of course, were works by mere hacks, and were in-
tended only for the minor stage. But if we rise in the scale of
merit, the rate of remuneration does not mount to a very high
level. Black-eyecl Susan, for instance, brought its author only
001., though the actor who played the leading character realized
4000Z. by the impersonation; for Masks and Faces, Messrs. Tom
Taylor and Charles Eeade received 150L, and for Tivo Loves and
a Life, 100Z.; while for the most successful play of modern
times, The Lady of Lyons, only 5001, was paid.
516
BRAIDISM.
In contrast with these figures may be placed the prices paid to
English dramatists in another generation of playgoers. Thus,
for Dr. Johnson's dull play of Irene, 300Z. was given ; for The
Good-natured Man, 500I.; for She Stoops to Conquer, 8001.;
for Holcroft's Follies of a Day, 6001., and 3001, for the copyright;
for The Road to Ruin, 9001., with 400Z. additional for the copy-
right; for Colman's John Bull, 1000Z.; for The Brothers, by
Dr. Young, 1000Z.; and for Marianne, by Elijah Fenton, 1000L
"VVe need not adduce further evidence upon this point. Enough,
we think, has been brought forward to show that, if properly
cultivated, the stage might become a powerful engine of mental'
culture, though evidently it must begin by growing honest if it
would exert all the influence of which it is capable.
Vl
