On Epilepsy
============

Art. IX.?

Two valuable contributions have recently been made to the
English literature of epilepsy and disorders akin to epilepsy, by
the translation for the New Sydenham Society of the undermentioned essays of Professor Schroeder van der Kolk, and Drs.
Kussmaul and Tenner.*
The starting-point and source of spasm in epilepsy, according
to Professor van der Kolk, is to be found in exalted sensibility
and activity of the ganglionic cell of the medulla oblongata; and
the grounds upon which this opinion is based are to be found in
the seat of the characteristic spasms, in the bilateral character of
these spasms, and in the appearances disclosed after death.
The spasms of epilepsy begin in muscles, the nerves of which
arise in the medulla oblongata?in muscles, that is to say, which
are supplied by the facial, accessory, hypoglossal, and the portio
minor trigemini; and in slighter cases, the spasms may be limited
to the sphere of these nerves. The spasmodic contraction of the
muscles of the chest, which is the most prominent and characteristic feature in the complete attack of epilepsy, is also supposed
to point to the medulla oblongata as the origin of the evil, for a
similar state of things is produced by the action of a strong
stimulus upon the great afferent nerve of the medulla oblongata
?the pneumogastric.
The bilateral character of the spasms is used as another argument in favour of this idea that the medulla oblongata is espe* 1. On the Prominent Cause and Rational Treatment of Epilepsy. By Professor Schroeder van der Kolk. Transl. by Dr W. D. Moore, for the New Sydenham Society. 1859. 2. On Epileptiform Convulsions from Hemorrhage. By Drs.
Kussmaul and Tenner. Transl. by Dr Browne, for the New Sydenham Society".
.242 ON EPILEPSY.
cially affected in epilepsy. The lateral halves of the medulla
oblongata are connected in the most intimate manner by transverse fibres and commissures, and this intimate connexion between
the two lateral halves is one principal point of difference between
the medulla oblongata and the brain and spinal cord. So
intimate, indeed, is the connexion between the two halves of the
medulla oblongata that unilateral action is impossible. Moreover, it is evident in none of the natural movements of the
features, or tongue, or voice, or breathing?movements more or
less under the control of the medulla oblongata unless the
muscles and nerves of the two sides concerned in these aetions
should act in concert. In the brain and spinal cord, on the other
hand, where there is no such intimate anatomical and functional
connexion between the two lateral halves, one side may act or
fail to act independently of the other side. Hemiplegia is an
illustration of such failure of action. Now in epilepsy, though
the spasms may undoubtedly affect one side more than the other
side, they are always more or less bilateral, and for this reason
Professor S. van der Ivolk supposes them to spring more or less
from the medulla oblongata.
The appearances after death also point especially to the medulla
oblongata. In early cases we may often fail to find any characteristic changes ; but in confirmed cases, Professor Schroeder van
der Kolk finds unequivocal changes in the medulla oblongata.
Thus he finds this organ often harder than natural from the
interstitial deposit of a minutely granular albuminous matter, or
else softened, swollen, and exhibiting signs of fatty degeneration.
He also finds very marked changes in the bloodvessels, and to
these he directs particular attention. In fifteen cases the posterior
half of the medulla oblongata, from the fourth ventricle, was
redder and more hypersemic than in the natural state, and this
whether death happened in an attack or not; and on minute
examination, the bloodvessels in the red and congested portions
were found to be dilated to thrice their natural dimensions, and
with their walls much thickened. On comparing, moreover, the
medulla oblongata of epileptics who bit their tongue with the
medulla oblongata of epileptics who did not bite their tongue, the
dilatation of vessels was seen to be most marked in the course of
the hypoglossus and the corpus olivare in the former case, and in
the course of the vagus in the latter case.
The facts upon which Professor Schroeder van der Kolk founds'
his theory of exalted action of the medulla oblongata in epilepsy
may be questioned. With him spasm is the great argument in
favour of exalted action?an argument which will be disallowed
by Dr Radcliffe and those who think with him. A full bounding
pulse, as implying an excited condition of the circulation, is also
used as an argument in favour of exalted action in the medulla
ON EPILEPSY. 243
oblongata ; but bere again is a doubt, for it lias been shown, wfe
think conclusively, that a full bounding arterial pulse has nothing
whatever to do with the phenomena of epilepsy. Nor do we
think that the after arguments used are more cogent than these.
We think, indeed, that Professor Schroeder van der Kolk does
not establish his theory of exalted action of the medulla oblongata as the starting-point and source of spasm in epilepsy ; but
on the other hand, we think that he has given us additional
reasons for looking to the medulla oblongata if we would hope to
read aright the most characteristic symptoms of epilepsy.
The treatment recommended is in accordance with the notion
that there 1s exalted action to be subdued?prudent diet, no stimulants, daily evacuations from the bowels, tartar emetic, digitalis,
local bleedings high in the neck, especially with cupping glasses,
setons, issues, actual cautery, also high in the neck, and so on.
Zinc and nitrate of silver are thought to act beneficially in the
cases where they do so act, by moderating intestinal irritability.
Sulphate of copper is condemned. Worms, in particular, are to
be sought for and removed.
The chief results arrived at by Drs. Kussmaul and Tenner in
their essay may be noted in the following general summary :?
1. The convulsions appearing in profuse haemorrhage of warmblooded animals (including man) resemble those observed in
epilepsy.
2. When the brain is suddenly deprived of its red blood, convulsions ensue of the same description as those occurring subsequent to ligature of the great arteries of the neck.
3. Epileptic convulsions are likewise brought on when the
arterial blood rapidly assumes a venous character, as, for example,
when a ligature is applied to the trachea.
4. It is highly probable that in these cases the attack of
spasms depends upon the suddenly interrupted nutrition of the
brain. It is not caused by the altered pressure which the brain
undergoes.
5. Epileptic convulsions in haemorrhage do not proceed from
the spinal cord.
6. Neither do they proceed from the cerebrum.
7. Their central seat is to be sought for in the excitable districts of the brain lying behind the thalami optici.
8. Anaemia of those parts of the brain situated before the crura
cerebri produces unconsciousness, insensibility, and paralysis in
human beings ; if spasms occur with these symptoms, some excitable parts behind the thalami optici must have likewise undergone some change.
9. Anaemia of the spinal cord produces paralysis of the limbs,
of the muscles of the trunk, and of respiration. When the
anaemia suddenly attains its greatest intensity, then only, and even
244 ON EPILEPSY.
then but rarely." do slight trembling movements of the limbs precede paralysis. The sphincter ani acts analogously to the constrictor muscles of the face in anaemia of the brain, that is, it
.contracts spasmodically before it relaxes.
10. Convulsions from haemorrhage are neither physical nor
reflective.
11. Convulsions from haemorrhage do not ensue?
a. In cold blooded animals, at least not in the frog.
b. When the haemorrhage is slow, so that the vital power is
only gradually consumed.
c. When the animals are very much debilitated.
d. When the nutrition of the spinal cord has suffered.
e. When large pieces of the excitable districts of the brain
have been removed.
/. In animals subjected to etherization.
g. Doubtless also when excitable districts of the brain have
undergone certain pathological alterations.
12. As suffocation brings on convulsions, and etherization
averts them, it is evident that etherization and asphyxia are two
different conditions.
? 13. The brain of warm-blooded animals can only be deprived
of red blood for a short time; otherwise it loses its capability of
resuming its functions when again supplied with the nutritive
fluid, and the appearance of death becomes a reality. The brain
of some rabbits preserved this capability for two minutes.
. 14. It is sometimes observed, after the arteries of the neck
have been tied, that the muscles of the trunk perish and take on
the rigor mortis before the action of the left heart is extinct.
Hence the left heart is not always the primum moriens among the
muscular organs.
' 15. Contraction and subsequent extreme dilation of the pupils
in the agonies of death, is no certain sign of real death and of the
incapability of being revived, as maintained by Bouchut.
10. To cure epileptic attacks caused by anaemia, there is no
better method than that of renewing the supply of red blood.
17. The debilitating method of treating epilepsy, especially by
abstracting blood, should almost always be rejected.
- 18. The quantity of blood in the cranial cavity can by way of
experiment on the living subject be considerably increased or
diminished.
19. Hyperaemiain the cranial cavity is caused by releasing the
stoppage of circulation in the cervical arteries (arterial congestion), by tying the cervical veins (venous congestion), especially
by simultaneously dividing the cervical branches of the sympathetic nerve (venous arterial congestion), and lastly by tying the
trachea during inspiration (venous congestion by asphyxia).
ON EPILEPSY. 24:0
20. Anaemia in the cranial cavity is produced by haemorrhage
and by tying the cervical arteries (passive anaemia), as well as
by electric excitation of the vaso-motor nerves of the head (active
anaemia).
21. The quantity of blood contained in the cranial cavity after
the application of a ligature to the arteries is greater than after
haemorrhage; the anaemia as regards small arteries, the capillaries, and the smallest veins being always present to a greater
extent.
22. From the quantity of blood contained in the skull after
death, it is seldom possible to draw certain conclusions with respect to the quantity contained during life. The death-struggle
brings on numerous conditions altering the circulation of the
blood in the skull, and even in the corpse the quantity of blood
may still undergo alterations.
23. The phenomena of the incomplete epileptic attack can be
explained by alterations occurring in the cerebrum only; whilst
the phenomena of the complete attack presuppose an alteration
of the whole brain. Convulsions in epilepsy are justly styled
cerebral ones, and the spinal cord probably plays only the part
of a conductor, transferring the impetuses it receives from the
brain to the muscles.
24. Circumscribed anatomical alterations of the brain or alterations of protracted duration cannot be regarded as the proximate cause of epileptic attacks, but may cause epileptic affections
(dispose to epilepsy).
25. Pathological anatomy cannot give any explanation as to
the nature of epilepsy.
26. Suddenly withheld nutrition is only one of the causes by
which the brain is brought into that peculiar internal condition
"which is manifested in the form of an epileptic attack.
27. Arterial congestion of the brain, does not seem to be capable of producing any other symptoms than those of paralysis
(dizziness and apoplexy).
28. Venous congestion of the brain, as well as arterio-venous
congestion, brings about conditions which belong more to those
of apoplexy than to those of epilepsy, and are characterized byparalysis of the glottis, together with a slower respiration and
slight spasmodic symptoms.
29. Marshall Hall's sphagiasmus and trachelismus are not to
be regarded as a source of epileptic attacks, but laryngismus will
produce them. All theories are false which assert the epileptic
attack to be derived from a sudden determination of blood, whether active, passive, or mixed.
30. It is probable that certain forms of epilepsy result from a
spasm of the muscular coats of the cerebral arteries.
246 MODERN MAGICIANS AND MEDIOMANIACS.
31. The epileptic affection, which disposes to the attacks, occupies either the whole of the brain, or some districts only, and
by it the brain is brought into that altered state on which the
epileptic attack is based.
32. The medulla oblongata, as being the part whence the nerves
causing the constriction of the glottis and the vaso-motor nerves
take their rise, seems frequently to be the spot from which
eclamptic and epileptic attacks proceed.
All who read the essays that we have thus briefly examined
will feel satisfied that the council of the New Sydenham Society
have acted most wisely in presenting them to their members, and
will feel under an obligation to Drs. Moore and Browne for the
able manner in which the translations have been effected.
