The Asylums of Spain
======================

Art. I IT.?
.f
To Spain belongs tlie honour of having first in Europe erected or;
set apart buildings for the special reception and protection of the
insane. So early as the year 1410, a lunatic asylum was founded
at Valencia, and one was established at Saragossa in 1-125.. Beforethe close of the century au asylum.was also opened in each of the
cities of Seville, Valladolid, and Toledo,?in the two former in
14-36, in the latter in 1483. The foundation of these asylums
was a work of the Church, and its execution was determined by
feelings of compassion for the sufferings of the miserable insensates, who at that time were to be found in the streets of every
city, a butt to the thoughtless and cruel provocations of thepopulace.
The events which more immediately influenced the formation of
the first asylum, that of Valencia, the establishment of which
gave the cue, so to speak, to the rest of the peninsula, are surmised rather than known. Dr Morejon, in his bibliographical
history of Spanish medicine, expresses the opinion, that the civil
wars which desolated the kingdom of Valencia at the beginning
of the 15th century, occasioned, from the suffering they gave rise
+ Des Asiles d'Alienes en Espagne, reclierches historiques et medicates. Par leDr Desmaisons, Directeur Medeciu du.Castel d'Andorte.
to among the people, a large increase in the number of lunatics;
ftnd that the excessive and glaring misery of these unfortunates
tendered necessary the foundation of the asylum. Dr Desmaisons
Points out, however, that the civil dissensions to which Dr.
Morejon refers originated at the death of KingD. Martin I., which
occurred in 1410, one year subsequent to the opening of the
asyluni.

The popular account of the origin of the asylum recites that
?ne Juan Gilaberto Joffre, a brother of the order of Mercy, as he
was wending his way to church in order to preach there, on the 24th
of February, i409, encountered in his way a band of children who
"Were pestering an insensate. Grieved by the outrages to which
the unhappy individual was exposed, the monk conceived the idea
of exhorting the faithful to found a hospital in which lunatics
could be received and protected, and this he did with such good
effect as quickly to enlist the sympathies of the citizens, and to
carry his object.

Dr Desmaisons objects even to this account. He remarks that
it is improbable that a novel institution, such as the first lunatic
refuge at Valencia, could be, as it were, improvised?that it could
result from a fortuitous circumstance. Seeking, therefore, for
fuller information respecting Juan Gilaberto Joffre, he quickly
found a confirmation of his doubts, and ascertained that the popular legend contained bat a glimpse of the truth.
A monk of the order of Mercy, Fray Marcos Salmeron, in a
work entitled, Historical and Political Records of the Services
which illustrious Members of his Corporation have rendered to
the Kingdom of Spain, and printed at Valencia in 1G4G, relates,
in a notice of Juan Gilaberto Joffre, that he was eminent for his
virtues and great eloquence, and that he had been particularly
moved by the sufferings of the lunatics he saw wandering in the
streets of Valencia. " He aspired without ceasing," writes the historian, " for the time when a refuge could be provided for them, in
which they could be solaced and their sad malady cured, and his.
Zeal caused him to seek ardently the means of realizing this project bv charity." In depicting the brother Juan's great work as
the consequence of thoughtful and constant meditation, the
Spanish historian seems to give a much more likely account of
the origin of the asylum of Valencia, than that which attributes
it to a casual emotion, however lively that might have been.
Dr Desmaisons adds to this statement a very ingenious suggestion. The Brothers of Mercy, of which association Juan.
Gilaberto Joffre was a member, were partly a religious, partly
a military order, which had been founded at the Court of Arragon,
Rnd which was devoted to the redemption of Christian prisoners
from the Infidels. To this duty the order added, by permission, the
practice of physic?n privilege which the members exercised in
common with the Brothers of Saint Jean de Dieu, long after the
order of Mercy had been merged in other religious corporations.
Now the avocations to which the Brothers of Mercy were devoted,
bringing them into contact with the Mussulmen of Spain and
Africa, perhaps more than any other charitable corporation, it is
reasonable to suppose that they would become acquainted with
the existence and organization of those hospitals specially destined
for the insane, which had, even at that time, existed for ages in
the East. It may be surmised, therefore, that from this source
Juan Gilaberto JofTre and his brotherhood obtained their first
notions concerning the sequestration of the insane, and that in the
erection of lunatic asylums, the Spaniards, to use the words of
M. Quinet, " copied yet cursed the spirit of Islamism at the same
time." 

The success which had attended Juan Gilaberto Joffre's eloquence
in Valencia was confirmed by the assent of King D. Martin I.,
obtained the 29th November, 1409, and in the year following
letters apostolic, promulgated at Barcelona on the 26th of February,
by Benedict XIII.,t (an Arragonese pope) authorized the construction of a chapel, and the appurtenances of the asylum, and the
formation of a cemetery. For these purposes a house and garden
were bought situated near the gate of Torrent, which has been since
luiown as the Madmen's Gate?la Porte cles Fous.
Seeing, therefore, a Spanish pope favouring an exclusively
Spanish association for the care and treatment of lunatics, at the
commencement of the 15th century, to Spain and the Spaniards
must be ceded the honour of having organized the most ancient
lunatic asylum of Europe.

Dr Desmaisons, upon whose authority we give these details,
does not himself, however, yield this credit to Spain, without a
slight reservation in favour of France, which is supremely amusing
from the naive national vanity which it displays. Over the
entrance of the Valencia asylum is, or was, engraved in the
Limousin dialect, the inscription : Spital de Nostra-Dona Sancta
Maria del Innocents. This recals to memory the intimate relations which, at the time when the inscription was written, existed
between the south of France and Spain. Moreover, the true
orthography of the name Joffre is doubtful. Historians are
ignorant as well of the birthplace of the monk as of the condition
of his family. But it is known that he visited the northern por* " SubjugutSs au dedans par l'esprit de l'lslamisme, dans le moment meme oh
lis lui livraient au dehors une guerre acharn^e, ils le maudissaient et le copiaient
en meme temps."?Edgard Quinet, GBuvres Completes, t. xi. p. 222. Paris. 1857.
f The antipape Benedict, the fiery Cardinal de Luna, relapsed from Charles YI.
of France, of whom the remembrance cannot be separated from the history of
insanity.?Desmaisons.
turn of France, in the exercise of his sacred duties, and that there
his eloquence was attended with success. From these circum-.
stances Dr Desmaisons thinks that " he is authorized to suppose,
at least he loves to believe, that in this matter France has given
to Spain, in the Brother Jean Gilbert Joffre, a worthy successor
ol IranQais Pierre Nolasque, the founder of the order of Mercy !"
is France so poor in men who have discovered a large outlet for
their charity in ameliorating the state of lunatics, that even one
?f her physicians can begrudge to Spain a solitary honour in this
respect, on grounds so slight as to be all but visionary ?
Not only, however, does Spain claim the credit of having created
the first lunatic European asylum, but it would appear also as if to
her was due also the first introduction of these institutions into other
pountries of Europe. The earliest special asylum for the insane
in Home, and probably in Italy, was, we learn from Cardinal
?Morichini, founded in 1548, and that it was the work of three
Spaniards, Fernando Ruiz, Chaplain of Saint Catherine de Farrari,
and Diego aud Angelo Bonne. Towards the close of the 14th
century, the leper-liouses of Italy had, as they became less encumbered by the diminution of leprosy, been made use of for the
sequestration of lunatics. But when, at the termination of the loth
century, syphilis broke out for the first time or appeared in a
greatly aggravated form, this custom was put an end to. The
claim then which Italy advances to the honour of being the first
European country in which special lunatic asylums were instituted
naust be set aside in favour of Spain. " Italy," writes Dr Desmaisons, " offered assistance to the lunatic in hospitals destined to
the most disgusting affections, or accorded aid with extreme parsimony, when Spain had opened asylums for these unfortunates."
(P- 112.) When Italy had founded establishments for the insane,
doubtless her example chiefly contributed to their being adopted
Jn other countries of Europe, but Italian authors have erred in
asserting that the lunatic asylums of Italy were the first refuges
?f the kind in Europe. These authors have unwittingly taken the
first date of some of the leper-liouses or other charitable institutions subsequently transformed into lunatic asylums, as the original date of the secondary use to which the buildings had been
pnt, and thus fallen into error. It may easily be shown, Dr.
Desmaisons tells us, that, for example, the Hospital of Bonifazio
at Florence, the origin of which dates from the 14th century, was
not made use of, in any of its dependencies, to receive the lunatics
-Tuscany, until four centuries after its foundation.

H Spain began the good work thus well, she has lost her vantage-ground over Europe, and until very recently she has lagged
greatly, and she still lags in the rear. Although, according to F.
?Marcos Salmeron, Juan Gilaberto Joffre had in view the cure as
well as the protection of the insane, when the asylum of Valencia was established, yet, as we have already said, the association which he formed to carry out his views was actuated chiefly
by charitable feelings. Hence we find that in 1414 permission
was sought from Pope Ferdinand XIII., and in 1414 and 1416
from the kings of Arragon, D. Ferdinand I. and D. Alonso V.,
that the association might act in concord with the members of
other societies, in performing additional charitable offices, such as
burying bodies which had been abandoned, and accompanying
criminals to the scaffold. These duties, however meritorious they
might be, and particularly in the midst of the bloody civil strife
that then prevailed, had the effect of distracting the disciples of
?Toffre from the special mission which at first they had adopted.
Thus at the very beginning the work of charity in favour of
lunatics was nipped in its growth. The special character of the
asylum being lost, its subsequent development was shackled, and
in 1512, the primitive buildings of the Valencia Asylum having
been destroyed by fire, the ancient house of the Innocents was
annexed to the general hospital of the city. From this moment
the progress of the asylum was arrested. It suffered from the
heart-burnings which existed between the lay and clerical elements of the government of the hospital?this being divided between the chapter and municipality of the city. In 1785,
Charles III. gave a preponderance to the laity in the superintending committee of the hospital, but the lunatics gathered no
advantage from this change, from that habit of economizing at
the expense of the patients, by diminishing as much as possible
the number of officers and attendants, to which all municipalities, as Dr Desmaisons well remarks, seem to be " instinctively
carried."

Since 1849, the direction of the lunatic department of the
hospital has rested of right, and in principle, with the central government at Madrid, and of the other departments with local
committees. It does not appear that the insane have derived
much benefit from this change, but rather that the defects in the
organization of the asylum have become more apparent than
when it was entirely under a provincial administration.
For the rest, the present building is defective in its structure,
as is the case with all the older asylums, and contracted courts and
edifices, and want of surrounding land?faults almost inseparable from a hospital constructed within a crowded city?interpose a bar to the effective treatment or the proper care of
lunatics.

It is needless to describe in detail the causes which led to the
decadence or comparative barrenness of results in other ancient
lunatic foundations of Spain. The asylums were charitable reTHE ASYLUMS OF SPAIN. 1G7
fuges or prisons, and defects of construction and government led
to similar evil consequences and abuses as occurred in the older
lunatic establishments of the rest of Europe. A few facts of
interest respecting the Spanish asylums may, however, be noted.
The founder of the asylum of Yalladolid, D. Sanche Velasquez
de Cuellar, in his testament dated the 13th February, 1436, formally excludes from participating in the benefits of the building
those suffering from the dementia of old age. It is curious tq
observe in the very infancy of European asylums, a founder thus
obviating in no small degree one of the chief causes which neutralizes the utility of our great public asylums at the present
day, the encumbrance of the wards with incurable cases.
In 1849, the ancient asylum of Yalladolid was vacated, the
patients being transferred to a handsome mansion, surrounded by
extensive gardens, outside the city. In 1840 the primitive
building, which was situated in an insalubrious locality within
the city, and utterly insusceptible of improvement, contained
twenty-four patients. At the close of 1852, the number of
lunatics in the new asylum had increased to 213?147 males and
CO females! This is a marked illustration of the advantages
which a community derives from the better administration of its
lunatic asylums.

It is worthy of remark, that the provinces pay five reals per
day for each patient sent by them to the Yalladolid asylum. But
if the number of lunatics from any province exceed six, the
amount of payment is diminished to four or even three reals per
day, the latter being the minimum rate. This arrangement is
thought to encourage the sequestration of pauper lunatics when
needful.

The ancient asylum of Saragossa was destroyed by fire in the
night of the 4th August, 1808, during the siege of the city.
The archives, valued at upwards of 200,000?., were lost in the
flames. The present asylum was erected in 1819, and it forms a
dependency of the general hospital. The building approximates
m character to a gaol rather than a hospital, and is exceedingly
unfitted to effect the objects for which it was constructed.
A train of the lunatics detained in the asylum of Saragossa
still assist, or at least did so very lately, in the great religious
solemnities observed in the city. The unhappy patients are clad
m a habit partly green and partly brown, and a bib is suspended
from the neck in front. They are accompanied by a drummer,
who beats his instrument as they advance, and they are preceded
by a banner, of which the colours, blue bordered with brown,
signify symbolically patience in adversity.

The Saragossa asylum is devoted to the care of lunatics of the
wealthier classes, as well as of those who are indigent. This,
indeed, would seem to "be the usual arrangement of the Spanish
asylums. It is also the approved one, judging from the rescript
for the model asylum at Madrid, to which we shall presently
have more particularly to refer.

Dr Desmaisons condemns strongly the custom of receiving the
two classes of patients into the same asylum, and under the same
roof. He considers that under such circumstances it is almost
impossible to make the arrangements which are requisite for the
proper occupation of the lunatics, with due regard to their social
condition and previous habits of life. We cannot either in the
in- or out-door exercises assimilate the duties assigned to the
higher and lower classes of patients, while by placing them
under one roof we are apt to contract the space which should be
at our disposal for each class, without any advantages being obtained which at all compensate for the inconveniences and discomforts to which the system gives rise, and for the injury which
the defects arising from it may occasion to the patients. From
the evidence given as to the working of the chartered asylums in
Scotland, before the Parliamentary Committee on Lunatics which
sat last session, it would seem as if an almost similar opinion
might be expressed with regard to those institutions, notwithstanding that they have all the advantages which skill and money
can afford to them,* while this is far from being the case in the
Spanish asylums.

It is interesting to remark that the number of lunatics in the
Saragossa asylum were the same in 1859 as 1853. We have
?already noted the great increase in the number of patients in the
Yalladolid asylum coincidently with the introduction of great
improvements as well in the housing as in the care of the insane.
A similar occurrence has also been observed in connexion with
a considerable amelioration of the condition of the insane in the
asylum of Sancta Cruz at Barcelona. From this Dr Desmaisons
argues that the opinion of the rarity of insanity in Spain,
* " 1360. Does it (the state of the chartered asylums) give satisfaction both to
the friends of the poorer and richer patients to have them confined in one building,
although not associated together ??I think that there are many disadvantages in
having them under the same roof, as they are at Dundee.

"1361. What disadvantages do you refer to??I think one of the principal
disadvantages is, the requiring to have separate airing courts for both classes. They
are grouped round the asylum, and they are much smaller than they would otherwise be, from the necessity of having two sets of airing courts.
"1362. They do not meet even in their amusements??In any holiday amusements they meet, but not in the everyday routine of the asylum.
" 1363. What other disadvantages have you to mention??Private patients do
not generally like being under the same roof with paupers.

"1364. Is there any unwillingness on the part of the relatives of the richer
patients to place their relations in the same asylum with pauper patients ??I do
not think there is when the two buildings are separate."?Examination of Dr J.
Coxe, one of the Scotch Lunacy Commissioners.?Report, 1859.

which lias been expressed by several writers of authority, is
erroneous. In so far as this opinion was founded upon the
paucity and slight variation in number of the cases in the Spanish
asylums, the recent experience of the asylums of Yalladolid and
Barcelona clearly show that this is to be regarded simply as a
measure of the unfitness of those asylums for the reception and
treatment of the insane. As the state of the Spanish asylums
approximates more and more in character to those of central
Europe, France, and England, in all probability the seeming comparative freedom of Spain from insanity will vanish.
The present asylum of Toledo was erected in 1703. It is a
noble building in all its details except those which more immediately appertain to the uses for which it was designed. In this
respect the interior arrangements are highly defective and unsuited for the treatment of lunatics.
In Madrid the insane are cared for in the general hospital and
in a small asylum, furnishing accommodation for about seventy
patients, at Legana, in the environs of the city.

According to a Spanish authority, D. P. Rubio, the number of
insane under care in the different asylums of Spain, averaged, in
1847, one- only in every 7402 inhabitants. The same author estimates that the proportion of lunatics existing in the kingdom is
one in every JGG7 population.

Spain has recently become conscious of the fact that of late
years in her care of the insane she has lagged far behind the other
Christian nations of the continent. She now seeks to regain a
position more befitting the people who first in Europe made the
lunatic an object of special charitable treatment. On the 28th
of July last, a report on the present condition of the Spanish
asylums was addressed to her Majesty of Spain, by the Minister
of the Interior, Don Jose de Possada Herrara. From this report
we learn that all the existing asylums need great and costly
reforms and considerable sacrifices on the part of the State, and
none more so than the asylum at Legana. The pettiness of the
general arrangements of the building, its absolute want of water,
and its defective situation and construction, render it unworthy of
being the general establishment for the central provinces of the
Monarchy. We are told, likewise, that the sad spectacle which
has been presented for so long a time in the mad-houses of the
kingdom, in which all classification of the patients is impossible,
and in which no other treatment than perpetual seclusion, chastisement, and isolation can be generally had recourse to, is inconsistent with the honour of the nation, and can no longer be permitted, medicine having shown the practicability of a better and
more commendable state of things and one more consistent with
humanity. We learn further, that the law governing the benefi170 THE ASYLUMS OF SPAIN.
cent establishments of tlie kingdom, sets fovtli that six public
asylums shall be founded for the better care and treatment of the
insane in different parts of the kingdom. It is intimated also, that
the subsequent use, as a matter of economy, of the ancient
asylums, as places for the care of lunatics, will be determined by
the nature of the hygienic conditions and architectural arrangements of the buildings. Moreover, it is suggested that in fulfilment of the law already referred to, an asylum should immediately
be erected at Madrid, which might serve as a model for the other
provinces of the kingdom, when called upon in their turn to found
asylums. The Minister finally submitted to Her Majesty a
scheme for the construction of a model asylum, and it was decreed
that this plan should at once bo carried into effect.

The scheme thus submitted to Her Majesty and now promulgated is to be regarded as the culmination of Spanish notions on
the construction of lunatic asylums, and as such it possesses considerable interest. Before, however, proceeding to describe the
scheme, we would remark that if to the Church is to be attributed
the first establishment of lunatic asylums in Spain, so also to the
Church is probably to be assigned the cause of the unsatisfactory
state of the asylums of Spain at the present day. Medicine, by
no means, if we are to repose faith in the statements of travellers,
holds an eminent social position in that country. Not only is the
science at a discount with the people, but it is hampered and
down-trodden by the priesthood. The former may be fairly
assumed to have been chiefly influenced by the latter, and the
latter have brought the full energy of ecclesiastical power to bear
in cramping the energies of the doctor. We read of comparatively recent laws preventing the right teaching of medicine. In
the bickerings between physic and theology, the former always
must go to the wall, and even if the power of the priesthood has
been checked in the administration of lunatic asylums by the
strong hand of the law, physic has fared but little better for it,
for then it has been brought into contact in this matter with the
prejudices of the people, as represented by municipalities. But
we need not go to Spain for examples to show how often the prepossessions of corporations or local governments of any kind act
most fatally upon the utility of lunatic asylums. It would not
perhaps be difficult to prove that to the unfortunate tone assumed
by the Church in Spain towards physic is chiefly to be attributed the
fact that the Spaniards have taken a longer time than any other
Christian European nation to learn that a lunatic asylum should
be a hospital for the cure, not a prison for the detention of the
insane?that it should be a medical institution, not merely a
charitable refuge. There are many able and accomplished Spanish
physicians who have long seen with grief the state of their
country's asylums, but whose efforts for "their amelioration have
been futile from their inability to incite local authorities to
action,?for the -success which has attended the efforts of Dr.
D. E. Pi y Molist at Barcelona stands almost alone, the improvements at Valladolid being the work of the director of the asylum,
& priest, whose excellent example has been but too rarely
followed. The medical profession of Spain is guiltless, we
believe, of the disgraceful state which still, according to the
official account, characterizes the majority of the Spanish asylums.
To return to the scheme proposed by the Minister of the Interior. The Royal Decree instituted a public competition for the
erection of a model asylum, or Manicomia, as it is termed, the
plans to be designed in accordance with the subsequent programme and to be presented within ninety days after the promulgation of the decree.
The programme states that the population of the asylum would
consist of 500 lunatics of both sexes, and a due number of
officials and attendants, and sets forth the following requisites:?
The establishment to be divided into two principal and independent sections : the one to contain 250 women and the other an
equal number of men.

Each section to be sub-divided into two divisions : the first for
lunatic-boarders of the first and second class; the second for
paupers.

The boarders' division to have two quarters: the first for tranquil lunatics ; the second, for restless and filthy.
The pauper division to have four quarters: the first for tranquil lunatics; the second for the restless and dirty ; the third for
children and old people ; the fourth for criminals. This division
also to have attached to it an infirmary for the treatment of accidental or occasional maladies.

The 250 lunatics to be estimated thus:?

Boarders' division { f Xss ! ! ! ! ! CO} 100
( Adults 100 |
Pauper division < Children and old people . . 40 > 150
[ Criminals ...... 10 j
The distribution of the lunatics to be arranged as follows :?
?Boarders.?Quarter for the ) ^ | First class  30
calm . . . j \ Second class ? ? . . . 50
f Restless, first class . . 5
Quarter for the 1 ) Dirty, id. . . 3
restless and dirty ] " j Restless, second class . . 8
C. Dirty, id. . . 4
Paupers.?Quarter for the calm 86
Quarter for the restless and dirty ... 30
Quarter for children and old men ... 24
Quarter for criminals 10

Dispositions to be made for 20 restless and 10 dirty lunatics.

The general appurtenances of the asylum were to be regulated
in the following manner :?

I. The entrance to the asylum to have, (1) a spacious vestibule ; (2) an apartment for the porter ; (3) a waiting-room.
II. On the ground-floor, near the entrance, to be placed (1)
the quarters of the porter; (2) the apartments of the resident
physician, consisting of reception-room, cabinet, bed-chamber,
and two or more other rooms; (3) another compartment for the
manager, with rooms for officers.
III. A hall to be designed and decorated with care for important
receptions and for the commission ; also?

IV. A chapel, so situated as to render it easily accessible to
the lunatics from all quarters of the asylum, and arranged so that
they may take part in the religious exercises in places conveniently separated.
Y. As near as possible to the apartments of the resident physician, must be, (1) a room destined for a library; (2) another to
serve for a museum of pathological anatomy and phrenology, and
as a cabinet for physical and surgical instruments; (3) an amphitlieatre, light and airy, capable of containing 150 persons; (4)
a room for dissection, anatomical studies, autopsies, and experiments.
Required also?

YI. (1) A dispensary; (2) a chemical laboratory ; (3) a closet
for the principal dispenser; (4) rooms for his assistants during
their daily attendance ; (5) places for pharmaceutical stores.
VII. (1) Pantry; (2) cellars for the preservation of food and
liquids; (3) one or more poultry-yards; (4) a skinning yard; (5)
a corn-mill moved by horses, with its dependencies.

YIII. A depository, a general magazine for linen and clothing,
composed of two rooms, in addition to one for the clerk; (2) a
second, for mattresses and other objects of similar usage; (3) a
wash-house, and all its appurtenances; (4) another wash-house,
for the use of the boarders and the employes of the establishment;
(5) rooms for the finishing and mending of the linen and
clothing.

IX. Two halls for medical gymnastics.
X. Coal and fire-wood depots, so placed as to avoid all danger
of fire.
XI. Coach-houses, squares, shady places, parterres, kitchengardens, covered walks.
THE ASYLUMS OF SPAIN. 173
XII. Apartments: (1) For the presiding physician; (2)
two assistant physicians; (3) two almoners ; (4) the dispenser ;
(5) the manager ; (0) six clerks ; (employes cl Administration) ;
(7) two chief hospital attendants; (8) four second-rank ditto;
(9) a doorkeeper; (10) ten porters; (11) twenty attendants
of both sexes; (12) twenty servants, as gardeners, watchmen,
lor the use of wash-houses, &c.
XIII. A cemetery.
XIV. The portion of the edifice destined for the lunatics to have
but a ground and first floor; this latter to be surmounted with a
second, if needful, for the apartments of attendants and servants.
XY. Sinks, conduits, wells, pools, troughs, and reservoirs of
water to be conveniently distributed.

The appurtenances of the sections to be as follows :?
Each section to possess, (1) a vestibule; (2) a reception hall;
(3) a room for the porter of the section; (4) a consultation cabinet
for the physicians; (?*>) an apartment for the chief attendant;
(G) kitchen, with its necessary dependencies; (7) refectory for the
attendants and other servants; (8) gardens, covered and open
Walks, and courts corresponding to the section.

The appurtenances of the divisions to be in this wise :?
In each division (1) a reception hall; (2) a room for the porter ;
(3) a lingerie ; (4) a depository for linen and soiled vestments ;
(o) another for the utensils and other things belonging to the
division ; (6) an apartment for the clerk charged with the care of
the clothing and furniture.

Boarders division.?Male section: (a) Quarter for calm lunatics.
?In this quarter to be arranged : (1) a reception hall; (2) a parlour ; (3) thirty residences for boarders of the first class, and fifty
lor those of the second. The residences or pavilions of the
first-class boarders to be composed of a vestibule, a drawingr?om, a closet with alcoves, a dining-room, a dressing-room, and a
small bed-chamber for the attendant or domestic. Those for the
second-class boarders to consist of a parlour, a bed-chamber
"With alcoves, a dressing-room, and a bed-chamber for attendant or
domestic. Also, (4) a refectory for those who might wish to take
their meals together; (5) a common room ; (G) a room for billiards
aiid other games; (7) a reading-room ; (8) six bath-rooms.
(b) Quarter for restless and dirty lunatics.?This quarter to be
subdivided in such a manner that the residences destined for the
dirty patients shall be separate from those set apart for the
restless.

Required here: (1) A reception-room ; (2) a parlour; (3) twenty
1 evidences arranged in the same mode as those for the calm
patients. Of this number, six to be set apart for boarders of
the first class, and fourteen for those of the second ; (4) the
apartments destined for the dirty patients to be arranged alike
for the first and second class hoarders; (o) four bath-rooms;
(G) a common room, adjoining which must be a room for the
attendants.

Boarders division?Female sectiont (a) Quarter for calm lunatics.?This quarter to have : (1) a waiting-room ; (2) a parlour; (3)
the same number of apartments as in the male section, and arranged
in the same manner; (4) a refectory for the patients who wish
to take their meals together; (5) a recreation hall; (G) a workroom; (7) six bath-rooms.
(b) Quarter for restless lunatics.?The same arrangement to be
made in every respect as in the quarter for restless and dirty males.
Pauper division.?(a) Quarter for calm lunatics.?Each section
of this division, male ox female, to have the following arrangement;
(]) A reception hall; (2) a parlour; (3) dormitories to contain
twelve, eight, six, and four beds, and chambers for single beds.
The beds to be placed at least six feet the one from the other.
(4) Apartments contiguous to the lunatic dormitories to serve as
day and night rooms for the attendants, and so planned that they
can exercise a complete surveillance over the patients; (5) waterclosets ; (G) a refectory; (7) a school-room; (8) work-shops ; (9) a
common room ; (10) an infirmary consisting of two rooms, one to
contain twenty beds for medical cases, the other, ten for surgical;
(11) a neighbouring closet for the physician; (12) another closet,
well lit, for surgical operations ; (13) two rooms for the assistantphysician and superintendent nurse ; (14) eight bath rooms.
{b) Quarter for the restless and dirty.?Each of these quarters
(male or female) to have:??

(1) A reception-room ; (2) a parlour; (3) twenty cells for the
restless and furious, consisting each of a room and of an alcove
so disposed as to facilitate surveillance ; (4) ten cells for the dirty
lunatics, formed also of a room and an alcove. These cells to be
removed as much as possible from the twenty first named. (5)
Apartments for the attendants from which they can observe the
restless patients without being themselves seen ; (G) water-closets;
(7) a common room; (8) a work-room; (9) the same number of
bath-rooms as for the calm patients.

(c) Quarter for children and old men.?This quarter to be arranged in a similar manner to, and to have dependencies like
those of, the quarter for calm lunatics, regard being had to the
number of individuals already estimated for this category.
(cl) Quarter for criminals.?This quarter to consist of:?(1) an
apartment for the porter; (2) a parlour; (3) ten prison-cells
(cellides de surete) having no communication with one another,
and two sets of two or three rooms ; (4) apartments for the
keepers disposed so as to secure a rigorous surveillance; (5) a
common-room; (0) another room arranged for the physicians'
examinations and for the reception of declarations; (7) a garden
or court-yard for the promenades of tlie prisoners.

This is the scheme issued by the Minister of the Interior, and
is the latest phase of action in Spain on lunacy questions. The
model Manicomia is to he constructed on an estate the superficies
of which amounts to about 100 fanegas. The fanega is a measure
of 400 square fathoms arable, and of 500 pasture land.
