Foreign Psychological Literature
==================================

Our retrospect of Foreign Psychological Literature will embrace the
following subjects:?

1. On a Form of Paralysis of the Lower Extremities, prevalent in
part of the District of Allahabad.

2. On Puerperal Insanity.
3. On a Form of Cachexy peculiar to the Insane.
1. Notice of a Form of Paralysis of the Lower Extremities, extensively
prevailing in part of the District of Allahabad, produced by the use
of Lathy rus sativus as an article of food. By James Irving, M.D.
[The following paper is a highly-interesting and important contribution
to our knowledge of the physical degenerations of the human species]:?
In October, 185(5, Mr. Court, the Collector of Allahabad, when in
Pergunnah Barra, on the right bank of the Jumna, was very forcibly
struck by the number of lame persons whom he met in all directions.
On inquiry he found, in village after village, that there were several
cripples in each. He was also informed that the disease which, gave
rise to this lameness was of recent origin, and that it was attributed
by some of the people to their living on bread made from Tcessaree
ddl, and by others of them to the unwholesome qualities of the wind
and water of the Pergunnah ; the latter being vague causes of disease
ever ready to be brought forward by the natives in order to account
for any unusual or unintelligible sickness. Several cases of paralysis
of the lower limbs were sent from Barra to the Government Charitable Dispensary at Allahabad, for medical treatment. Unfortunately,
however, they got tired of the means employed for their cure, and left
after being in hospital for a month or five weeks. But, through the
kindness of Mr. Court, who accompanied me to Barra, I was enabled
to make some few inquiries into the nature and history of the malady.
Close to the village of Kheerut Gohanee, on the Sohagee Road, all
the lame people from surrounding villages were mustered for my
inspection on the morning of the Gth February, 1857. About fifty
men were present, all more or less lame in both legs ; some so much
disabled as to be hardly capable of motion, while others were only
slightly affected. One after another was questioned, and the following particulars were thus gathered. Without exception they all
stated that they had become paralytic during the rains; in most cases
suddenly so ; and several stated that it had been during the night.
Men who had gone to bed quite well had awoke in the morning feeU
ing their legs stiff and their loins weak, and from that day they had
never regained the use of their limbs. At first, the lameness was
trifling, and amounted only to unsteadiness of gait, and slight stiffness
chiefly of the knees. After a time the muscles of the thighs commenced to ache and feel weak, and also the loins. In no case did
those examined admit that they had then, or ever had, severe pain
either in their limbs or loins. They all ascribed their disease to their
feeding principally on Jcessaree ddl, but they seemed to imagine that,
in order to produce the malady, there must be another circumstance
superadded?viz., the deleterious quality of the water during the rains.
So far as could be gathered, it was not from drinking the water that
they fancied they took harm, but from getting wet by it. More than
one dwelt on the fact of his having been exposed to rain, either while
ploughing or tending sheep ; and others spoke of having been working
in jheels just before they became lame, at various periods embraced
between the months of July and October. The people were particularly examined,and questioned as to whether they had hadany symptoms
of fever, or of any other disease at the time that they lost the use of
their limbs, but they all said that they had not, and nothing was
discovered to lead to the inference that this was not strictly true. In
only one of many cases examined was enlargement of the spleen observed.

Many of the men appeared to be strong-looking, and their legs even,
in most cases, did not seem to be much wasted, if at all so. It was
stated by those afFected, as well as by several native officials who were
interrogated on the subject, that the complaint did not lead to other
diseases, nor tend to shorten life, unless indirectly by preventing the
individual working, and thus procuring proper means of support. It
was further stated, that the arms were never affected ; but that there
were some few cases of persons so greatly crippled that they could not
walk. It was added, that males were more often afflicted than females ;
and that ryots were more liable to the disease than the zemindars,
although the latter class was not exempt from it

Now it appears, from a return with which Mr. Court kindly
furnished me, that, in the month of January, 1857, there were, in
Pergunnah Barra, 2028 persons known to be affected with paralysis, or
in the proportion of one in every 31'30 of the population. These
figures disclose a terrible amount of removable disease, showing a
proportion of 3*19 per cent, of the population rendered useless by
a single disease ; for only a very few of those paralysed are able to do
any work in order to support themselves.

To show further the extent to which palsy of the lower limbs
prevails in Barra, the following facts may be stated. In the beginning
of 1857 there were 295 villages, and I had a return showing that there
were paralytics in 188 of these, thus leaving only 107 villages, scattered over an area of 158,493 acres, in which there were no cripples.
But, of the 107 villages in which there were no cripples, there were 58
uninhabited, so that in reality there were only 49 inhabited villages
in the whole pergunnah which were free from this species of paralysis.
Different villages, however, are affected in very different degrees
and proportions. Thus in Kuchra, with a population of 371, there
was only one paralytic, while in Soondurpore, with a population of
250, there were 39. In Puchiour, with a population of 375, there
was one. In Buschora Uperhar there were 353 inhabitants, of whom
33 were paralysed. In the village of Abheepoor there were, in January,
1857, 2(58 inhabitants, of whom 22 were palsied. In Loliera, out of
557 villagers, 8 were cripples, or one in 09. In Pooreli Gunga Chuk
there were 261 inhabitants, of whom 20 were palsied, or one in every
13. In Buradeh Zuptee, there were 148 inhabitants, 8 of whom were
affected, or in the proportion of one in 18. In Room there were 6
paralysed villagers of 198, or one in 33. In Buckla there was a population of 491, and only 4 lame, or one in 122.
The disease, as might be expected, is not confined to Barra, but
extends to Khairagurh, in Allahabad District, and to the adjoining
District of Banda. Mr. Mayne, the Collector of the latter, supplied
the following table and memorandum in reference to this malady :?
Pergunnah.

Chiboo
Total
Enohan
Total
Thannah.
Mow,
Burgah,
Rajapoor,
Kurwee,
Munikpoor,
Bimree,
No. of villages
in which
cripples are
known to
exist.
23
26
3
52
10
23
12
45
No. of
cripples.
64
131
5
200
14
72
34
120
Population of
Pergunnah.
80,170
82,313
Percentage.
0-249
0-139

" The greatest amount of cripples in pergunnah Chiboo, is to be found in
Burgah, which is composed entirely of villages in the hills. In Mow, where
the country is less hilly, the numbers decrease, and in Ilajapoor, where there
are no hills, we have none at all. The causes are' given as gatheea, baiee,
gurhun, beeadh, shukembad, gutteea, adhung. The same remarks apply to
pergunnah Enohan. Thannah Munikpoor is entirely in the hill country, and
the cripples are there more numerous. Thannah Bimree is less hilly, and
has less cripples. Kurwee is in the flat country, and contains hardly any
cripple."

When Mr. Mayne says that the causes are given as gutteea, &c., I
presume he alludes to the native names by which this particular kind
of palsy is known in the Banda District.

Before alluding to the cause of this form of paralysis, it may be as
well to glance at the physical aspect of Barra, and the circumstances
connected with it likely to produce sickness. In passing through this
part of the country, it appears a vast swamp. One is struck not only
by the great number of jheels, but also by the numerous tanks that
are visible in all directions. These tanks, moreover, have generally
one side, or part of a side, level with the surrounding ground, and are
intended to dra:n the contiguous fields and render them arable. There
are several low ranges of hills covered with large blocks of stone. The
village of Barra stands high, and I was told that, looking down from
it in the rains, nothing is visible but one vast sheet of water on all
sides. This was the case so late as the month of December, in the
year 1856. The soil of Barra is a stiff marl. It appears to take up
water readily, and to retain it for a long time. In the liot weather it
dries and splits into deep and wide fissures. I examined numbers of
bricks made in different parts of the pergunnah, and found that none
of them had the ring of good brick, when struck. They were easily
broken, and a fracture generally showed numerous small calcined
masses, chiefly of lime. There is a strong saline impregnation of the
soil which shows itself by efflorescence on the surface. Lime made
with the water soon crumbles away.

In March, 1856, some of the water from a well which was said to
be poisonous to any animal that drank of it, was sent to the Chemical
Examiner to Government for analysis, in consequence of a law-suit
then pending in reference to the closing of the said well, on account of
the deleterious qualities of its water. He reported that the water
contained " no absolutely poisonous ingredient, but it holds in solution
so large a quantity of saline matter that it would prove very deleterious to any animal habitually drinking it." He further stated that
the saline ingredients consisted of Sulphates, Carbonates, and Chlorides
of Lime, Magnesia, and Soda. Water is found very close to the surface.
In several wells examined in February, it was only six feet, and in
the rains it is said to rise within one foot of the surface of the
ground.

The people of Barra appear to be very poor, and signs of their
poverty are everywhere visible. The villages look dilapidated, and
many of the houses are unoccupied. I saw no horses nor camels,?not
even a common bullock cart. The bullocks that one does see, ploughing or carrying loads, are wretched, half-starved looking animals. The
area of Barra is 158,493 acres, and the population 63,490, which gives
an average of 256 to the square mile. But the general population of
the North-West Provinces, according to the last Census, is at the rate
of 420 tc the square mile, and in the district of Allahabad generally,
it is 493 to the square mile.

As has been stated, the paralytic symptoms which prevail so extensively in Barra are, by the natives, very generally attributed to their
making large use of kessaree dal,?the Lathyrus sativus of English
botanists ; and it is perhaps one of the most remarkable circumstances
connected with the malady, that the people should be so fully persuaded
that in eating this grain they eat poison, and that yet notwithstanding
they have continued, and will continue to do so, from generation to
generation.* Kessaree dal is not unlike gram, and is common enough
* Mr. Court, Collector of Allahabad, in a letter to Government on this subject,
writes:?"It will be an object with me to discourage as much as possible the
cultivation of Kessaree Dal, and the employment of that vetch as food. But I
fear that this will have but little effect on the people. They all ascribe the disease
to eating it, and yet they live upon it. The fact is they cannot help themselves.
They must either eat it or die of starvation. In the highlands of the pergunnah,
wheat will not grow ; cotton is grown in the khareef; gram and linseed in the
rubbee ; but the staple produce of khareef harvest is the kodoo ; of the rubbee,
kessaree. There are other causes for this besides that of the soil being unsuited
for wheat, &c. The pergunnah is particularly liable to disaster. Too much rain is
as destructive to the better description of crops as too little, and as in that as in
in most parts of India. It is frequently sown along with wheat, or
barley and cut green as fodder for cattle. In Barra the Jcessaree dal
is ground and made into bread. It is sometimes mixed with other
grains, such as barley ; but is more generally taken alone, the people,
in fact, not being able to afford anything else. It is the cheapest
grain procurable, and forms the chief support of the people from March
till October. On the 7th February, 1857, in the bazaar at Barra,
wheat sold at the rate of fourteen seers to the rupee, while Jcessaree
dal was at the rate of twenty-two per rupee. It grows without labour
or trouble, and on damp swampy ground that will bear no other crops.
The land is merely ploughed slightly once, and the seed thrown in ; or
the plant sows its own seed, which germinates freely next year without further attention or care. The moist nature of the soil of Barra
should be noted in connexion with the production of this poisonous
Lathyrus ; for it is stated by Loudon?in speaking of Lathyrus cicera
causing paralysis of the lower limbs, in those who live on bread partly
made of it, in some continental states?that the plant grown on a
strong moist soil is more injurious than that cultivated on one which
is dry and light.*

That use of kessaree dal as an article of food is apt to lead to
paralysis of the lower limbs appears to be ver}r generally known to the
inhabitants of many parts of India. Dr K. W. Kirk, in his
Topography of TJpper Sindh, says :?

" My attention was first attracted to it [Paralysis] as follows: a villager
brought liis wife, a woman of about thirty years of age, to my hospital, with
paralysis of her lower extremities; she had been so ailiicted for the last four
years. I asked whether she had had a fall or a blow to cause the disease.
' Oh,' said the man, ' it is from kessaree ; we are very poor, and she was obliged
to eat it for five months on end !' I had never heard of such effects before
from any grain, and asked whether it was good of its kind. Finding it was so,
I sent the mau into the bazaar to bring me a handful, which I afterwards
showed to some respectable natives, and was told that disease from its use is
very common all over the country. The villager above alluded to said, that
if they had sowed a better kind of grain it would have been plundered by the
Belouches from the hills, but they would not take this. I did not enter a
village in Sindh where this kessaree was not to be found in the bazaar, and
daily used by great numbers of poor people, nor where several were not rendered most helpless objects by the use of it. Their general health seemed
good, however, their only complaint being that they had no power in their
legs, but they moved about by lifting themselves on their arms. All natives
know that this dal is a poison, and eat it only because it is cheap, thinking
that they can in time save themselves from its consequences."
Colonel Sleeman states, that in part of the Saugor Territories in
1829, and two succeeding years, the wheat crop failed from various
reasons, and during these three years the kessaree remained uninjured,
other pergunnahs bordering on the hills, hail-storms are very frequent. The kessaree grows in all seasons. It requires little or no culture ; it varies in luxuriousness of growth only according to the season, and affords the only certain provision
of life. As the people are at present circumstanced, they have, in real truth, no
option.

* Encyclopedia of Plants, p. 620. Taylor on Poisons, p. 536.
and thrived with great luxuriance. In consequence it formed the only
food of the people during the three years of famine. " In 1831, they
reaped a rich crop of it from the blighted wheat fields, and subsisted
upon its grain during that and the following years, giving the stalks
and leaves only to their cattle, In 1833 the sad effects of this food
began to manifest themselves. The younger part of the population of
this and the surrounding villages, from the age of thirty downwards,
began to be deprived of the use of their limbs below the waist, by
paralytic strokes; in all cases sudden, but some more severe than
others. About half of this village, of both sexes, became affected
during the year 1833-34, and many of them have lost the use of their
lower limbs entirely, and are unable to move. Since the year 1834 no
hew case has occurred, but no person once attacked had been found to
recover the use of the limbs affected." He further adds, that " many
of those he saw were fine-looking young men, of good caste and respectable family. They stated that their attack had come on suddenly,
often while the person had been asleep, and without any previous
warning. Males were said to be more subject to the disease than
females. They believed that both horses and bullocks fed on Jcessaree
lost the use of their limbs."?(Sleeman s Rambles and Recollections
of an Indian Official, vol. i. p. 134.) Dr Thomas Thomson also, in
his book of Travels in the Himalayas, mentions instances of paralysis
caused by the use oI' Lathyrus sativus which he had observed in Thibet.

I received the following information as to the prevalent ideas of the
people of this part of the country in reference to Jcessaree dal from a
very intelligent educated native, the late Pursidh Narain Sing, a tehseeldar in the Allahabad District.* The lameness, he writes, that
results from the use of Jcessaree dal, is supposed by the natives to be
a mixture of palsy and rheumatism. Living on this particular grain
is supposed to be the predisposing, and exposure to'cold, rain, and damp
weather, the exciting cause of the disease. He adds, " the bhoosa (or
chaff) of this grain may be given to cows and bullocks without harm,
but such is not the case with horses, who are affected (in consequence
of eating it) with what is called by natives Icoorlcooree. I do not
know the English term for it. He describes the symptoms of this
complaint in the horse, and both from the name he gives above, and
from the description, there is little doubt that he alludes to colic, or
gripes, an affection likely enough to result from this or any other indigestible food, and which would result independent of any specific
action of this grain on the horse. Colonel Sleeman, as before noted,
had been informed that Jcessaree dal caused loss of power of the limbs
in both horses and bullocks. Pursidh Narain Sing further informed
me, that " the natives consider Jcessaree dal to be void of all nourishment, and they declare it to have a peculiar effect on the lower part
* This man was Tehseeldar of Hundya, and was one of the very very few native
officials at this place who, really and in earnest, stuck to us during the rebellion.
He did so from the very first to the very last. For having gone to Cawnpore along
with General Neil, he was sent to Bithoor with a party of Mehter police for the
purpose of re-establishing order, and was there attacked by a large band of rebels,
and cruelly put to death.
of the spine. It is also said that Tcessaree grain makes the system
susceptible of catching other diseases, such as scrofula, particularly in
Patna District."

In Europe also, paralysis of the lower limbs has been observed to
follow the use of Latliyrus sativus as an article of food. Thus Don, in
the Gardener's Dictionarjr, says, that the flour of this plant, mixed with
wheat flour in half the quantity, makes very good bread, but alone
produces surprising rigidity of the limbs in those who use it for a continuance. In the same quarter of the globe similar effects have also
been observed to follow the eating of other kinds of grain produced by
the same great natural order of plants, the Fabiacese?to which the
Latliyrus sativus belongs; as well as other species of the same genus.
Thus Dr Taylor alludes to Latliyrus cicera and JSrvum JErvilia (bitter
vetch) as occasionally rendering bread poisonous. In some part of
the Continent, a bread is made from the flour of the Latliyrus, which
is so injurious in its effects, that the use of it has frequently caused its
prohibition by law. Loudon states, that when mixed in equal parts
with wheaten flour it makes a good-looking bread, which, however,
occasionally gives rise to weakness of the knees and spasmodic contractions of the muscles. Cattle and birds, when fed on the seeds, are
said to become paralysed. A more recent example of the poisonous
effects of Latliyrus cicera flour is furnished by M. Vilmorin ; he
remarked that " the use of this bread for a few weeks produced complete paralysis of the lower extremities in a young and healthy man.
Six or seven individuals of the same family who had eaten it suffered
more or less from similar symptoms, and one had died. A physician
who practised in the district remarked that paralytic affections were
very common among the poor, who subsisted on this bread, while they
rarely occurred among the better classes. When the Latliyrus flour
formed one-twelfth part, no inconvenience was observed to attend its
use; in a proportion greater than this it becomes injurious; and when
it amounted to one-third part, the effects might be serious." (Ann.
d. Hyg. Avril 1847, p. 409?Taylor on Poisons, p. 536.) Dr Lindley
also states, that the seeds of LJrvum Lrvilia, mixed with flour and
made into bread, produce weakness of the extremities, especially of the
lower limbs, and render horses almost paralytic. (Veqetable Kingdom,
2nd Edit. p. 548.)

As to the treatment of cases of paralysis caused by the use of
Latliyrus sativus, I have little to say from practical experience. About
a dozen cases have come under my observation at the Dispensar}', but
most of them disliked the restraint and the means of cure employed,
and left after they had been patients for a month or five weeks. In
some strychnine was tried ; in others blisters to the loins frequently
repeated ; in others tonics. To all I gave generous diet. Two seemed
to be somewhat benefited, and could walk better ; and in one case the
improvement was such, that a man who formerly could only walk
with the aid of two sticks could after a time proceed without any
assistance. He was under treatment at the time of the rebellion in
June, 1857, when the Dispensary was burnt down by the "poor natives,"
for whose use it had been built and maintained by Government. What
seemed t-o me of most use were tonics and generous diet, together with
the application of occasional blisters.

The natives of Barra do not appear to have any kind of rational
treatment. They rub the lower extremities with various liniments, of
which one is composed of oil, garlic juice, and opium. They fancy
that eating pigeon's flesh is of use. It was stated to Mr. Court that
this affection was of recent origin in Barra; but on asking a native
official who had known the purgunnah for twenty years past, I was
informed that the disease had, to his knowledge, always existed;
although he thought that of late it had become more common; and
villages in which formerly there were no cripples now contained several.
?Indian Annals of Medical Science, July, 1859.

2. Observations upon Puerperal Insanity. By Richard Guxdry,
M.D., Assistant Physician to the Southern Ohio Lunatic Asylum.
[In a very able and interesting paper, Dr Gundry has elaborately
analysed fifty-six cases of puerperal insanity, and compared the results
of his own experience and research with those recorded by other observers. He divides the puerperal state into?
1. The period of gestation ; including both conception and delivery.
2. The period extending about two months from delivery, during
which the involution of the uterus is completed, and the function of
lactation is thoroughly established.

3- The period of lactation, including weaning and the changes
induced by the decline and cessation of the lacteal secretion.
The following important data are extracted from this paper :?]
Proportion of Cases of Puerperal Insanity in Asylums.?In an
analysis of the causes of insanity in 11,762 insane women, reported
from fourteen hospitals for the insane in the United States, 1050 are
noted as occurring during the puerperal period ; or nearly 1 in 11 insane
females. The reports of foreign hospitals for the insane would doubtless tell the same story. During five years one-eighth of the females
' admitted into Bethlem (London) were subjects of puerperal insanity.
At Salpetriere a twelfth, and during some years a tenth, were of the
same nature. The experience of these two metropolitan hospitals is
thought by Dr Tuke to be above other institutions. He estimates that
in most English asylums one-fourteenth to one-twentieth of the females
admitted is the proper proportion. The results of a careful examination of the cases given above do not enable me to concur with this
opinion, but exactly agree with the deductions from the experience of
Bethlem and Salpetriere, and it may be questioned whether they
represent fully the proportion chargeable to this cause. Esquirol met
in private practice with a still greater relative number of cases, and
this has been the experience of several eminent practitioners who have
had abundant opportunities for observation. From various sources we
derive the following statistics on this subject.

Number of Insane Females.
Puerperal
Cases.
14 American Asylums . . .
Reported by Dr McDonald
? ,, M. Parchappe
,, ,, M. Seller . . .
,, ? Hanwell Asylum
? ,, M. jMittivie . .
,, ,, M. Esquirol .
? ,, Bethlem Hospital
11,762
691
596
97
703
242
1119
899
1050
49
33
11
79
9
92
111
Totals.
16,109
1434

According to which table, of every 100 insane women, nearly 9 became so in consequence of the puerperal condition in some of its stages.
On the other hand, the records of lying-in hospitals show that a very
small proportion of the whole number of women confined become
insane. In the Westminster Lying-in Hospital, according to Dr.
Reed, only 9 out of 8500 delivered there were attacked. In Queen
Charlotte's Lying-in Hospital, in 2000 cases there were eleven who
became insane. Other institutions of a similar nature furnish like
results. It must be recollected, however, that the time spent in
a lying-in hospital after delivery is usually very short, and does
not include the period of lactation most productive of mental
disease.

Analysis of Fifty-six Cases.?Age.?The age at which insanity first
appeared in these cases, was as follows :?

Under 20 years of age

? 25 ?
>> 30 ,,
>> 3j) ,,
? 40 ?
45
Totals
Cases.
3
18
11
13
56
Ratio,
5-36
32'14
19*64
23*21
14*29
5-36
100.

It will be seen that from 20 to 25, and from 30 to 35, the proportion
is much larger than at any other period ; but this might have been
expected, so far as the first period is concerned ; for the proportion of
females living at that age in the United States greatly exceeds that
of any other period, excepting less than 20 years of age. So far as any
conclusion can be drawn from such limited data, it points to the period
of life between 30 and 35 as the time most prolific of puerperal
insanity. Many of the cases in our survey did not come under
observation during the first attack. We must therefore inquire the
age at which the attack (herein alluded to) was developed:

Between 20 and 25 in 9 cases.
>t 25 ,, 30 ,, 15 ,,
,, 30 ,, 35,, 16 ,,
,, 35 ,, 40,, 11 ,,
Between 40 and 45 in 3 cases.
>> 45 ,, 50 ,, 2 ,,
Total . . 56
And in this connection we must also take into account the number
of attacks suffered. Thus, it was?
The 1st attack in 37 cases.
? 2nd ? ? 10 ?
? 3rd ? ? 4 ?
The 4th attack in 4 cases.
No. unknown *? 1 ,,
Total. . . 56
"We shall more full understand the influence of age by ascertaining
the periods at which each of these attacks occurred :?
Pekiods.
Less than 20 years.
>> ? 25 ,, .
>> >> 30 ,, .
? ? 35 ? .
>> >> 40 ,,
? >> 45 ,,
?? 50 ,. .
Totals ,
<0
S s
37
Of two attacks.
1 st 2nd
10
10
Of three attacks.
1st 2nd 3rd
Of four attacks.
1st 2nd 3rd 4th
^ O
a

The history of the 55 persons, therefore, embraces 85 different
attacks of insanity, of which more than one-half occurred between 25
and 30 years of age; while taking those only who had one attack, the
period from 30 to 40 furnishes more than one-half. Whether the
inference to be drawn from this, that those attacked more early are
more liable to a recurrence of the disease, is warranted by the other
circumstances of the cases, will afterwards be adverted to. One case
of the 5G not included in the above analysis had suffered from several
attacks (the exact number not being known to me), of which the first
took place before 25 years, and the last at 32 years of age; from all of
which she perfectly recovered.

Occupation.?The influence of occupation receives but feeble illustration from this series of cases. All classes seem equally liable.
Neither riches, with the luxury that attends, nor poverty, with its
supposed exemption from enervation, can claim any exemption.
Civil Condition.?As to their civil condition very little can be
said. 51 patients were married, and 2 single women. Esquirol
remarked that the number of single persons becoming mothers, who
are afflicted with puerperal insanity, bears a large proportion to the
married. Of 92 cases reported by him, G3 were married and 29
single. We might expect, a ?priori, that if moral causes exerted so
preponderating an influence in the production of insanity as many
writers assert, a larger number of those unfortunate women who have
home illegitimate offspring would be found subjects of this disease
than the statistics of insanity in any country exhibit.
Hereditary Transmission. ? How far does hereditary tendency
display itself in cases of this description ? This is a difficult question
to answer correctly, for no point is more assiduously concealed by the
friends of parties than the existence of any hereditary taint. Where
collateral relatives have been insane, I have included them in my
estimate, as leading to the surmise of a taint in the common ancestry,
in the absence of precise information; though such evidence is by no
means conclusive:?

Father had been insane in 3 cases.
Mother ? ,, ,,  ,, 6 ,,
Father, brother, and 6 sisters ,, 1 ,,
Mother, and mother's sister .   ? 1 ?
Great-grandfather (father's), and sister ,, 2 ?
Brothers or sisters   4 ?
Father's brother   1 ?
Uncle and aunt _ >? 1 ?
Hereditary (relationship not specified) ,, 3 ,,
Not ascertained   34 ?
Total  56
Twenty-two out of fifty-six, or two in every five, are suspected or
known to have been predisposed to mental disorders by the existence
of hereditary taint. This corresponds with the proportion observed
by Esquirol, while Dr Burrows found, in 80 women who became
insane after delivery, more than half hereditarily predisposed. Dr.
Gooch remarks : " A very large proportion occurred in patients in
whose families disordered minds had already appearedand in 217
cases collected by Helfi't, Weill, and Marce, 89, or 41 per cent., belonged to this class.
Unusual Circumstances. ? Any unusual circumstances affecting
the patient about the time of the attack must be taken into consideration, as exercising more or less influence in its causation. Of such
several have been ascertained in this series of cases. These can be
arranged as follows :?

Lost a child prior to last delivery . 3
Miserably situated at confinement . 2
Drunken or worthless husband . . 5
Inflammation of uterus .... 3
Leucorrhcea 1
Still-born child 1
Family difficulties 2
Child ruptured (grief) 1
Chorea
Abscess of breasts .
Illegitimacy of child
Repelled papular eruption
,, ulcer . . . .
Mental emotion . . . .
No unusual circumstances
Not .ascertained . . . .
1
1
3
1
1
1
26
4
Total ? *

Primiparce and Multipara.?-Are primiparae more liable to become
affected than multipara ? Among 53 persons (3 being unknown) it
was observed there were attacked in connection with the
1st labour 10
1st, 2nd, and 3rd labours ... 3
1st and 3rd ,,.... 1
1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th,, .... 3
2nd 8
2nd and 3rd ? .... 1
3rd ...... 9
3rd and 4th labours 1
4th   6
5 th   3
5th, 6th, 7th, and 8th labours . . 1
7th ,, . . 2
After every labour (No. unknown) . 1
After having borne several children. 4

Only 18, or 1 in 2*94 of the number were primiparse ; while of these
7 had a repetition of the attack in connection with every child born to
them. When insanity has once established itself as one of the incidents
of the puerperal condition, it seems to have a great tendency to appear
at every successive period of that kind. This periodicity was noticed
in 10 women, and was established in the 1st, the 2nd, the 3rd, and
even the 5th puerperal state. In only one case did it skip over one
child after it had once appeared, and then re-appeared with the next.
M. Marce found in 57 patients only 14 primiparse ; and amongst the
43 remaining cases, 13 had been confined 5, 6, and even 9 times.

Circumstances attending the Labour.?How far the nature and
history of the labour influenced the production of insanity which
may have ensued, is open to much discussion. Difficult and tedious
labours seem as innoxious as regular and easy labours. Nor are those
who have flooded profusely more certainly liable to an attack than any
others. Drs. Merriman, Gooch, Esquirol, Frias, Selade, Billod, and
Eeid, mention one instance each of insanity in connexion with labour,
complicated with puerperal convulsions, and apparently dependent on
that cause. Yet the proportion of patients with eclampsia becoming
deranged is exceedingly small; too trifling to furnish evidence of any
relation existing between them, as cause and effect. Dr Webster has
charged upon the use of chloroform in labour some few cases of puerperal insanity, and Dr Skae, of the Edinburgh Asylum, reports one
case attributed to this, the only one out of 44 cases of puerperal
insanity admitted into that institution since the discovery of chloroform.
On the other hand, Dr Simpson relates two cases where the use of chloroform in labour prevented the expected usual attack of mania after it.
Period of Invasion :?

Period of Attack.
During pregnancy
Less than 15 days after delivery
1 month 
2 months,
3 
12
Immediately after weaning (about 12 months after delivery)
Unknown, but during lactation
Totals
20
5
4
2
6
4
2
2
4
7 29 20

To complete the history of this stage of the disease, it may be necessary to ascertain at what period the previous attacks already alluded
to occurred. Four attacks were non-puerperal; four attacks were
during pregnancy; fourteen attacks were during the second epoch ;
two attacks were during lactation; and the circumstances of six*
attacks are unknown. So that of 76 known puerperal attacks, 11
began during pregnancy ; 43 during the two months following delivery ;
22?during lactation, or immediately after weaning.
Compare with these the results of others. Esquirol thus classifies
92 cases:?

From first to fourth day after delivery in 16 cases.
,, fifth to fifteenth ,,     21 ,,
,, sixteenth to sixtieth ? ,,   17 ,,
,, sixtieth to twelfth month of suckling . . . . ? 19 ,,
After forced or voluntary weaning   19 ,,
A summary of the cases reported by Dr McDonald, Dr Burrows,
M. Marce, and at Hanwell, in 1848, and those collected by M. Marcd,
and by Dr Wyman, of Boston, in lleport of 1834, may also be useful
for comparison :?

Period of Attack.
During Pregnancy
After Delivery .
During Lactation
Total

66
57
2
79
27
180
103
310
80
58
370
207
635

The second period is, therefore, the most important in the causation of
disease. Some have regarded that as embracing only six weeks after
delivery instead of two months, the limit I have adopted ; so that
were the figures corrected to that period, the numbers of the second
epoch would be still slightly increased.

Access of Disease.?The access of the disease was marked by symptoms in this series, which were, in many instances, doubtless but
imperfectly recorded. Often the alterations of manner, of feeling, the
emotional and instinctive changes which ushered in the attack, were
either unobserved, or their value unappreciated. Something startling,
out of the usual routine of life, must occur to be remembered as the
starting point in the history of mental disease in such cases. I have
estimated the first symptoms as closely as possible, in the following
table:?

* These six attacks, marked as unknown, occurred either during the second or
third epoch,?in which is unknown.
Nature of the First Symptoms.
Unfounded jealousy and suspicion
Fear of injury from persons
Attempts to wander away
Indifference to child.
Excited talk . .
Delusions ....
Hallucinations . .
Fear of impending evil
Ecstatic feeling .

O
Quarrelsome propensity
Attempt to kill child .
Suicidal attempt
Suicidal and homicidal attempt
on children
First symptoms not ascertained
Total . . .
Form, of Disease.?The form of insanity assumed by the patient is
to some extent influenced by the epoch in which the attack began.
This may be seen, so far as the 56 cases are concerned, in the following
table:?
Form of Mental Disease.
1st
Epoch.
2nd
Epoch.
3rd
Epoch,
Totals
Mania
? periodical . . . .
Melancholia
Dementia (primary) . . . .
Monomania of fear . .
,, ? unseen agency.
,, ,, suspicion .
22
1
5
1
36
1
14
1
2
1
1
Totals
29
20
56

Mania is the most frequent form, and especially predominates in the
cases occurring soon after recovery. In those during lactation,
melancholia, and those partial forms (more allied to melancholia than
to mania), more nearly balance the number in which mania occurred.
The experience of M. Marce accords in assigning the highest number
of cases to mania. All other authorities coincide. There is, however,
a class of cases which rarely has any examples in any hospital for the
insane, wherein mental disturbance (of the type of delirium rather
than mania) supervenes a few days after delivery, and very rapidly
terminates, either by recovery (as in the large majority) or in death.
The proportion of such is difficult to be arrived at.
Suicidal and homicidal Propensities.?A distressing symptom,
frequently met with in all forms of puerperal insanity of every epoch,
is the perversion of the instinct of self-preservation. Attempts at
suicide are often very suddenly put into force, and persevered in. It
may be the first symptom of mental derangement that arouses the
alarm of friends, as in the five cases already noted, or it may be
developed at any time during the course of the attack. A lady during
lactation, not previously deranged, was discovered by her husband
hanging in the room at night; so quiet had been her movements, that
he had not been awakened. She was resuscitated, and passed into deep
melancholia, from which she gradually recovered, to all appearances,
so that the vigilant oversight hitherto maintained, were relaxed. No
sooner did this take place than again she hanged herself. Resuscitation, followed by a similar state of melancholia, was again succeeded
by apparent restoration of cheerfulness and reason, when the suicidal
impulse again suddenly re-appeared. The case is not embraced in this
series, and the final result I am not acquainted with. In the 56 cases
twelve attempted suicide, and three threatened or contemplated such
a course. The manner of attempts may be noted:?

Manner of Suicidal
Attempt.
By cutting throat
,, drowning . .
? hanging . .
,, several modes.
Totals .
Mania.
2
Melancholia.
1
2
W
Monomania.
12

In Bethlem Hospital, out of 111 cases of puerperal insanity 32 were
affected by the suicidal impulse.
Allied with this perverted instinct, and appearing sometimes inthesame
individuals, is the propensity or impulse to kill. The victims selected are
usually those naturally claiming the love and sympathy of the patient.
One patient tried to kill by scalding various persons ; three patients
tried to kill husbands ; four patients tried to kill their infants; one
tried to kill children and husband; so that nine, or one in six developed homicidal propensities. Of these, three were combined with the
suicidal impulse.
Hallucinations, Illusions, Sfc.?
Nature or Symptoms.
Hallucinations of hearing . . .
? ? sight ....
Illusions of hearing
,, ? sight . _ . . .
Hallucinations of sight and hearing
,, ? ,, hearing & smell
,, ? hearing, and illusions
of sight
Delusions
Totals .....
Mania.
Melancholia.
Monomania.
30

More than one-half, therefore, of the 56 cases were more or less
under the control of some form of illusion. They heard voices directing them to do this, or to refrain from that. They saw robbers, or
deceased relatives, or acquaintances, or faces constantly peering at
them from the ceiling or the window. Several entertained that most
harassing delusion that they were eternally lost, having committed
the unpardonable sin: one that her husband had bewitched her,
and another that she could cure all the sick by laying her hands
upon them. In one case, ecstacy " rapt her soul in Elysium," but
soon the scene changed to the blackness of despair, and a fear of
demons who were tormenting her took possession of her.

Prognosis.?The prognosis of puerperal insanity is stated by writers
in exceedingly favourable terms. The proportion of recoveries is quite
large, according to the following authorities:?Dr McDonald records
that 80 per cent, of his cases recovered. Dr Webster thinks that
" three in every five cases of puerperal insanity may be confidently
expected to recover within the year." Dr Haslam cured 50 out of
85 cases at Bethlem. Dr Burrows records 57 cases, of whom 35
recovered. Drs. Gooch and Prichard have considered these results as
indicating a less favourable prognosis than the circumstances would
justify, inasmuch as the cases are taken from hospital practice, and
usually do not come under care under the most recent, and consequently curable stage of the disease. Dr Gooch observes: " Of the
patients about whom X have been consulted, I know only two who
are now, after many years, disordered in mind, and of them one had
already been so before her marriage."

So far as regards the present analysis, the following results are
obtained:?
Recovered ... 31 persons or 55*35 per cent.
Improved. ... 4 ,, ,, 7 "14 ?
Died 6 ? ? 1071 ? ?
Were not unproved. 15 ,, ,, 26-78 ,, ?
Total . . 56
For the rest, of the 37 persons labouring under mania, 19 recovered,
3 improved, and 4 died, 11, after periods varying from eight months
to ten years, remaining unimproved.

Of the melancholic, and other depressed forms of mental disease,
including nineteen persons, twelve recovered, one improved, two died,
and four had received no benefit, in periods of from four to ten years.
Of seven cases occurring during pregnancy, three recovered, one improved, and three were not improved.
Of 29 occurring within two months after parturition, fifteen recovered, three improved, three died, and eight received no benefit from
treatment.

Of 20 cases occurring during lactation, thirteen recovered, three
died, and four were not improved.

We have already seen that these 56 persons had previously suffered,
in some instances, from one or more attacks of puerperal insanity.
Taking the number of these attacks as the basis of our calculations,
we have the following interesting results:?

Period of Attack.
Occurring during 1st epoch . .
? ? 2nd ? ...
? yy >> ...
,, in 2nd or 3rd (which unknown)
Totals ....
57
15
82
This would give a ratio of 69*51 per cent, of recoveries from
attacks.

An interesting inquiry may arise, whether the chances of recovery
are lessened by the previous occurrence of attacks in the individual ?
Some light will be gained by investigating the results of the attacks,
embraced in the present analysis:
Number op Attacks.
First attack
Second ,,
Third ,,
Fourth ,,
Totals.
60
1
6
&
15
85

This is exclusive of one patient who had several attacks (the number not ascertained). We may safely assume two attacks, though
three or four would probably be more correct. But four of the first
attacks were non-puerperal in their character; deducting these, and
adding the two as above, we shall have the following proportion of
recoveries in 83 known puerperal attacks :?
Recovered from 1st attack 35 out of 52 ; or 67*3 per cent.
ft ,, other than 1st attack . 23 ? ? 31 ; ? 74'2 ? ,,
Total ...... 58 out of 83 ; or 69'8 per cent.
Thus it would appear that the first attack is more disastrous to
life and reason than when several attacks have been safely borne.
If we take those who did not recover, or those who died, and make
the same comparison, we shall arrive at the same result.
The influence of time upon the prognosis is shown in the general
table of results. We may notice more particularly a few of the mere
important points in this connection:

Within six months 13 recovered, and 1 died; in one year, 10 recovered, 3 died, and 2 did not improve; in 18 months, 4 recovered,
and 1 did not improve ; in two years 4 recovered, 1 died, and 1 did
not improve; over 2 years, 4 improved, 1 died, and 11 did not improve.
Treatment.?No special means were resorted to. Such indications
as from time to time appeared were met with appropriate treatment.
In a majority'of the cases, anodynes, in some form or other, entered into
the medicinal treatment. Morphine and camphorated tincture of opium,
were perhaps the most frequently called into requisition. Both in
mania and melancholia they seem to relieve the tired brain from the
fatigue of its own teasing vagaries, and, besides the inducing of
sleep at night, exert a beneficial effect. Tonics are also generally
required, and none are better than the various ferruginous compounds.
The citrate, the tartrate, the muriated tincture may be used, as the
taste of the physician or the special case would suggest. The carbonate combined with conium, " Brigham's mixture of iron and
conium," with the occasional addition of morphine, answers admirably as a general tonic.
In the sleepless ravings of some cases, chloroform may be cautiously
applied. In a few cases it was useful for the immediate purpose of
inducing sleep, but further than this I have not observed any marked
effect on the course of the disease. A more reliable course for a more
permanent benefit to this class of patients, is the free administration
of diffusible stimulants. Where opiates fail to induce sleep, and chloroform can only induce temporary quiet, these often act like a charm,
in soothing irritation and producing good, refreshing sleep. Wine,
spirits, ammonia, sulphuric ether, according to the special exigencies
of the case, are thus beneficial.

Cathartics have always played a very conspicuous part in the treatment of insanity, puerperal and otherwise, ever since ' Naviga ad Anticyram' conveyed a reproach, as well as suggested the therapeutic means
to put it away. But it may be doubted whether the practice has not
often been carried too far. Their occasional use in this disease is undoubtedly proper, not because the patient is insane, but to procure
relief when she is constipated. In the same way emetics may be occasionally useful. In both cases it is rather to remove causes of disturbance, than from any other reason.
In two or three cases I have seen great benefit from the continued
use of quinine in moderate doses, with an occasional anodyne. They
were of a low, nervous, melancholy character, with loss of appetite,
inability to apply themselves to any object requiring attention, and
a depressing, somewhat hysterical state of feelings.

In a word, the treatment of puerperal insanity is, to brace up the
enfeebled body and shattered nerves, to procure as absolute quiet and
repose for the organ of the mind as we gain for a broken bone by
the use of splints. To devise the special means by which this end
may be attained, constitutes the difficulty of treatment in the one
case as in the other. And there is, in both cases, a point in their
history, when, passive treatment having done its work, it needs to be
replaced by action of the limb, or of the brain, as the case may be.
To recognise the exact time when this point is reached, and to make
the change of means judiciously, should ever be objects of the
greatest care. When mental exercise can be safely substituted for
mental quiet (now passing into lethargy), excitement and of the emotions replaces indifference, then they are not only proper, but almost
imperative. But, to be too hasty in this matter, is only to renew the
former trouble. On the other hand, too long delay allows the patient
to sink into partial fatuity. (American Journal of Insanity. Jan.
1860.)

3.?On a form of Cachexy peculiar to the Insane. By Dr E. Billod,
Chief Physician and Director of the Lunatic Asylum of SainteGemmes-sur-Loire.
[In a communication addressed to the Academy of Medicine in 1855,
l)r. Billod made known the existence, in several French asylums, of a
pellagrous affection which he held to be peculiar to the insane. The
results of his subsequent researches upon the subject are summed up
in the following paper.]

In order to complete our study of this subject, and to sum up the
various opinions, it only remains for us to demonstrate the existence
of a cachexy, which specially belongs to the state of insanity, of which
the affection which we have hitherto described by the name of a variety
of pellagra proper to the insane, or pellagra consequent upon viental
alienation onty, constitutes one of the forms?say the pellagrous form
?and to consider it in general and under all its forms ; such is the
object of the present paper.

Although this general disposition of the health of the insane at
certain periods of mental alienation has never yet been the subject of
a special description, we do not believe that its existence will be disputed by any physician, however little he may be versed in the study
of mental disorders, and we shall have no difficulty in gaining admission
by the side of the various known cachexies, such as the scorbutic,
cancerous, venereal, paludal, saturnine, mercurial, &c., of a cachexy
specially belonging to the insane, which may be properly considered
as the result of the latent progress of mental alienation and of its continuous action on the animal economy, aided or not by the concurrence
of certain particular hygienic conditions.

Symptoms.?It does not require a long observation of the insane, in
order to recognise that some in whom the disorder has passed to the
chronic state, end by presenting an alteration in nutrition, the progress
of which, though very variable, is ordinarily slow. This alteration
betrays itself in the first instance by a certain emaciation, by the tendency to diarrhoea, and by a successive diminution of strength; but
that which appears to me to constitute one of its essential characteristics is the tendency presented by the skin of those individuals who
are, or are about to be, affected by it, to undergo various changes; in
fact, it is the pathological result depending upon the relation which
exists between the dermis and the nervous system. In many in42,0 FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE.
stances alterations of the skin which appear to us very variable in their
nature coincide or alternate with disorders of the digestive apparatus.
At times, and most frequently under the influence of insolation, there
may be observed on the dorsal surface of the hand, and extending
more or less up the fore-arm, erythematous symptoms, uniting all the
characters assigned by writers on the subject to pellagrous erythema,
from scarlet erythema to blackish erythema, accompanied with exfoliation ; the back of the feet, the neck and the breast, when they
remain uncovered, sometimes participate in this state. For an expose of
the symptoms of the progress and other points in the history of this form
of the cachexy of insanity, answering to that which we have hitherto
described by the name of a variety of pellagra proper to the insane, we
must refer the reader to our preceding memoirs. That which completes
the analogy between this form of the cachexy of insanity and pellagra
is the period of evolution and habitual exacerbation of its symptoms,
and their amendment or almost complete remission after this period.
At times, there is observed, as in the last stage of pellagra, scorbutic
spots, oedema of the extremities, a general earthy appearance of the
skin; at other times, as we have observed in two cases, and as M.
Bouacossa, the eminent chief physician of the asylum at Turin tells
me he has also observed in his practice, this membrane assumes a
bronze tint which recalls the malady known as Addison's bronzed skin.

In some cases we may observe eruptions successively vesicular, papulous, squamous and furuncular, constituting a sort of lichen (poussee),
as noticed by M. Girard of Auxerre. Neither is it very uncommon to
see dartres farineuses, most frequently on the face, and sometimes
affecting circular forms with almost geometrical regularity. We have
twice observed purpuric eruptions over the whole body. In two cases
we have seen the skin assume the characteristics of psoriasis diffusa,
and M. Baume of Quimper has told me that he once made a similar
observation. Several bull? of pemphigus have also been observed
bv us in the course of the cachexy which we are now considering. We
believe we may refer to alterations of the cutaneous organs, sometimes
observed in the case of lunatics threatened with, or actually in the
state of cachexy, a certain hypertrophy with deformity and blackish
discoloration of the nails, to which our esteemed friend, M. le Dr Payen
of Orleans, has particularly called our attention. Perhaps, also, the
bloody tumours of the pavilion of the ear, to which our dear and venerated master, M. Ferrus, was the first to call attention in his lessons
at Bicetre, and which have recently been the object of an interesting
monograph by M. Foville, jun., are not unconnected with the general
disposition which we are now describing.

Most frequently the skin of cachectic lunatics, or those who are
about to become so, is dry, rough, and does not perspire. Finally, in
some cases no appreciable alteration in the skin is to be noticed.
With reference to these alterations of the skin, which so evident^ testify to a pathological relation between the dermis and the nervous system, we ought to allude incidentally to a fact observed by our colleagues
as well as by ourselves, that is, the relative frequency of erysipelas and
ichthyosis amongst the insane. We do so, however, without referring it
to the cachexy now under consideration.

When the cachexy of the insane threatens to assume the character
of pellagra it is not uncommon, as in the latter disorder, to see the
cutaneous symptoms long precede the development of the cachexy : it is
often, in fact, only after a long series of vernal exacerbations, and at the
end of several years, that the cachectic state really commences. One of
thethreecases which M.Baillarger presentedin our name to the Academy
of Medicine, that of the patient named Bureau, has only been cachectic
for one year, or speaking more correctly, it is only one year since the
alteration of nutrition began to operate in him, and it has progressed
but very slowly.

The cutaneous symptoms which we have enumerated almost always
accompany the cachexy of insanity, but their intensity does not always
measure its degree ; thus, for example, they are sometimes wanting in
the last stage of the affection, although they may be very decided in
its commencement, and before any appearance of emaciation; they
may also be wanting, as we have already said, during the whole course
of the cachexy. It is not so with its other characteristics, marked by
disorders of the digestive apparatus and nervous system, which are
common to all forms, and rarely vary except in degree.

Among the digestive symptoms which characterize this special
cachexy the most prominent is without doubt diarrhoea. This
diarrhoea is often colliquative and incoercible; the stools are generally serous, sometimes bilious, very rarely bloody, and are scarcely
ever accompanied with colic. The belly is supple, painless,
and ordinarily depressed. What distinguishes this diarrhoea is
that throughout its continuance the tongue is ordinarily clean and
humid, the appetite is maintained, and the apyrexia is perfect. In
some cases, however, and especially in the last stage, the tongue is dry
and horny, the thirst raging, and the appetite gone; but these cases
are, we repeat, exceptional.

Being rather an asthmic flux than a symptom properly so called of
enteritis,the diarrhoeaof our cachectics sometimes ceases after a duration
varying from a few days to as many months, and it always exhibits a
strong tendency to reproduce itself, without any other assignable cause,
in most instances, than a slight increase in the general asthenia. This
tendency to relapse and the incoercibility augment as the patient
approaches the last stage of the cachexy of insanity, and there are few
cases in which they do not mark the ultimate step.

In certain cases cachectic lunatics are the prey of burning thirst ;
some, especially those whose condition partakes of all the characters of
pellagra, complain of a burning sensation in the epigastrium of the
nature of pyrosis. Ptj'alism often exhibits itself; in which case the
buccal mucous membrane is red, tumefied, sometimes aphthous, and
the papillte of the tongue are generally depressed.

The urinary secretion presents no special modification; we have
never discovered in it any trace of albumen or saccharine element, its
reaction has always appeared more or less acid. In some cases, how428 FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE.
ever, the acidity of the urine has seemed to us very notably
diminished; the secretion is most commonly limpid pale and. free from
sediment.

We here offer these remarks only upon the urinary secretion in the
cachexy of insanity, reserving to ourselves their completion by ulterior
researches, and if need be their rectification.

Nothing particular has been observed with reference to the heart
and lungs ; the latter less frequently become tuberculous than might
have been expected ; but we believe we can trace to the cachexy of
insanity certain cases of venous obstructions and arterial obliteration
followed by sphacelus of entire members, which we have sometimes had
occasion to observe. In general, whatever may be the stage of this
cachexy, no bruit de souffle is perceived in the carotids ; a diminution
of caloricity may, hovvever, generally be observed, as also a diminutiveness and a characteristic depression of the pulse.
At the same time that the symptoms we have enumerated develope
themselves, general enfeeblement progresses until death, which is ever
the fatal result, ensues.

In some of our cachectics we observe a certain curvature of the vertebral-column, although the patients do not ordinarily complain of any
pain in that region ; this symptom is particularly marked in one of
our pellagrous patients at the asylum of Sainte-Gemmes, who for
some years has also exhibited some choreic symptoms.

We have never observed at any period in the cachexy of insanity
any symptoms of general or special paralysis which we could refer to a
lesion of the nervous centres, and in particular to the spinal chord ;
nevertheless as we have remarked in a previous paper, the general
muscular debility sometimes calls to mind that which characterizes the
general paralysis of the insane.

In proportion as the cachexy displays itself and becomes more pronounced the dementia becomes confirmed.
Progress.?The progress of the cachexy of insanity is properly
speaking continuous : intermission and abatement are at times observed, but they only relate to certain of the symptoms, for example,
the cutaneous and digestive symptoms, which when they exist generally
pursue the same evolution as the symptoms of pellagra.

Although latent, then, the progress of the cachexy is no less real;
at most it can only be said that the malady is sometimes stationary.
The mode of inversion is variable; thus in those cases in which the
affection assumes the characters of pellagrous cachexy, the cutaneous
symptoms may precede for a long time, many years, for example, the
development of the cachectic state, and there is then recognised in the
progress of the malady the two periods that we have admitted;
the first extending from the apparition of the earliest cutaneous or
other symptoms to the moment when the constitution receives a
cachectic impress, which we have termed pellagrous properly so called:
the second extending from the commencement of the cachexy to the
termination of the affection. In those cases, on the contrary, in which
the cachexy manifests itself without having been preceded by any cutaneous or other symptom, it is evident that there is but one period.
It follows from the exposition we have given of the symptoms of
the cachexy of the insane that, as in pellagra, the modification in
nutrition which characterizes the affection is most ordinarily preceded
by a group or a succession of disorders in the cutaneous system, the
digestive apparatus, and the nervous system. The cutaneous symptoms,
it is true, sometimes fail; but as (still as in pellagra) they constitute
but a symptomatic expression of a general interior disposition, and this
symptomatic expression can fail, and indeed very often fails, without
the aforesaid disposition the less existing, a conclusion cannot be
drawn from their absence contrary to the opinion which we have
expressed.

This is the place, moreover, to consider that it is much less in real
and effective changes that the symptoms derived from the skin of our
cachectics consist, than in a disposition of this membrane, in a sort ot
aptitude, so to speak, to become morbidly changed in divers fashions
under certain conditions, just as is observed in pellagrous individuals.
We know indeed that insolation ordinarily constitutes the essential
condition of the development of alterations of the skin among the
pellagrous as among our cachectics, and we are able, in removing
patients from this influence, to prevent effectively the alterations ; but
it is evident that in this case, if the skin is not altered, it does not
lack the morbid aptitude to become changed, and that just as, according to the first Sydenham, there is variola without eruption, so there
may be pellagra and cachexy of the insane without cutaneous
symptoms.

The inquiry which we have instituted in the majority of our principal asylums, with the kind aid of our honourable fellow-labourers,
has fully confirmed these last-named data. It results, in effect, that
notwithstanding cachexies inherent to the progress of mental alienation
exist in every establishment, in some, nevertheless, these cachexies are
not accompanied with any special alteration of the skin ; it results
also that in those cases where the alterations of the skin are manifestly
linked to the progress of the caehexy peculiar to the insane, these
alterations have not presented everywhere the same characters,witness,
for example, the asylums of Auxerre and of Toulouse. The conclusion
to be drawn from this difference is that, if the state of mental
alienation is the primary condition of the development of the cachexy
of the insane, this cachexy, nevertheless, is dependent for its manifestations upon certain hygienic conditions peculiar to each medium.
Differential Diagnosis. ?The special conditions under which the
cachexy we have under consideration is developed, prevent us from
confounding it with other cachexies, hence it is not necessary to detail
the differential diagnosis. We think, however, that it is of importance
to note that this cachexy ought to be distinguished from the marasmus
which terminates the course of general paralysis, and with which it
has nothing in common. It is well also not to confound the cachexy
with the modifications of nutrition which accompany divers maladies that may supervene incidentally during insanity. It is manifest
for example, that it is necessary to distinguish the cachexy of the
insane from the modification of nutrition in a lunatic, which depends
upon the development of incidental tubercular phthisis.

Pathogeny and Etiology.?The primary condition of the development of the cachexy of the insane being the state of mental alienation,
it follows from this that its etiology will not be doubtful; as to its
pathogeny it will be allied to the mechanism of this cause, and we
cannot but reproduce here what we have previously said apropos of
our variety of pellagra, and of which the application is equally fitted
to the cachexy which we now study :?

" If it be true, and no one doubts it, that an emotion, a chagrin, a pleasure,
any moral cause, in short, can exercise an influence upon the play of the
organic functions, and produce a modification, of whatever kind, of the general
health, it ought also to be true, afortiori, of mental alienation, that exaggeration,
that ne plus ultra of all moral causes. This follows, moreover, from a
physiological principle which appears to me to have the force of a law, to wit,
that the general health may be regarded as the result of a pre-established
repartition of the innervation between all the organs. Every circumstance
which disturbs the exercise of a function, in a manner to augment or diminish
the quantity of innervation which physiologically devolves to it, ought to
induce a change in the general repartition, a rupture in the equilibrium, and
consequently a disordered state of the health.

"It follows from this that mental alienation, by the disturbance of the
cerebral functions which characterize it, ought, in modifying the innervation
almost at its source, to lead much more certainly than any other disturbing
cause to the rupture of equilibrium just referred to, and, in consequence, to a
change in the general health. Now, we believe that pellagra is in the number
of these possible effects."

This being presumed, it is easy to admit that the chance of the
cachexy under consideration being produced, will be greater in proportion
to the older date of the mental alienation. All things being equal,
observation demonstrates that, of all the forms of mental alienation,
that which most disposes to the cachexy is the melancholic or depressive.
Of 65 lunatics suffering from or threatened with the peculiar
cachexy, we observed in 18 lypemania with stupor or depression; in 32
lypemaniacal dementia, also with stupor or depression ; in 5 chronic
mania ; in 2 dementia, consecutive to epilepsy ; and in 7 idiocy.
It results from these data that it is depression which plays the principal part in the production of the cachexy of the insane. It is always
important, in order to appreciate the comparative influence of
depression and excitation, to hold count of the very marked predominance which exists in the asylums in which we collected our observations of the melancholic form of mental alienation, but as the cachexy
of the insane, when it assumes a pellagrous character, induces depression, that is to say converts mania into lypemania among those
individuals who are attacked with the malady, it results that the
portion of maniacs who suffer from the said cachexy is greater than at
first appears. A priori, it does not appear that it could be otherwise,
because prolonged mania brings about an expenditure of innervation,
which necessarily, sooner or later, leads to exhaustion, the effects of
which, although not invariably manifested during the progress of the
expenditure, are not the less real, and in the end appreciable. Also,
when the source of innervation is exhausted among maniacs, in consequence of the excessive expenditure it has been subjected to, it is common to see depression succeed hastily to excitation, and the marasmus
progresses much more rapidly than in other cases. We have seen
recently a striking example of the rapidity with which patients sink in
these circumstances. It happened in the case of one of our boarders,
the sister of a physician, attacked with mental alienation characterized
by a delirium of persecutions and habitual exaltation. Her physical
health had always been sustained without the appearance of exhaustion,
when, fifteen days before death, she began to exhibit the first symptoms
of an enfeeblement, the progress of which was most rapid. During
these fifteen days, in proportion as the marasmus became more conspicuous, the excitation gave place to depression, but not without reappearing at certain intervals, as if to complete the exhaustion of its
source even to death, which seemed to be the result of a last glimmer
of exaltation.

It will be understood that the cachexy of the insane, when it pursues a progress so rapid, is not marked by the same characters, and is
much more rarely accompanied by symptoms recalling more or less
pellagra, than when it pursues, as among melancholies, a slower progress.
This difference in the characters of the cachexy of the insane, according as the progress is more or less rapid, or according as it affects
patients in a state of depression or exaltation, explains, perhaps, the
differences observed, in this respect, in the asylums of the department
of the Seine, where the maniacal form of alienation predominates over
the melancholic, and in the majority of the provincial asylums where
the contrary is ordinarily observed. It is possible also, that under the
same relation there are notable differences between the asylums of the
North, South, East and West.

The influence of mental alienation upon the development of a special
cachexy can be heightened or diminished, and sometimes altogether
neutralized, by certain hygienic conditions. It is a fact, recognised at
first sight, that in the inaisons de sante, and in the boarders quarters
of public asylums, where the regimen is more comfortable than in the
pauper sections, the development of the special cachexy is less manifest,
and when it supervenes, it never assumes a pellagrous character.
We have, in certain cases, retarded and even stopped the progress
of the special cachexy by a simple modification in the regimen; for
example, in rendering it more substantial and more nutritious. The
use of wine has seemed to us to exercise a prophylactic influence.
This is to be gathered plainly from the following observation :?Until
the 1st of January, 1859, our lunatics received wine but once or twice
weekly at most, and from the 4th of June, 1854, to that period?that
is to say, during a period of four years?we had recorded 66 cases of
the affection that we have described under the name of a variety of
pellagra peculiar to the insane, in a total of 1287 individuals, who
made part of the population in the interval. Now, since the 1st of
January, 1859, the distribution of wine has been daily, and during the
course of the year we have not observed any new case of this variety
of pellagra.

We cannot terminate our remarks on the etiology of the cachexy
of the insane, and in particular of its pellagrous form, without saying
a few words on the argument which some physicians have deduced from
this affection against the opinion which is maintained by several that
the use of maize, deteriorated or not by verdet, is the essential cause
of pellagra. Now, although we rank ourselves among the adversaries
of this opinion, we do not think that the existence of a variety of
pellagra peculiar to the insane and consecutive to mental alienation
proves anything against the etiological hypothesis referred to, from
the moment when this variety of pellagra is regarded as of a distinct
and every way special species. It might be, after all, although this is
but another hypothesis, that, if the influence of deteriorated maize was
as real as some physicians believe, it would act by producing in the
nervous system previous perturbations, of which the effects upon the
nutrition are analogous to those which result from the continued
action of mental alienation. This opinion would be all the more
admissible since, among the nervous perturbations which characterize
pellagra properly so called, mental alienation is observed in the end,
and in its melancholic form.

I may be permitted here, to express the opinion that the practice
indicated by one of the most fervent adepts of Balardini, of submitting
the maize, before delivering it for consumption, to torrefaction by the
process of Bourguignon, should be undertaken sooner or later. I am
an adversary, as I have already said, to the theory that the use of
maize is the sole cause of pellagra, but not a bigoted one. Were it
but for the sake of dissipating the obscurity which still invests the
etiology of pellagra, I think that the foregoing experiment is desirable.
[Dr Billod in terminating his paper dwells briefly on the prognosis,
pathological anatomy, and treatment of the cachexy he describes.
The prognosis, as would be surmised, is very grave ; pathological
anatomy does not throw any definite light on the nature of the cachexy, but Dr Billod is inclined to think general or partial softening
of the spinal cord has some connexion with the cachexy, particularly
its pellagrous form; finally, the treatment, apart from that which is
proper to the form of mental alienation which precedes the cachexy,
is simply hygienic.]
