Psychological Quarterly Retrospect
====================================

We should either have been more or less than man if we had escaped
the infectious enthusiasm of that glorious movement which may be
said to have attained maturity in the Volunteer Review, before
Her Majesty, on the 23rd ult. We refer to the movement here,
not that we propose to' discuss its ethical or ?esthetical aspects.
These are sufficiently impressed upon the feelings of every true
Englishman. But there is an incidental circumstance connected with
the growth of the Volunteer Rifle Corps, which is worthy of being
called to mind, as being amusingly illustrative of the little change
which man's habits of thought undergo in the course of ages. " My
good sir," exclaims Paterfamilias, seizing us warmly by the arm, if
we happen to stray into the drill-ground, or to be his neighbour at the
dinner-table, or to come across him in the Park?" My good sir," he
exclaims, " now isn't this truly excellent for our young men; this
drill, this rifle exercise, this so forth." Of course Paterfamilias never
touches upon the great moral and political significations of the Rifle
movement. He knows that to be useless. He feels that he and I are
of the fullest accord in all that relates to its greatness, its goodness,
and its significant meaning across the water. He knows very well
that if he and I could get over the impertinent simper of our tailor if
we alluded to the matter, and the tale-telling of our bare-faced
cheval-glass, we should both endue our very civilian-like bodies in the
grey or the green of a Volunteer Corps before sunset, and amble into
the goose-step with the most serious gravity. He knows all this,
and consequently he keeps to other and by no means uninteresting
matter. " What can be better," he proceeds, " than this constant
drill, this wielding a ponderous rifle (that is, as you of course understand, comparatively speaking), for strengthening the frame, developing
the brawn, my dear sir; giving a firmer, a nobler, an altogether better
gait, sir; weaning the unsophisticated youth from more dangeious
pleasures?yes, sir, pleasures : I mean what I say, and I assert that
every volunteer ranks his duty among his greatest pleasures. Now, sir,
you are a medical man, and I should like to hear what you think of
this view of the question." Thus Paterfamilias ; and we assent most
warmly to his opinions, and confirm them by showing to him that
they possess all the respectability, all the stability which may be
derived from hoar antiquity.
Turn for a moment to"Plato's dialogue concerning Courage?the
I
I
xlii THE EDUCATIONAL TENDENCIES OF VOLUNTEER CORPS.
Laches. Lysimachus and Melesias, two of the interlocutors, are
country gentlemen. They are anxious about the education of their
sons, and have been recommended to let them learn a certain swordexercise. They consult Nicias and Laches, two eminent military men
at Athens, and it is in this fashion (to quote Dr. Whewell's summary1)
that Nicias gives his opinion in favour of the sword-exercise :?
" It keeps young men out of worse employments of their leisure,
gives them strength and agility, is a preparation for actual war, both
in the rank and single affrays ; and is likely to set young men upon
learning other parts of the art of war." It would also, he says, make
a man braver and bolder than he would otherwise be; and a thing, he
says, not to be despised, would give him a military carriage which
would inspire awe. "So that," he says, in conclusion, "I think, and
for these reasons, that it is a good thing to teach the young men this
exercise."
And so it is, also, we echo, and with truth, in no small degree, of
the drill and discipline of our Volunteer Corps, and we doubt not that
these will, henceforth, play a not unimportant part in the moral and
physical education of our youth ; and this without putting to flight
the more sober civilian virtues upon which we are apt to pride
ourselves as a nation.
And now, if we would learn another lesson from the passing events
of the quarter, let us turn to Mr. Gladstone's address upon his installation as Rector of the University of Edinburgh. Comment would be
almost impertinent upon the noble language and nobler thoughts of
the trumpet-tongued speaker:?
"You have chosen, gentlemen, as your own representative in the University
Court one widely enough separated from you in the scale of years; one to
whom much of that is past which to you is as yet future. It is fitting, then,
that he should speak to you on such an occasion of that which unites us together?namely, the work of the University, as a great organ of preparation for
after life ; and that, in treating of what constitutes the great bond between
us, he should desire and endeavour to assist in arming you, as far as he may,
for the efforts and trials of your career Subject to certain cycles of partial
revolution, it is true that, as in the material so in the moral world, every
generation of man is a labourer for that which succeeds it, and makes an
addition to that great sum total of achieved results which may, in commercial
phrase, be called the capital of the race. Of all the conditions of existence in
which man differs from the brutes there is not one of greater moment than
this, that each one of them commences life as if he were the first of a species,
whereas man inherits largely from those who have gone before. How largely,
none of us can say; but my belief is that, as yeare gather more and more upon
you, you will estimate more and more highly your debt to preceding ages. If,
on the one hand, that debt is capable of being exaggerated or misapprehended,
if arguments are sometimes strangely used which would imply that, because
they have done much, we ought to do nothing more; yet, on the other hand,
1 The Platonic Dialogues, Vol. I., p. 20.
\
I
MR. GLADSTONE ON HUMAN PROGRESS. xliii
it is no less true that the obligation is one so vast and manifold that it can
av "TuS / 'Je adequately measured. It is not only in possession
instit f US6' enjpyment) an" security; it is not only in language, laws,
1 Utl0|ls' ar^s> religion; it is not only in what we have, but in what we are.
fi r' as character is formed by the action and reaction of the human being and
va C1,rcui.ns^auces iQ which he lives, it follows that as those circumstances
an J a ? too, aQd he transmits a modified?it ought to be also an enlarged
m t ^paneling?nature onwards in his turn to his posterity, under that
ys erious law which establishes between every generation and its predecesrs a moral as well as a physical association. In what degree this process is
arred ?n the one hand, by the perversity and by the infirmity of man, or
estored and extended, 011 the other, by the remedial provisions of the Divine
mercy, this is not the place to inquire. The progress of mankind is, upon the
e> a chequered and an intercepted progress; and even where it is full?rmed, still, just as in the individual, youth has charms that maturity under
memorable law must lose, so the earlier ages of the world will ever continue
0 delight and instruct us by beauties that are exclusively or peculiarly their
o\Mi. Again, it would seem as though this progress (and here is a
c astening and a humbling thought) were a progress of mankind and not of
le ^dividual man, for it seems to be quite clear that, whatever be the compilative greatness of the race now and in its infant or early stages, what may
e called the normal specimens, so far as they have been made known to
us either through external form or through the works of the intellect, have
ended rather to dwindle, or at least to diminish, than to grow in the
mghest elements of greatness. But the exceptions at which these remarks
aye glanced neither destroy nor materially weaken the profound moment
? the broad and universal canon, that every generation of men, as they
traverse the vale of life, are bound to accumulate, and in divers manners
uo accumulate, new treasures for the race, and leave the world richer, on their
departure, for the advantage of their descendants, than, on their entrance,
they themselves have found it. Of the mental portion of this treasure 110
Sniall part is stored; and of the continuous work I have described no small
Part is performed by Universities, which have been, I venture to say,
entitled to rank among the greater lights and glories of Christendom." (Apr. Gladstone then proceeded to describe the idea and work of an
University somewhat in detail, and lie concluded his address in these
words:?
"And now, my younger friends, you to whom I owe the distinction of the
j ce which enables and requires me to address you, if I have dwelt thus at
ength upon the character and scope of Universities and their place in the
scheme of Christian civilization, it is in order that, setting before you the
dignity that belongs to them, and that is reflected on their members, and the great
opportunities wliicli they offer both of advancement and of improvement, I might
chiefly suggest and impress by facts, which may be more eloquent than precepts,
I ,le responsibilities that are laid upou you by the enjoyment of these gifts and
Dressings. Much, however, might be said to you on the acquisition of the
knowledge which will be directly serviceable to you in your several professions;
much on the immense value of that kind of training in which the subjects
iearued have for their chief aim not to inure the haud (so to speak) to the use
its tools in some particular art, but to operate on the mind itself, and, by
making it flexible, manifold, and strong, to endow it with a general aptitude
or tiie duties and exigencies of life ; much, lastly, on the frame of mind in
v 110 Jou should pursue your work. Of these three branches, the topics
xliv MK. GLADSTONE ON STUDENT-LIFE AND DUTIES.
belonging to the first are the most obvious and simple, for it requires no argument to persuade the workman that he must be duly furnished with his tools
and must know how to handle them. The means are less directly palpable
which have made it the habit of our country to spend, where means permit,
many precious years upon studies void in a great degree of immediate bearing
upon the intended occupations of our after life. Those may, however, be the
means of showing, first, that even the direct uses of the studies which you
iuclude under the general designation of humanity are more considerable when
they are collected into one view than might have been supposed; and, secondly,
that the most distinguished professional men bear witness with an overflowing authority in favour of a course of education in which to train the mind
shall be the first object, and to stock it the second. Man is to be trained
chiefly by studying and knowing man; and we are prepared for knowing man
in life by learning him first in books, much as we are taught to draw from
drawings before we draw from nature. But if man is to be studied in books,
he will best be studied in such books as present him to us in the largest,
strongest, simplest?in a word, the most typical forms. These forms are principally found among the ancients. Nor can the study of the ancients be dissociated from the study of their languages. There is a profound relation
between thought and the investiture which it chooses for itself; and it is as a
general rule most true that we cannot know men or nations unless we know
their tongue. Diversitv of language is, like labour, a temporal penalty inflicted
on our race for sin; but, being like labour originally penal, like labour it
becomes by the ordinance of God a fertile source of blessing to those who use
it aright. It is the instrument of thought, but it is not a blind or dead instrument ; it is like the works in metal that Da;dalus and Vulcan were fabled to
produce, and even as the limping deity was supported in his walk by his nymphs
of so-called brass, in like manner language reacts upon and bears up the thoughts
from which it springs, and comes to take rank among the most effective powers
for the discipline of the mind. But more important than the quest of professional knowledge, more vital than the most effective intellectual training, is
the remaining question of the temper and aim with which the youth prosecutes
his work. It is my privilege to be the first person who has ever thus
addressed you in the capacity of Rector. (Loud applause.) But without
doubt your ears have caught the echo of those affectionate and weighty
counsels which the most eminent men of the age have not thought it beneath
them to address to the students of a sister Scottish University. Let me
remind you how one of European fame, who is now your and my academical
superior?how the great jurist, orator, philosopher, and legislator, who is
our Chancellor?how Lord Brougham besought the youth of Glasgow, as I, in
his words, would more feebly, but not less earnestly pray you, ' to believe
how incomparably the present season is verily and indeed the most precious
of your whole lives,5 and how ' every hour you squander here will,' in other
days, 'rise up against you, and be paid for by years of bitter but unavailing
regrets.' Let me recall to you how another Lord Rector of Glasgow, whose
name is cherished in every cottage of his country, and whose strong sagacity,
vast range of experience, and energy of will were not one whit more eminent
than the tenderness of his conscience and his ever-wakeful and wearing sense
of public duty?let me recall to you how Sir Robert Peel, choosing from his
quiver with a congenial forethought that shaft which was most likely to strike
home, averred before the same academic audience, what may as safely be declared to you, that ? there is a presumption, amounting almost to certainty,
that if any one of you will determine to be eminent, in whatever profession
you may choose, and will act with unvarying steadiness in pursuance of that
determination, you will, if health and strength be given to you, infallibly
succeed.' The mountain-tops of Scotland behold on every side of them the
V
MR. GLADSTONE ON STUDENT-LIFE AND DUTIES. xlv
"witness, and many a one of what were once her morasses and her moorlands,
now blossoming as the rose, carries on its face the proof that it is in man and
not in his circumstances that the secret of his destiny resides. Tor most of
you that destiny will take its final bent towards evil or towards good, not
from the information you imbibe, but from the habits of mind, thought, and
life that you shall acquire during your academical career. Could you with the
bodily eye see the moments of it as they fly, you would see them all pass by
you, as the bee that has rifled the heather bears its honey through the air,
charged with the promise, or it may be with the menace, of the future. In
jnany things it is wise to believe before experience until you may know, and
in order that you may know; and believe me when I tell you that the thrift of
time will repay you in after life with an usury of profit beyond your most sanguine dreams, and that the waste of it will make you dwindle, alike in intellectual and in moral stature, beyond your darkest reckonings. I am Scotchman enough to know, that among you there are always many vtho are
already, even in their tender years, fighting with a mature and manful courage
the battle of life. When they feel themselves lonely amidst the crowd?when
thev are for a moment disheartened by that difficulty which is the rude and
rocking-cradle of every kind of excellence?when they are conscious of the
pinch of poverty and self-denial, let them be conscious, too, that a sleepless
eye is watching them from above, that their honest efforts are assisted, their
humble prayers are heard, and all things are working together for their good.
Is not this the life of faith which walks by your side from your rising in the
morning to your lying down at night?which lights up for you the cheerless
world, and transfigures all that you encounter, whatever be its outward form,
with hues brought down from heaven ? These considerations are applicable to all
?f you. You are all in training here for educated life, for the higher forms of
mental experience, for circles limited, perhaps, but yet circles of social influence
3.n.d leadership. Some of you may be chosen to greater distinctions and heavier
trials, and may enter into that class of which each member while he lives is
envied or admired?
' And when he dies, he bears a lofty name,
A light, a landmark on the cliffs of fame.'
And, gentlemen, the hope of an enduring fame is, without doubt, a powerful
incentive to virtuous action, and you may suffer it to float before you as a
vision of refreshment, second always, and second with long interval, to your
conscience and the will of God. For an enduring fame is one stamped by the
judgment of the future, that future which dispels illusions and smashes idols
into dust. Little of what is criminal, little of what is idle, can endure even
the first touch of the ordeal; it seems as though this purging power following
at the heels of man and trying his work were a witness and a harbinger of the
great and final account. So, then, the thirst of an enduring fame is near akin
to the love of true excellence. But the fame of the moment is a danger?ns possession and a bastard motive ; and he who does his acts in order that
the echo of them may come back as a soft music in his ears plays false to
his noble destiny as a Christian man, places himself in continual danger of
dallying with wron"1, and taints even his virtuous actions at their source. Not
the sublime words alone of the Son of God and His apostles, but heathenism
too, even while its vision was limited to this passing scene,^ testifies with an
hundred tongues that the passing scene itself presents to us virtue as an object
and a moral law, graven deeply in our whole nature, as a guide. J3ut now,
when the screens that so bounded human vision have been removed, it were
sad, indeed, and not more sad than shameful, if that being should be content
to live for the opinion of the moment who has immortality for his inheritance.
He that never dies, can he not afi'ord to wait patiently awhile ? And can hg
Yi
xlvi PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF THE IRISH EXODUS.
not let faith, which interprets the present, also guarantee the future ? Nor
are there any two habits of mind more distinct than that which chooses success
for its aim and covets after popularity, and that, on the other hand, which
values and defers to the judgments of our fellow-men as helps in the attainment
of truth. But I would not confound with the sordid worship of popularity in
after life the graceful and instinctive love of praise in the uncritical period of
youth. On the contrary, I say, avail yourselves of that stimulus to good deeds,
and, when it proceeds from worthy sources and lights upon worthy conduct,
yield yourselves to the warm satisfaction it inspires; hut yet, even while
?young, and even amid the glow of that delight, keep a vigilant eye upon yourselves ; refer the honour to Him from whom all honour comes, and ever be
inwardly ashamed for not being worthier of His gifts. But, gentlemen, if you
let yourselves enjoy the praise of your teachers, let me beseech you to repay
their care, and to help their arduous work by entering into it with them, and
by showing that you meet their exertions neither with a churlish mistrust nor
with a passive indifference; but with free and ready gratitude. Rely upon it
they require your sympathy, and they require it more m proportion as they are
worthy of their work. The faithful and able teacher, says an old adage, is in
loco parentis. His charge certainly resembles the mother's care in this, that,
if he be devoted to his task, you can measure neither the cost to him of the
efforts which he makes, nor the debt of gratitude you owe him. The great
poet of Italy?the profound and lofty Dante?had had for an instructor one
Whom, for a miserable vice, his poem places in the regions of the damned; and
yet this lord of song?this prophet of all the knowledge of his time?this
master of every gift that can adorn the human mind?when in those dreary
regions he sees the known image of his tutor, avows, in language of a magniticence all his own, that he cannot, even now, withhold his sympathy and sorrow
from his unhappy teacher, for he recollects how, in the upper world, with a
father's tender care, that teacher had pointed to him the way, by which man
becomes immortal. Gentlemen, I have detained you long. Perhaps
I have not had time to be brief; certainly I could have wished for much
larger opportunities of maturing and verifying what I have addressed to you
upon subjects which have always possessed a hold on my heart, and have long
had public and palpable claims on my attention. Such as I have I give ; and
now, finally, in bidding you farewell, let me invoke every blessing upon your
venerable University in its new career; upon the youth, by whom its halls are
gladdened, and upon the distinguished head and able teachers by whom its
places of authority are adorned.
Turning now to other events of the quarter which come within the
scope of our Retrospect, we would note, first, a remarkable article of
the Times (May 3) upon the persistency of the Irish emigration. The
psychological aspects of the subject, as indicated by the writer, are of
singular and grave interest, and while reading we seem as if we were
looking forwards into the probable future of a race:?
" The Irish emigration still continues, at a rate which threatens results far
beyond the calculations of the economist, perhaps even the wishes of the
statesman. It is no longer the overflow of a vessel full to repletion, but the
operation of a syphon which drains to the very bottom. If that syphon may
be regarded in any visible form it is the railway system, which hi the eyes of
every Irishman appears to have one common terminus across the Atlantic. He
sees trains of hopeful, if not happy, faces going off to the Land of Promise,
from which relations and friends have sent not only invitations but the means
of accepting them. A train starts to catch an emigrant-vessel as regularly as
PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF THE IRISH EXODUS. xlvii
la England to catch _ a steamer across the Channel. The emigrant-ships have
10 ?"ner to peep into every little port to pick up their passengers. They
semble at Cork, and pass in a continuous stream, if it may be so called, across
wlf' i0C^a^', which, wide as it be, is easier to an Irishman than the gulf
1C <Mes him from England. At present it cannot be said that there
a,Ves ,.[e^and as much as the natural increase, but the causes in operation are
i , j ^ely to make it exceed that rate. As the small holdings are thrown
o larger, and the farms grow to the English scale, there must be numbers
very where bred to the occupation of land, and with all the ideas adapted to it,
tjU' holdings that will require little or 110 capital. They go across
*e Atlantic as a matter of course. Brothers, uncles, and neighbours have
gone long before, and send, not only good news, but the substantial pledge of
s truth in the shape of orders on Irish banks. In Ireland the remark is that
'ese are welcome to go. They are the Irish surplus. They constitute the
ore-house of independent enterprise which Providence would seem to have
Prepared through long ages for the peopling of the New World. But there is
? ass who are not bid " God speed" quite so cheerfully. Labourers?that
ls? men with strong sinews and thews, who can do a good day's work, and are
content to receive wages, are, as they always have been, the chief want of
reland. The new race of farmers do not like to see them go. But who can
"ft ^ c^00se *n human aifairs ? There are good, easy souls, who enter life
with, this speculation, who expect in everything the fruit without the husk,
* without the bone, the sweet without the sour, the harvest without
le tillage. In Ireland they expect a good farm, a good house, a good land01 d, and some good labourers, who shall come when wanted and do a good
aJ s work. But the postman knocks at all doors, and brings to these, as well
as their prouder neighbours, letters and remittances, and good accounts from
the Western States : so off they go, leaving the new tenant farmers to manage
aS ttel! as they can.
" It this goes on long, as it is likely to go 011, Ireland will become very
^iglish and the United States very Irish. When an English agriculturist
takes a farm jn Qa]way or Kerry he will take English labourers with him.
.ys we shall come to at last, strange as it may now seem. The days may,
^ eed, come when Ireland will be no more Celtic than the Scotch Lowlands are
. ason,the Eastern Counties Danish, Cornwall even Phoenician, and Ireland
1 self Milesian or Spanish. But several millions more undiluted Celts cannot
5 P0ured into the United States without leavening them even more strongly
Wlth that very marked element. There will be more poetry, more eloquence,
h]0r j ^anaticism, more faction, more conspiracy, more resentment, more
loodshed, more insubordination, more of the narrow politics that take
origin from race and stop short of society, that ever account the
hole less than the part, and think the best use of government is to do convenient ill. So an Ireland there will still be, but on a colossal scale, and in a
lew world. We shall only have pushed the Celt Westwards. Then, 110
onger cooped up between the Liffey and the Shannon, he will spread from
ew York to San Erancisco, and keep up the ancient feud at an unforeseen
vantage. We must gird our loins to encounter the Nemesis of seven
centuries' misgovernment. To the end of time a hundred million people spread
0ver the largest habitable area in the world, and confronting us everywhere by
sea and by land, will remember that their forefathers paid tithe to the ProtesJV1. , ergy> rent to absentee landlords, and a forced obedience to the laws
u . these had made. Possibly a darker and more turbulent era at home
^mtervene to efface these Old World recollections. But, even though the
engeful Celt should forgive and forget, that will not prevent the surer
eveiopment of an intractable race and untoward circumstances in the character
ttie great American nation. It will be more than half Celtic. Saxon; Dane,
xlviii THE AGAPEMONE.
Gael, Trench, German, African, and other races will be there, but the preponderating element will be that which lias risen to its perfection and glory on
the banks of the Seine, and fallen to its depth and despair on the western promontories of Ireland. As ' the child is father of the man,' so have we seen nursed
and educated by our side at home the power that will dominate over the. New
World, show its influence over either ocean, and be the lord of a whole hemisphere. This is the true and final home of the Celtic race. It is tor this that
it has wandered and suffered these two thousand years; for this, that it has
never planted the firm foot of civilization on the soil that was not to be its
resting-place, but has dwelt in tents and hovels, and not possessed the soil
under the soles of its feet. We have been owners and masters of Ireland that
its inhabitants might one day have elsewhere a grander possession and rule.
"But what will be the reaction upon us that remain behind ? The present
natural rate of increase in these isles would take three times the present rate
of emigration to bring it to a sandstill. We have to suppose, what, indeed, is
not unlikely, that with the growth of the United States and the British colonies,
and with the increased and more rapid means of communication, more and
more of our people will leave these shores. But wealth and opportunities will
still increase at home. Machinery will supply the working power which ever
requires the hand of man to guide it; and, while multitudes leave, iron feet and
iron fingers will multiply at home. These are servants that rebel not and love
not; fit for cold masters; that will not fly, and need neither love nor justice.
So we shall have, perhaps, in these islands that peace which we have long
desired, if indeed our neighbours will but leave us alone. Most probably, too,
as the Englishman supersedes the Irishman in the open market of labour, in
our fields and our streets, there will be more order and more subordination
to the rights of the proprietor and the employer. But it cannot be expected
that we should escape the inconveniences of a household from which the
stronger sex, the stronger age, the stronger hands, and the stronger will are
ever flying. The community left behind will suffer, probably, more than now,
the disparity of the sexes, the burden of the weak and improvident, and the
incubus of those who sit on society and demand to be supported. We are an
old and burdened State, but we shall be older and shall have heavier burdens
still before we have done. There are other encumbrances besides armies and
navies, and civil services, and church establishments, that accumulate upon old
States, devour their substance, and hamper their movements. There is the
universal depredator; the consumer, and nothing else; the race for whom
institutions were founded of old by pious fools, and for whom benevolence is
this day besotted. Who is there that stands but within speaking distance
of the avenues of preferment who does not know the monster evil of an old and
wealthy State ? There are, indeed, such ' unclean birds,' we dispute not with
Mr. Bright, that settle on the branches of the social tree, and devour or spoil
the fruits of industry and virtue. But we need not go within the walls of Parliament to learn what and where they are. They are everywhere ; they infest
all classes; they devour, they invade, they molest; they paralyze, they exhaust.
This is the parasite at the table of the rich man which constitutes the chief
bane of a high civilization and a fixed state of society. We are throwing off
Agitators and Repealers, Socialists, and perhaps Reformers; old England turns
itself on its bed and expects another slumber. But its own morbid growth of
idleness, luxury, pride, and vice it cannot so easily get rid of. They must
grow upon it, all the more from the absence of the more violent annoyances
that but lately formed the staple of its domestic annals.
Of different, but not less, and perhaps more immediate interest than
the possible results, psychological and general, of the Irish Exodus,
THE AGAPEMONE. xlix
are those events of the quarter which may serve to throw light upon
the groundwork of popular credulity and superstition. Standing head
and shoulders above all events of this kind, during the tri-mestral period,
!s the history of the doings at the notorious Agapernone, in Somersetshire. Certain proceedings in one of our courts of law have brought
the inner-workings of the so-called " Abode of Love" once more before
the public. We had intended to have reprinted in this number of our
Journal the evidence tendered in court, this being of no small importance to the psychological physician. The judgment, however, not
having been delivered we are compelled to postpone our report of the
trial. In the meantime, the following summary of the history of the
Agapemone, will be read with interest:?
" It is now some twelve or thirteen years ago that a quiet parish in Somersetshire was astonished by the arrival of a clergyman who professed strange
doctrines, and was accompanied by strange disciples. According to the chief
of this new sect a fresh religious epoch had opened on the world. We were
to live under a new dispensation, which, if it did not contradict, was at least to
supersede, the forms of belief in which we had all been trained. The keystone
of the new system was this:?Various covenants have been at different times
offered to man by his Creator. At first Adam was the Divine witness; then
the Patriarchs, as Noah and Abraham; then a far greater One than these.
But each ' dispensation' was closed whenever any one was found perfect under
it. Now, in Brother Prince was found perfection under the Christian dispensation, and, consequently, a new religious epoch commenced, with this man as
its witness. Is Prince a religious enthusiast, a lunatic, or an adventurer ? _ It
seems probable that he has passed through the first two phases of mental aberration,
but we should be not a little curious to know at the present time if Brother
Prince believes in himself. The course of his dealing with the property of the
dupes whose reason he has perverted certainly affords tolerably strong evidence
that he may lay claim to the third character named. If Brother Prince is mad,
he has lucid intervals when he can thoroughly well distinguish between a hawk
and a handsaw. If at one moment he is the raving leader of a set of religious
lunatics, we find him immediately afterwards discussing the intricacies of the
share-market with all the acumen of an accomplished stockbroker, and tying up
the discretion of his victims in a way which would have won for him the approval of a Lincoln's-inn conveyancer. Brother Prince under one aspect may
oe a blasphemous buffoon, but under another he is certainly a capital man of
business. Being, then, such as we have described, he arrived about the year
1847 at the Castle Inn, at Taunton, with his portmanteaus and his prophetical
pretensions. He had been educated originally at Lampeter College, in Wales,
and had been ordained Deacon and Priest about twenty years ago. The method
of liis ministrations, however, does not seem to have earned for him the
favour of his spiritual chiefs, for he was successively deprived of his licence,
Jrst in Somersetshire by the Bishop of the Diocese, and subsequently by the
bishop of Ely. Being thus an outcast from the regular ministry, in the year
1843 lie repaired to Brighton, and there opened a chapel of his own, which he
called Adullam, and probably the name was well chosen. In the four following
years the ruin of his wits was complete, or his schemes for securing to himself
a luxurious and idle existence at the expense of his dupes were sufficiently
matured. The scene of his earliest pastoral labours was chosen as the apt spot
for the development of his more splendid fortunes; so to Somersetshire herepaired once more with his first followers, among whom four half-witted
f
1 THE AGAPEMONE.
sisters?the Misses Nottidge?occupied a conspicuous place. With the money
he procured from them and others, or, as he would say, with their free-will
offerings, he purchased a little property of about two hundred acres. On this
he either found a house or built one?we know not how this matter stands?
which has since obtained sufficient notoriety under the name of the Agapemone. It was calculated to accommodate some fifty or sixty inmates. There
were around it extensive pleasure-grounds, and gardens, and conservatories,
and hothouses, and all the appliances of a comfortable country-house. The
fee-simple was in Brother Prince?he was not so absorbed in spiritual considerations but that he guarded his private interests carefully upon so capital
a point. There was, however, more than this. By some strange mental twist
the Prophet had a great fancy for horses and fine equipages. In the Agapemone were to be found horses of great value, both for riding and driving.
Brother Prince himself seems to have taken huge delight in driving about the
country in a carriage drawn by four horses. The privilege of using this vehiclc
was occasionally conceded to the disciples, and seems to have been held forth
conspicuously as one of the great temporal advantages to be enjoyed by the
faithful who had cast in their lot with the High Priest of the New Dispensation.
" Meanwhile strange stories got abroad. Many ladies were received into the
Agapemone, and the neighbours believed that the practices of Mormonism
might in many particulars be advantageously compared with those of the Agapemonists. There was a public trial some few yeai-s ago in which it appeared
in evidence, rightly or wrongly, that the Prophet selected female disciples in
a manner in which it would be difficult to say whether the ludicrous or the
horrible more prevailed. It is hard indeed to believe that Brother Prince was
merely a religious fanatic. He instructed his wretched dupes that the judgment had arrived, and that the day of prayer and supplication was over; selfhumiliation and self-denial had lost their virtue, and nothing remained but the
necessity for pure enjoyment. Men made perfect were to play at hockey.
Now, among the earliest of Prince's followers were the four ladies already
named. He had known the Misses Nottidge at the second curacy he held, at
Stoke, in Suffolk; and when he was driven to his Adullam from that place by
the persecution of the Bishop of Ely these ladies went with him. Their names
were respectively Louisa Jane, Harriet, Clara, and Agnes. Their father was
dead, and he had left to eacli of them a sum of 5000/. or 6000/. In 1845,
when Prince returned to Cliarlwich, in Somersetshire, he went by way of
Taunton, the Misses Nottidge being of his party, and defraying all the expenses of the journey. When at Taunton, Prince sent for Miss Harriet
Nottidge, and informed her that she would be 'giving great glory' &c., by
marrying his friend Mr. Lewis Price. Her consent was obtained. Miss Agnes
Nottidge was next summoned, and informed that the Spirit had in store
for her a great blessing?she was to be married in a few days to Brother
Thomas. The wretched lady talked about a settlement in favour of any children she might have by this marriage. Her objections were overruled, and
the letter written to her by Brother Thomas on the subject, who signed himself
' her's affectionately in the everlasting covenant,' may stand as one of the most
remarkable documents for its unblushing impudence ever known even in the
annals of religious imposture. Two days afterwards Prince extorted from the
third sister, Miss Clara Nottidge, a promise to marry his follower, one William
Cobbe. Thomas and Price were in indigent circumstances at the time, and
Cobbe was entitled to a sum of money of his own of about 1000/. No settlement was made of the property of any of the three sisters. It was revealed to
Prince that the marriages were to take place on the same day, at Swansea,
and, what will, no doubt, prove truly appalling to auy lady who may read this
story, the three brides were to be dressed in black. In July, 1845, the marriages were solemnized at Swansea. Poor Mrs. Thomas seems to have had
THE AGAPEMONE. H
even at thai period some suspicion of the Prophet's true character. She endeavoured to dissuade her husband from obeying a summons which he received from
him at Ilfracombe, and which ran thus:?' Brother Thomas, I command you to
arise and come to Weymouth. Amen !' The struggle against Prince's influence
Was continued for a short time, but, as might have been anticipated, was wholly
unavailing, and the end of it was that Mrs. Thomas was not allowed to reside
with her husband at the Agapemone. In 1816 a child was born to her, and
after a sharp struggle Mrs. Thomas and her mother were in 1850 appointed by
the then Vice-Chancellor Knight Bruce guardians of the child. Meanwhile
Prince had drawn the eldest sister, Louisa Jane, into his toils. In 1846,
howevever, this unfortunate lady, who had evinced symptoms of insanity,
was placed in confinement, from which she was released in 1818 by the Lunacy
Commissioners. On the very day of her release Brother Thomas was waiting
for her, and took her down to the City to Prince's broker, to execute a transfer
to the Prophet of the stock then standing in her name. There was a momentary
difficulty about the precise amount, but very shortly afterwards the transfer
was executed. In 1858 Miss Louisa Jane Nottidge died intestate. The
question which has been for several days discussed before Vice-Chancellor Sir
J. Stuart was as to the validity of this transfer.
The case for the defendant, as very ably stated by the counsel engaged,
amounted to this,?that you could not accept any divergence from the religious
opinions which are accepted by the majority as positive evidence of insanity.
In 1818 Miss Louisa Jane Nottidge, after due investigation, had been released
from confinement by order of the Lunacy Commissioners, a competent tribunal
for inquiring into and adjudicating upon the'matter. She subsequently brought
an action against her relatives for false imprisonment in the asylum, and
recovered damages against them ; therefore, if any weight is to be attached to
the previous decisions of judges of sufficient jurisdiction, Miss Louisa Jane
Nottidge was not of insane mind at the time of the execution of the transfer.
Furthermore, she had every reason?it must be understood that we are but recapitulating the arguments used for the defence?to disinherit those of her own
relatives who had been instrumental in locking her up, and in constituting
Brother Prince the object of her bounty, inasmuch as he was not only the
object of her religious reverence, but he was to provide, and actually did provide her, with alf the comforts and luxuries of life. She was then not of insane
mind,?she was deeply exasperated against her own family, as deeply interested in favour of Prince,?she was anxious to spend the remainder of her days
the Agapemone, in the society of her sisters Harriet and Clara, Mrs. Price and
Mrs. Cobbe, and she was to receive as a quid pro quo sustenance and support in
this establishment during the remainder of her days. We have given the
arguments with full force, because it is earnestly to be hoped, in the interest of
Public morality, that the Court of Chancery may find it consistent with a due
and impartial administration of the law to annul this transfer. It would be a
most unhappy conclusion if we were to be told upon the authority of a ViceChancellor that as English law stands a religious^ imposter ? a conscientious
fanatic, if you will?might legitimately exercise his spiritual influence over his
female devotees so as to induce them to denude themselves and their natural
heirs and kinsfolk of their propertv in his behalf. We will drop the question of
religious imposture altogether, but what if Dr. Paul Cullen?what if our
own Archbishop of Canterbury, had extracted a gift or transfer by religious
pressure from a half-witted woman,?ought the validity of such an act to be
maintained ? Surely not. The weakest point of Prince's case was the one in
which he endeavoured to make out that he had personally nothing to do with
the transfer?it was Miss Nottidge's free-will offering. Now, when the wretched
lady was let out of the asylum whom did she find on the threshold ? The
chosen disciple of Prince. What did he do with her ? He took her straightway
lii THE ETHICAL INFLUENCE OF THE WINE-BILL.
down to Prince's broker in the City of London, to execute the transfer of the
stock standing in her name to Prince. When the transaction was completed
whither did he conduct her, and to whom? To the Agapemone and to Prince
?and she lived with him, and under his influence, from the date of her liberation from the asylum until the date of her decease. Y et it was gravely argued
thaf Prince couid not be held to be cognizant of the transaction. The last
thirteen or fourteen years of Miss Nottidge's life, in short, were spent between
the Agapemone and the asylum?many will question if she was ever out of a
lunatic asylum at all. We do not, of course, affect to discuss this question with
the technical knowledge of those gentlemen who have spent their lives in the
study and the administration of equity ; but as a matter of common sense it
will be most deplorable if the silliest and weakest minds of the community are
left at the mercy of such men as Prince, and if the Court of Chancery holds
that they may apply the religious screw to such women as the Nottidges, and
pocket the plunder.?{Times, June 12th.)
The introduction, in May, of a Bill into Parliament for the removal
of certain restrictions upon the sale of wine in refreshment houses, gave
rise to much discussion as to the influence which greater facility of
access to wine might have upon intemperance in the country. The
moral question is one of no small moment; but in its political aspect,
by some strange freaks of partizanship, the question became so waiped,
that little respect was shown to those who contended against the Bill
from a conviction that it would have the effect of promoting still
greater intemperance in the land. On the opposite side it was argued
that the substitution of a more innocent liquor like wine for a more
highly stimulating and heady fluid like spirit or beer, could not but be
advantageous to the community. A similar argument in respect to
beer as compared with spirits, if we mistake not, was urged with great
effect when the Bill authorizing the establishment of beer-houses
throughout the land was debated in Parliament several years ago.
Now, in 1854, a Select Committee of the House of Commons reported
that?" The beer-shop system was a failure. It was established under
the belief that it would give the public their beer cheap and pure ;
would dissociate beer-drinking from drunkenness, and lead to the establishment, throughout the country, of a class of houses of refreshment
altogether free from the disorders supposed to attend exclusively on the
sale of spirits." This does not look very promising for the argument on
the moral advantages which some suppose may arise from facilitating
access to wines. But let us listen to Mr. Gladstone's remarks on the
question. (Debate, May 7th.) He said :?
"It is a question whether this Bill will tend to promote and increase intemperance. Who is it that tells us such will be the case ? Who are they
who combine to form the opposition to this Bill upon the ground that it is
likely to increase drunkenness ? It is the same proposition, but it proceeds
from parties who are singularly united in a sort of concordant discord. There
is an old fable, called, I believe, the ' Vision of Hercules,' which is in point.
THE -ETHICAL INFLUENCE OF THE WINE-BILL. liii
When Hercules was young he dreamt that he came to a certain point
of the road, where he was met bv two figures ?one the figure of
?irtue, and the other the figure of Vice. He was solicited by Virtue to
go one way and by Vice to go another. We are iu the position of Hercules, as we are encountered by two figures of Virtue and Vice. But,
instead of Virtue soliciting us to go one way and Vice pressing us to go
another, we have both Virtue and Vice leagued against us, both standing
across the road and refusing to allow us to proceed. I know the virtuous
motives of those who support the temperance movement, which the lion,
member for Marylebone (Mr. James) has manfully thrown overboard in his
speech. The arguments used are a group ot assumptions fastened together,
which it is difficult to separate and to deal with. We are told that the use of
wine is to be considered exactly as that of ardent spirits. These practical
philosophers will not condescend to draw any distinction; they have invented
phrases, ' alcoholic liquids,' ' intoxicating liquids,' and such like; but my
right hon. friend the member for Oxfordshire could readily show them the fallacy of mixing up things which are so distinct. There is a dillerence between
the lighter wines of Northern Europe and the gin which is consumed in rivers in
our great towns. Some one has given us a deplorable description of the drunkenness that prevails in France, and I begin to think that no English traveller
pouldhave made a proper use ofhis eyes. However,Ihavefoundatestimony which
!s entitled to great weight, coming from a man pledged by his sacred profession,
eminent for his eloquence, distinguished and beloved lor all his virtues?Dr.
Guthrie. That gentleman before he devoted himself to his present calling resided for some time on the Continent, and in one of his sermons he says that he
was in Brussels and Paris during periods of great national festivity, and that he
did not see in seven weeks as much drunkenness in those capitals as he would
meet with in seven short hours in London, Edinburgh, or any other of our large
towns. That, Sir, is the testimony of an impartial witness. I have spoken of
the fable of Virtue and Vice; and I appeal from them to what I call the common sense of the House of Commons and of the country at large. _ I have heard
references made to the number of petitions presented against this Bill; but I
deny that this Bill is disapproved by the public opinion of England. We all
know that wherever there is an organization the numbers which it commands
are easily available for the purpose of signing petitions; but in this case we
have the strongest evidence, from the press, from various authorities, and even
from several drstinguislied prelates, in favour of the principle of the measure.
Ihe real question is this?Will you attempt to modify or improve the present
system? I grant that this Bill is so far inconsistent with the report of the
committee that it falls short of that report, but I hold that it is in harmony both
ith the spirit and even with the letter of that report. It is insisted by some
that you should treat the use of wine, and even of the lightest wine, as you do
the use of brandy, for instance. It is also insisted that you have nothing to look at
except the number of houses for the sale of liquors in order to ascertain the
measure of drunkenness that prevails. The case of Liverpool has been referred
to, and I will show the House how untrue that is in the case of Liverpool. It
js true there is a large number of publichouses in Liverpool, but I think the
hon. member for Leominster (Mr. Hardy) when he was dealing with this subject, and when he was referring to the case of Liverpool and Manchester, did
great injustice even to those beer-houses with respect to which so much has been
s?id. He adverted to the great difference in point of sobrietv in favour of Manchester against Liverpool, but he omitted to notice that the characteristic of
Manchester was that there was a greater number of public houses with a smaller
number of beer-houses, and that the characteristic of Liverpool was the reverse.
| have got before me the number of persons brought before the magistrates in
Liverpool for drunkenness in a series of years, and also the number of licenses
liv AN INKLING OF NETHER-CLASS LIFE.
granted. I find that in 1846 the magistrates gave seventeen new licenses to
public houses ; and in 1847 there was a diminution of 256 in the number of
persons brought up for drunkenness. In 1852 the magistrates gave no newlicenses ; and in 1853 there was an increase of 1,144 in the number of persons
brought up for drunkenness. In 1854 the magistrates gave two new licenses ;
and in 1855 there was an increase of 1,018 in the persons taken up for drunkenness. Lastly, in 1857 the magistrates gave the immense number of thirty-two
new licenses in Liverpool; and in 1858 there was a decrease of 1,259 in the
persons brought up for drunkenness. That shows you how loosely and how
widely these doctrines are thrown out. Some hon. members may have seen a
small tract in which a great number of eminent medical men in this country are
made to declare that all strong liquors are extremely mischievous, and that total
and universal abstinence from alcoholic drinks and intoxicating beverages of all
kinds would greatly contribute to the health and prosperity of the human race.
Naturally enough, I looked among the list of names for that of the gentleman
of whose professional assistance I had availed myself, and by whom 1 have been
recently advised. I found his signature appended to the document, at which I
was not a little surprised, seeing 1 remembered that he recommended me, as a
means of recovering my strength, not illiberal potations. I afterwards asked
him whether he had signed that document or not; he replied that he had, and
on expressing my surprise at his having done so, he assured me that in signing
it he meant nothing more than that excess of water was less injurious than
excess of wine. That was the opinion of a very eminent medical man, Dr.
Ferguson; and I believe it is a gross error to suppose that the testimony of
those who study the health of mankind is against the moderate use of spirituous
liquors. It is said by some that there can be no such thing as a moderate use
of them. But is not the love of money, for example, as prevalent and as universal as the love of wine ? I never heard that those who denounced the use
of alcoholic liquors carried their own principles with consistency into effect;
and if they did so, the end of it ought to be that they should go, like the Anchorites of old and people the deserts of Egypt. But the doctrine, that the
use of wine is to be treated as an unqualified mischief, and almost as a sin, is
incompatible with the usages and necessities of society. That, however, is at
the root of the opposition made by one portion of the opponents to this Bill."
This is not very satisfactory ; but the question is now submitted to
experience, and we apprehend that the majority of individuals will not
trouble themselves with any other view of the subject, than that it is a
very pleasant change to be able to get light wine at a reasonable rate,
without the, until now, almost necessary associations of beer and
spirits; an advantage that we are by no means disposed to murmur at.
From the morality of wine-drinking to the morality of the lower
classes of our great towns is an easy step. The following illustration
of certain phases of life among the metropolitan lower classes is instructive :?
Mansion-house.?John Keating, an Irish shoemaker, one half of whose
features was obscured by hair, and the other half by dirt, was charged with
assaulting Ellen Lawler by stabbing her in the face with a knife.
The prosecutrix, the left side of whose face exhibited a huge circular patch
of sticking plaster said, " Plase yer Honours, my name's Ellen Lawler."
AN INKLING OF NETHER-CLASS LIFE. lv
Mr. Goodman (chief clerk).?And what is your hnsband's name ?
Prosecutrix.?Pat Bresshanan.
Mr. Goodman.?Then I suppose your name is Bresshanan ?
Prosecutrix.?Lord, me, yer Honour, my name is Ellen Lawler.
Mr. Goodman.?How can that be if he's your husband ? Your maiden
name, you mean, I suppose, was Lawler ?
Prosecutrix.?Yes, my maiden name, and my name now; for, though I call
| at my husband, we ain't married, but we've lived together a long while, and
he s a good husband, too.
Mr. Goodman.?Why did you not say at first that you were not married?
Go on with your evidence.
Prosecutrix.?Well, on Saturday night I was sitting at supper with Pat,
when who should come in but Moggy Qunk ; so, says I, " Sit down, Mog, and
have some supper." But, yer Honours, she was nasty, and got to words, and
at last says she, " If you are a woman, come down into the yard and have it
out" "Very well, Mog," says I, "I'll come down, cos you know I ain't
afraid of you;" and she says, " No, I knows that, I knows you are too good a
woman for me and that's right, yer Honours, because, though I'm a quiet
Woman, 1 can stick up for myself like a good 'un, only I didn't want to hurt
her nor nobody. Well, when we got downstairs we quieted, and we wasn't
a-going to fight; but there was a mob at the door, and that there prisoner
there made a rush at me, and gave me a job in the mouth with his fist, which
loosened all my teeth, and then he jobbed at me again with something in his
hand, which I took to be a knife, and stabbed me in the face. So I calls out,
"Pat," says I, "he's made a hole in my face with a knife, and I'm kilt intirely !" and then down I went, while Pat dashed out and collared him. The
hole ain't quite through my cheek, but it's a whacker, and I hopes your worship
Will give me purtection.
Pat Bresshanan said?When that man stabbed my wifeMr. Goodman.?She says she is not your wife, though she lives with you.
Witness.?So she does; and an honest woman she is.
Sir 11. Carden.?Why don't you make an honest woman of her?
Witness.?I don't mean in that way; but I mean that she's too honest to
hieddle with anybody's business.
Mr. Goodman.?She can fight well, at all events, according to her own
confession. ?
Witness.?She's a regular good'un, yer Honour; she's a rale beauty, and
ho mistake.
Sir 11. Carden.?Then why don't you marry her ?
.^Witness.?Well, I will, yer Honour, I will._ But about this here prisoner.
throwing
^ater over me just before, and when I went out again I took a little poker
i h me, and 1 hit her with that. It was a very little one, yer Honour, but
sharp at the end.
Sir R. Carden.?A poker would not have cut like a knife. However, knife
0r poker, I shall send you to prison for twenty-one days.
-1- rosecutrix.?And, oh! yer Honour, wont you bind him over to keep the
Peace towards me?
tol'lr ?".^arden.?The police will protect you. I'd rather bind you over not
"re with that man again till you are married.
p^secutrix.?And, faith, yer worship, I'd not object to that.
T1 Bresshanan.?And, yer Honour, I will marry her. I've often talked
n? ltjJnand H?w I'll do it.
ey then left the Court.?Times, April 10th.
lvi THE MORAL THERAPEUTICS OF LONDON.
It is by no means an easy task to exercise a moral influence upon the
classes of the metropolitan population, of whom Pat Bresshanan and
his concubine are examples. We are not, however, doing what we
might in this matter. Far from it, indeed ; and we may derive some
very useful hints from sundry comments of the Times (April 16th), on I
a Pastoral Letter addressed by the Bishop of London to the laity
of the metropolitan diocese, at the beginning of the quarter :?
" The Bishop appeals very earnestly to the claims which the poor have on
those who live by their labour; claims substantially the same as those which
have fringed gentlemen's parks with picturesquely-constructed cottages, and
made the village church an almost necessary complement of the landscape.
Employers have only to hunt out their men in alley and court, and they will
find families as interesting, and as much in need of religion, as that at the
pretty lodge or the model farm. All this is strictly and sternly true. The relations of property and labour are the same everywhere, and were logic the
rule of life there would be no need for Pastoral Letters. But the simple fact
that things are not as they ought to be, and that the Diocese of London is not
in the same state as the rural districts of the favourite counties, sends us back
to inquire how this comes to pass. We must not expect that all people will
act by Rule of Three. If they act differently it is because the circumstances
are different, and it becomes us then to adapt our plans to those circumstances.
Vain it is, we grieve to say, to raise up moral visions in a crowded and dingy
metropolis. The squire and his lively sons, the lady andjher kind daughters,
the pastor and the parsonage, and all the rest that, barring a few ruffles and
an occasional hitch, goes on so smoothly on the estate of a great proprietor,
?all have a secret and a charm of their own. The chief secret of the whole
consists ill a warm mutual interest, and distinctly defined social relations.
Power, authority, influence, dependence, order,?in a word, nature itself,
blend all into one family, in which the landlord or the clergyman feels a real
and natural interest in the people, only second to that he has for his own wife
and children.
" Far different is the relation between employer and employed, or landlord
and tenant, when the one party knows not even the faces, names, or localities
of the other, and only regards them as dishonest and degraded beings, practising
every art of conspiracy and imposture to evade lawful claims on their labour or
their purse. Par different when the employed are only a class, changing their
masters, their habitations, and, too often, their companions, from year to year,
if not oftener. Unfortunately, the hackneyed phrase of the philanthropist who
appeals to us for the ' masses' is too true to the fact. There are masses that
we have to deal with; rude masses ; uninviting masses ; human nature in
oceans and swamps, rather than rivers and lakes. It is a great Dismal Swamp
of human existence for which the Bishop pleads. This is the true scene of
modern martyrdom. A colony at the Antipodes, a Northern County, the
Punjaub, Jamaica, Central Africa, and British Columbia, all have their charms
for this or that temperament or period of life. There is scarcely any position
that may not be sweetened with matrimony and 1000?. a-year. Even the Parliamentary curate's stipend of 80Z. is wealth and happiness to a young bachelor
who can ride colts, or has good health. Suffering and death themselves may
be made attractive by picturesque circumstances and the prospect of a wellwritten biography. You will not live to lose the manners of society, or return
home to be detected in Pejee provincialisms. Par otherwise is it to the man
who devotes himself to the pastoral duties of a clergyman, or even a good
neighbour, in a poor and populous metropolitan district. He sacrifices everyCOMMON-PLACE SUICIDE. lvii
?fortune, health, connexions, manners, tone, aspect, cheerfulness, with
he whole exterior,?ay, more than the exterior of the English gentleman.
. 'lefl the Apostle wished himself accursed for the Jews, he could not have
imagined an earthly lot in which the sacrifice could be so nearly consummated.
e man who spends his days among the London poor, and his nights for them,
may acquire the odour of sanctity, but he will lose that of society. Even
among the saints he can hardly expect to shine so bright or cut so good a
'oUre as the man who has ministered in handsome churches and splendid
drawing-rooms to the wants of a West-end congregation.
'All experience shows that a population of this sort, and in this condition,
cannot be dealt with as the simple folk within sight or sound of a village church,
0r even the small knot of gentry and tradespeople in a country town. In those
Vast metropolitan parishes,?three exceeding 35,000,' says the bishop; four
more exceeding 30,000; five more exceeding 25,000; six more exceeding
*0,000; and so on,?altogether sixty-six parishes exceeding 10,000, we have
a chaos of social elements, a dead level of conditions, a mere undeveloped mine
?i moral qualities. This is not the case for individual agencies, marvellous and
c\ en miraculous as they have proved in some emergencies. Ordinary men
cannot breast such waves, and even extraordinary men may fail. The Bishop
Jails missionary enterprise, but hopes more from any scheme for subdividing
parishes into manageable districts. The latter is the work to be promoted
oy the Diocesan Church Building Society. Of course, there must be both
churches and clergymen, and we hope eventually to see them adjusted one to
"e other. But, as there are not churches, or the churches that are, so we are
?ld, are but ill-attended ; as clergy engaged in this hard service require mutual
lelp and countenance; as the spiritual war is, in fact, the invasion of an
enemy's territory, we cannot help thinking the Bishop would get more sympathy, more money, and more men for a well devised missionary work, framed
0 the scale of the whole metropolis, than for more ' churches,' in the vulgar
?cnse of the word. The handsome church, on a costly site, with its actual or
threatened tower, its permanent endowment, and its staff of petty officers, is
he Church's three-decker, on which we spend so much, and so often find to be
useless. What we really want is the flotilla of gunboats, to push into lanes
and alleys. We want something more locomotive than church and steeple;
more winning even than reredoses and copes ; sweeter than church bells; and
more penetrating than either the feet or the eloquence of dignified rectors. If
Church does not adapt her means to the end, and make it a ' day of little
lnSs/ Dissenters and even Roman Catholics will. In fact, this is what they
' re doing; and this it is that enables them to make up for their immense dis^antages in social rank and position."
Several instances of suicide have been recorded by the daily and
Weekly journals within the three months which have just transpired, of
bleat interest to the practical psychologist, not so much from possessing any unusual feature, but from the light which the history of
le eases throws on the motives leading to ordinary every-day?in
short, common-place suicide. We shall terminate our Retrospect
J laying the cases before our readers simply as they have been reP?ited in the papers, chiefly the Times:?
Guildhall.?Ann Ginsty, a decent-looking woman, was charged with
empt ing to commit suicide by swallowing a quantity of laudanum.
l?Wp' said he was called to a room on the second-floor, at 3, Charlotte1'? tiedeross-street, where he found the prisoner suffering from the effects
Iviii COMMON-PLACE SUICIDE.
of poison. He saw an empty bottle labelled laudanum on the table, and she
said she had taken it all, alluding to the previous contents of the bottle. He
procured medical assistance, and as soon as the prisoner was in a condition to
be removed, he took her to the police-station.
Alderman Hale.-?Is this the first attempt she has ever made upon her life?
Officer.?No, Sir; she made a similar attempt about six weeks ago.
Alderman Hale.?And what is the cause of these attempts to destroy
herself ?
Springate, the gaolor.?She tells me, your worship, that it is jealousy of
her husband, and she has been on her knees all the morning praying for forgiveness.
The husband here came forward and corroborated the gaoler's statement.
Alderman Hale.?How long have you been married to the prisoner ?
The husband being unable to answer the question, the officer supplied the
information, stating that they had been married only eight months.
Alderman Hale (addressing the prisoner) said,?You must be a very foolish
woman to poison yourself because your husband is unfaithful to you; and let
me remind you that the offence you contemplated is a most serious one, for
the commandment, "Thou shalt do no murder," applies equally to the taking
of your own life as that of another.
Prisoner.?I will never do the same again, Sir. I will pray for forgiveness.
Alderman Hale.?Yery well. Upon that promise I will let you go home
with your husband; but if you are brought here again on such a charge, you
will most assuredly be tried at the Old Bailey for it.
Mansion-house.?Sarah Johnson, a decently-attired young woman, was
charged with attempting to destroy herself by taking laudanum in the iadies'
waiting-room at the Blaekwall Railway station.
Police-constable 519, said,?Yesterday afternoon, about four o'clock, I was
on duty at the Blaekwall Railway station, when I was called to the ladies'
waiting-room and told that the prisoner, who was sitting there, had been taking
poison. I asked if such was the case, and she said Yes; she had taken sixpennyworth of laudanum because she was so tired of her life that she could
live no longer. I at once sent for a medical man, who gave her an emetic,
which had the required effect, and I afterwards conveyed her to the station.
The prisoner, when asked what she had to say, replied, "Nothing."
Police-constable, 519.?Her husband is here, my Lord.
A very respectable-looking young man ascended the witness-box and said,?
The prisoner is my wife, my Lord. We have been married for about three
years, and for the first part of the time we lived very happily together, till an
improper intercourse took place between her and my master, who is a very respectable tradesman, not far from here. It had been carried on some time
when I had a suspicion of it, and one night when I went home I asked her
about it and she confessed to the whole. I immediately applied to a solicitor,
but he told me that, as I had no witnesses to the adultery, I could take no
legal proceedings. I then went to my master, who offered me a sum of money
to settle it, and, as I found I had no legal remedy, I accepted the money to
compromise it, and took my wife home and tried to make her comfortable
again. But, of course, after what I had discovered, we had a few words now
and then, and on the 30th of January last she left me, after we had quarrelled,
at eleven o'clock at night, and I have not seen her since till now.
The Lord Mayor.?Have you any family ?
Husband.?No; no family.
The Lord Mayor.?Have you anything to say, prisoner; you have heard
what your husband has said?is it true ?
COMMON-PLACE SUICIDE. lix
Prisoner (crying.)?Yes, quite true.
The Lord Mayor (to the husband).?Do you feel disposed to take her back
and try her again?
Husband.?Under the circumstances, I cannot do so. I think I have given
her one very fair trial; and besides, I had provided her with plenty of money
and everything necessary for comfort, and I supposed myself to be entirely out
me^' but after she left me I found I had a good many bills to pay.
The Lord Mayor.?I have nothing to do with that; but I have no doubt
that she is a bad and depraved woman, and it is my duty to send her to prison
tor seven days.
Prisoner.?Richard ! Richard!
Husband.?Will your Lordship remand her that she may go back to her
father ?
The Lord Mayor.?Has she a father ?
Husband.?Yes; a man in a very respectable position.
The Lord Mayor.?Then, at your intercession, I will remand her for a few
days ; and I hope her father will come forward to take care of her.
The prisoner was then remanded, and her husband, by permission, went below
to speak with her.
. W orship-street.?Ellen Norton and Mary Anne Hodges, two well-grown
girls, were charged with attempting suicide.
The girl Norton is tbe daughter of a brass-worker in New Norfolk-street,
siioreditch, and having been found by her elder sister to have formed an
acquaintance with very disreputable characters, she very properly pointed out
the consequences to her, and rebuked her for it. This seemed to have had no
effect; and as the girl frequently stopped out late at night, occasioning her
family great unhappiness, this reproval appeared to have been as frequent;
and the consequence was that, instead of the prisoner mending her ways, she
stayed out late again the night before this charge, came home so ill that a
doctor was sent for, and it was then discovered that she had swallowed a large
dose of muriatic acid, used by her father in his business, and the bottle usually
containing it was found to have been emptied. Clarey, a constable, was sent
tor who found her, at half-past two in the morning, fearfully exhausted and
SIp> and altogether so ill that she could not be moved till late the next morning,
i Ien she was taken into custody for her own protection, and to see what could
be done with her.
The prisoner acknowledged to the magistrate that she had attempted to kill
erself merely because she had been blamed for stopping out late, and seemed
? \T?nS^er herself rather ill-used than otherwise; but
-Mr. Mansfield told her that such conduct as hers was depriving her of all
lance ot becoming a respectable or happy woman, and committed her to prison
0r a week that she might derive advantage from the advice of the chaplain,
f 11 .octees's case> Archer, of the H division, was fetched to the house of her
atiier, in Winchester-street, Spitalfields, at three o'clock that morning, and
iere found the prisoner totally senseless, and dying, as her mother-in-law said,
tj?m Poison she had taken. A surgeon was procured, who succeeded in restoring
e prisoner to consciousness; but, instead of repenting of her lolly, she repeated
ne officer her fixed determination to make away with herself.
sorr ^ prisoner's father, who was so affected that he was unable to speak for
so'e }!me= and then did so in tears, said he had unfortunately lost his wife
Sent3 u'e aS?and, as he had a family to care for, he married again last
so ie 1 6r' seemed to have given the prisoner great offence. She became
her ?a 0U,S,0^ her step-mother that it was almost impossible to do anything with
5 aud he could only suppose she must have been labouring under insanity,
lx COMMON-PLACE SUICIDE.
arising from this jealous feeling, when she committed this act, as she had never
shown such a disposition before, and was otherwise a well-conducted, industrious
SirlThe prisoner said she had had a quarrel with her step-mother, and, suddenly
seizing the bottle of poison from oil' the sideboard, swallowed the contents.
She accused her step-mother of harshness to her, and
Mr. Mansfield, though condemning the prisoner's conduct, for which her
father's second marriage formed 110 justification at all, still thought it better,
for the happiness of all the family, that the girl should be removed from her
home, and maintained by herself elsewhere, and that some arrangement of this
kind might be effected, remanded the prisoner for a few days that she might
also have time for reflection.
An inquest was held yesterday afternoon (June 1), at the Guildhall, Plymouth, before Mr. John Edmonds, the coroner for the borough, to inquire into
the circumstances attending the death of Mary Anne Luke, who died on Wednesday evening from injuries she sustained by jumping out of a window on the
previous afternoon.
The case having been much talked about during the day, there was a very
large crowd in and around the Guildhall. The hall itself was completely filled,
as were also its approaches, and there were hundreds in the street who could
not get in.
The Coroner addressed the jury, and said they were called together for the
purpose of inquiring into the circumstances attending the death of Mary Anne
Luke. This investigation was of considerable importance, not only on account
of the station of the deceased, but also as to how far the fatal occurrence was
attributable to the conduct of the father. By the rule of the law, a parent
might chastise his child properly, but that must not be done violently. It
seemed from what he had heard?but they would have the evidence by and by
?that this young woman, the deceased, was violently beaten with a rope, and
that she fled in consequence from her father, and jumped out of a window.
By law, if one person, under a well-grounded apprehension of violence from
another, had to resort to such means as that by which this young woman met
her death, he who had caused it was held responsible.
The jury then adjourned to the house to view the body.
When Thomas Luke, the father of the unfortunate girl, came into court, he
was received with yells from the assembled crowd.
Mary Abbott, the first witness called, was examined, and said,?I am a
widow, and reside at Mr. Thomas Luke's house, 30, Union-street. Mr. Luke
and all his family reside there. I am employed by him as housekeeper. The
deceased was his daughter, and was single ; her age was eighteen, and she was
a healthy girl, except during the last few months. Her employment was
keeping her father's business and selling boots and shoes. Mr. Luke has a
wife and five other children, the deceased being the eldest. All the family
lived in the house, with the exception of Mr. Luke and the eldest son, who
took their meals at one of the other shops, Mr. Luke having four in different
parts of the town. All the family slept at the house in Union-street. At two
minutes to nine on Tuesday night last, Miss Luke came home to the shop with
her mother, having been at the establishment in Bedford-street all the afternoon,
where she went with her father. They appeared to be good friends. She went
up to her bedroom, which was two stories high, to take off her bonnet and
shawl. She came down again on her sister calling her, and went out into the
kitchen. Her father was there, and insisted on an explanation, which she said
she could not give, and he then slapped her face with his hand. He might have
given her two or three slaps, but 1 cannot say. She cried, but said she could
not give any explanation. Her father then took a piece of line and struck her.
COMMON-PLACE SUICIDE. lxi
[The " line" was handed to the coroner. It was apparently a piece of clothesline^ about the thickness of a small finger. As it was exhibited, a roar of execration burst forth from the densely-crowded court, which the coroner appeased
by requesting the crowd to desist from any exhibitionof feeling, whatever their
thoughts might be.] Her father went into the yard and cut it from a clothesline. He held it in his right hand when he came in, and the deceased was
standing up. No one had hold of her. I think the line was once doubled, and
her father struck her with it on the arm. I do not think more than two or
three blows were struck. She held up her arm, receiving the stripes on it, and
said, " Don't, father." He ordered her to her bed, and she went. That was
instantly after he struck her the last blow. She was crying then, but not much,
and left the room quickly. No one followed her. The kitchen door was then
shut. When Mr. Luke ordered his daughter to bed, he threw the rope down
the floor. He did not threaten to beat her again, but sat down, and she
rau up-stairs, and I stood at the kitchen table. We heard the deceased's
window thrown open, and her sister Emily screaming that deceased was out of
window. I ran into the court with Mr. Luke, and there we found her on the
ground, quite insensible. She was lying on her back, with her head thrown on
?iie side. She was removed indoors, and I went for a surgeon, Mr. Whipple.
-Deceased died at ten minutes after eight o'clock last night. Deceased spoke
yesterday, and she was attended by Mr. Whipple and Mr. Square.
Mr. Whipple, surgeon, was the next witness examined. On Tuesday
evening he was called to attend the deceased, and found her in the kitchen
lying on a sofa. Deceased was lying on her back, and there were two wounds
irom which blood was flowing?one in the temple and one in the forehead.
?Blood was also flowing from both nostrils. He enlarged one of the wounds
for the purpose of minutely examining the skull, and then found that a portion
?f the frontal bone had been separated and driven down on the brain. Being
satisfied that the case must terminate fatally, lie sent for Mr. Square, as in
case any grave charge should be brought against any person, it would be satisfactory to have the evidence of two medical men. He told Mr. Luke there
was no hope, and he appeared quite distracted, and stated that he had chastised
her severely?very severely. Witness attended the case, and deceased died
the previous evening. She was never sufficiently conscious to be examined by
a magistrate; she could answer "Yes" or "No," but was not capable of
reflection. A person jumping out of a window twenty or twenty-five feet
high, in case of the head coming to the ground, wouid be likely to receive
sjich an injury as the deceased did. The cause of death was fracture of the
skull and laceration of the brain. Since the death he had examined the body,
and then found several contusions produced by the fall; on the left arm near
t'le shoulder there were three or four stripes, similar to what would be produced by blows of a stick or cord. They were not very severe and the skin
was not broken.
Emily Luke said she was sister to the deceased, and was about fourteen
years of age. She detailed the particulars of the altercation in the kitchen,
and said that when her father ordered deceased to her room, he shut the door,
and, going back by the fire, sat down. Witness went out into the garden, and
before she thought it possible for her sister to have reached her bedroom she
eard the window thrown up. She looked upwards, and saw her sister spring
?ut. The next instant she was lying on the ground, having fallen on her head.
. witness also testified to the kind manner in which the deceased was invariably treated by her father. In answer to a question as to how some glass
ecanie broken, she said her sister leaned against the window while her father
jas beating her, and the rope struck one pane of glass and broke it. She
bf remember the time when her sister had been punished by her father
re Tuesday evening. The words used by deceased to her father in the
lxii COMMON-PLACE SUICIDE.
kitchen were?" I have nothing to say; what can I say ? " The Coroner,
assuming this witness had concluded her evidence, told her she could withdraw, whereupon she said she had something "particular" to communicate.
She was requested to proceed, and made the following extraordinary statement :?" About ten days or a fortnight before this happened, my sister
showed me a bottle of oxalic acid and a bottle of laudanum, saying, ' I slial1
take it if father is told.' I understood her meaning to be, that she and the
shopman had not been acting as they ought. On Tuesday evening, just after
she came home, father sent me up to her room to request her to come down
to him. She then said, 'I took a large dose of oxalic acid in the dinner time,
and I am surprised that it has taken no effect.' This was before father
thrashed her. I saw a bottle of poison taken from her pocket after she
jumped from the window."
Mary Ann Avent deposed,?I am a shopwoman with Mr. Luke, at 30, Union
Street. On Tuesday morning I complained to Mr. Luke that I was not comfortable in his shop, and gave him notice to leave. I have seen the foreman
and deceased eating together in the shop, and thought it improper. On Tuesday morning I told deceased of it in the presence of her father, and she said
nothing. The man came into the shop, and Mr. Luke discharged him on the
spot, promising him his regular wages if he would call the two following
Saturday nights.
The Coroner having summed up, at twenty minutes after ten the jury
retired to consider their verdict.
After an absence of half an hour, the jury returned into court with the following verdict:?"That on the 27th day of May, in the year of our Lord
18G0, the said Mary Ann Luke, having been severely beaten by her father,
Thomas Luke, of Plymouth, at No. 30, Union-street, within the borough,
became excited, and, while labouring under temporary derangement, jumped
from the bedroom window of her father's premises and fell on the ground
below, whereby her skull was fractured and brain lacerated. That she
languished therefrom, at 30, Union-street aforesaid, until the 30th day of the
said month of May, and then and there died of the said fracture of the skull
and laceration of the brain, and the jury further say that her said father's conduct towards the deceased was marked by undue severity."
During the time the foreman was reading the decision of the jury, Luke
made use of some incoherent expressions, and then sank forward on the desk
weeping like a child.
