Disputed Wild. Pdea Of Unsound Mind
====================================

433
MEDICO LEGAL TEIAL.
Court of Probate, Mat 18.
Before Sir C. Cresswell and a Special Jury.
"WILLIAMS V. EVANS.
Tut nlainiiff Anne Williams, propounded, as executrix, the will, dated the
L , J December, 1856, of Philip Taylor, late of Hirwaine, near Aberdare, in
Glamorganshire, who diod on the 23rd of July, 1859, at the a"e of 70. The
defendant Helen Eliza Evans, a niece of the testatrix, opposed probate on the
Grounds that the will was not duly executed that the deceased was of unsound
mind, and that it was obtained from him by the undue influence of the plaintiff.
Mr T.nsli O C Dr. Spinks, and Mr. F. W. Lloyd were counsel for the
nlaint'iff * Mr. Edwin James, Q.C., Mr. Serjeant Pigott, Dr. Swabey, Mr.
rMffird and Mr Owen for the defendant.
Tim 'rlpppnspd beean life as a draper's assistant, and afterwards carried on
holiness oTany ye? as a draper at Hirwaine By this business and by
business j j fortunate purchases ot land which contained coal, he
accumulated a^ortuM of about 15,?00/ He was married but had no children
accuuiui niece of his wife, Anne Edwards, the present
a? ? 1'W pH with them until 1841. In that year she married David Evan
^lHams who had been first Mr. Taylor's apprentice and then his partner, and
who from 1837 had had the management of the business Upon the marriage
Mr Tavlor transferred the business to Williams for 1,700/., of which he gave
onn/ to Mrs Williams, received 200/. from her father, and took a bond for
the remaining 1,300/. from Williams, who paid him interest upon it. He gave
no the premises upon which the business was carried on to the Williamse^and
took his own residence in an adjoining house. He had a niece Helen
Eliza Taylor, the daughter of an only brother, in Jamaica, and in 1841, at his
^iiza xdv , o Eld t j wlth him. She remained with him,
request she came over to Mgian^ ^ ^ ^ ] ^ ^ ^
Mr ^ Evans. She and her husband lived first at Cardiff, then at Manchester,
and in October 1855, went back to Hirwaine. The W Jliamses mid the Evanses
did not acree] and the deceased appeared at first to have sided with the Evanses,
aiaiioidera,auu ??? the Williamses notice to quit the premises
wmoe?upiS Tile e^eqSnee of this notice was that the wkmses
removed to a third house adjoining .the two occupied by the deceased and tho
Evanses Between the death of his wile and 1855 the deceased made a num-
vT of wills Their general effect was to divide his property between Mrs.
Evans and Mrs. Williams, giving a slight advantage to Mrs Evans and to
nrmoint them ioint executrixes. In 1855 he made an alteration in this dis-
position He cave the whole of his property to Mrs. Evans appointing her
Lie executrix, subject to legacies of 500/. to Mrs. Williams and her five sisters,
the daughters of Mr. Edwards, and these legacies were only to be payable con-
ditionally He had had a dispute with Mr. Edwards respecting the proportion
to which 'he was entitled of a piece of land that they had purchased jointly ;
the land had turned out more valuable than had been anticipated in consequence
of the discovery of coal, and the condition upon which the legacies were left
was that Mr. Edwards should transfer to him a sufficient quantity of the land
to' make up his share to 250 acres. His next will was made on the 10th of
September, 185G. Mrs. Evans was appointed sole executrix and residuary
434 MEDICO-LEGAL TRIAL.
legatee; 500Z. was given to her sister and Mrs. Brown, 100Z. to a friendly
society for miners, 100Z. to a former shopman, 6s. a week to an old servant, and
50Z. a year to a Mrs. Moore. In June, 1856, Mrs. Evans had written
to Mr. Frank James, the attorney of Mr. Taylor, directing him, as her
uncle was getting very old and infirm and wished to transfer to her the
management of his affairs, to prepare an instrument empowering her to act for
him in all matters. She added that it would be necessary to make this instru-
ment irrevocable, and that any document which he might subsequently sign
should be void. A few days afterwards Mr. Taylor and Mrs. Evans went
together to his office. He advised Mr. Taylor not to sign any such instrument,
and drew up a short paper empowering Mrs. Evans to receive Mr. Taylor's
rents as his agent, which Mr. Taylor signed. On the 2nd of December, 1856,
he wrote to the secretary of the Yale of Neath Railway Company, asking him
to transfer some shares which he held in that company to Mrs. Evans. The
secretary sent him the forms which it was necessary for him to fill up before
the transfer could be made. He received them on the 5th of December. On
that day he went into Mr. Williams's shop, burst out crying, wished he was
dead, showed the papers, said that the Evanses had been trying to get his pro-
perty from him during his life, that they had treated him badly and he could
stand it no longer, and asked to be allowed to live with Mr. and Mrs.
Williams. They consented to receive him, and he said he should have come to
them before, but he was afraid they had taken offence at having had notice to
quit the premises they first occupied. He also said he had made a will disin-
heriting Mrs. Williams, and he wished to alter it immediately. Mrs. Williams
asked him to take time for consideration, but he insisted, and a clergyman was
sent for. The clergyman declined to interfere, and Mr. Frank James, his
solicitor, was sent for. Mr. James and his clerk (Mr. Harris) arrived between
eight and nine that same evening, saw the deceased alone, took his instructions
for a will, drew it up, and it was duly executed and attested by Mr. James,
Mr. Harris, and a chymist named Kees Thomas. By this will 701. a-year in
fee was left to Mrs. Evans, certain mortgage estates were vested m Mr.
Williams, and Mrs. Williams was named residuary legatee and sole executrix.
At the same time the instructions for the transfer of the Yale of Neath shares
to Mrs. Evans, and the appointment of Mrs. Evans as agent for the receipt of
rents, were revoked. He had left some deeds and papers in the house of the
Evanses, who refused to give them up when they were demanded, and their
detention gave rise to legal proceedings. In the beginning of 1857 the
Evanses presented a petition to the Court of Chancery for a commission in
lunacy to inquire into Mr. Taylor's state of mind. On the 13th of February,
1857, four medical men?Messrs. Dyke, Lucas, North, and White?had a long
interview with him for the purpose of testing his capacity, and arrived at the
conclusion that he was of perfectly sound mind, aud certified that opinion to
the Lords Justices, before whom the petition was heard. Their lordships,
thinking it desirable to have further evidence, commissioned Dr. Forbes
Winslow to examine him. Dr. Winslow examined Mr. Taylor on five occasions
?twice in London, and three times at Hirwaine?and stated the result in an
elaborate report to their lordships. Dr. Winslow stated that Mr. Taylor was
free from all kind of delusion, hallucination, and illusion; that he conversed
about the Russian and Chinese wars and other topics of general interest; that
he complained of the manner in which he had been treated by Mr. and Mrs.
Evans, and accused them of having received money without accounting for it;
that he said he had left their residence in consequence of having been asked to
transfer some of his property to them, and had sought the protection of his
other niece, Mrs. Williams; that he conversed about his property, and
estimated its value at 15.000Z.; that his knowledge of his pecuniary position
appeared to be remarkably acute; and that the only part of his intellect which
WILLIAMS V. EVANS. 435
appeared to be defective was his memory, which occasionally flagged. Dr.
Winslow said that, perceiving his irritation against Mr. and Mrs. Evans, he
urged him to forget the past and make an equitable distribution of his pro-
perty; to which he replied that he had not been well treated by them but
would not forget their claim. In conclusion Dr. Winslow submitted that, if
evidence similar to this were generally considered sufficient to warrant the
protection of the Court of Chancery, no aged man in the kingdom with a
memory somewhat impaired by age and bodily infirmity would be free from
the suspicion of insanity and mental incapacity, and he reported that he was
clearly of opinion that Mr. Taylor was a person of sound mind and capable of
managing himself and his affairs. In consequence of this report their lordships,
in April, 1857, dismissed the petition. In J une, 1858, an application was made
on the part of the Evanses for a habeas corpus, on the ground that the
Williamses were detaining Mr. Taylor in their custody against his will, but
that application also was refused, and with costs. The deceased died in July
last of brain fever, having been confined to his bed for the previous 15 mouths.
In support of the plaintiff's case Dr. Forbes Winslow and the four medical
men who had tested tiie testator's capacity in the course of the proceedings in
Chancery in 1857 were examined, and adhered decidedly to the opinion they had
then expressed. Mr. Edward Davies, a medical man at Merthyr Tydvil, had also
examined him to test his capacity in December, 1856, and found him perfectly
rational. This gentleman attended him subsequently, and said that in August,
1857, lie had a slight attack of paralysis.
In addition to this medical evidence a great number of witnesses were
called to speak to various acts of business done by the testator subsequent to
the date of the will. Mr. Erank James and his partner, Mr. C. H. James, had
had several consultations with him on the subject of the proceedings in Chan-
cery and of the actions against the Evanses, and had taken his instructions,
and had also transacted business for him connected with his mineral property
at Hendrewin. On two occasions, in May and in September, 1857, Mr. C. II.
James inquired whether he wished to make any alteration in the disposition of
his property in favour of any of his other relations. He replied decidedly and
positively that he wished matters to remain as they were. Mr. Joseph had seen
him several times at the end of 185G and the beginning of 1857 about taking a
lease of the minerals at Hendrewin. He conducted the negotiations himself
and granted the leases. At the general election in 1857, he was canvassed for
Mr. Vaughan, but said he had promised to vote for Messrs. Talbot and Vivian,
and did vote for them.
A number of other witnesses were called to speak to various other smaller
matters of business, such as the receipt and payment of money, in which he
had acted for himself in 185G and 1857, without showing any symptom of a
decayed mind.
In the course of the case his lordship asked one of the witnesses what was the
number of the inhabitants of Hirwaine, and how manyof them knew the deceased.
The witness said Hirwaine had about 6,000 inhabitants, and most of them
knew Mr. Taylor.
His lordship observed that he could now form some idea as to the probable
duration of the cause.
The plaintiff's case was concluded, and Mr. Serjeant Pigott briefly opened
the defendant's case.
The court then adjourned.
May 21.
This trial was resumed by the examination of Mr.William Davis, a surgeon,
who had attended the deceased, and who said that he had an attack of para-
lysis in May, 1S55, and that in June, 1856, he had become quite childish.
436 MEDICO-LEGAL TRIAL.
At the conclusion of this witness's examination, a conference took place
between the learned counsel.
Mr. E. James then said that he and his learned friends found that it would
be hopeless to attempt to establish the plea of undue influence on which the
defendant relied, ana he was therefore authorized to consent to a verdict for
the plaintiff.
Mr. Lush said that the plaintiff was willing to hold out the olive branch by
consenting that the costs should be paid out of the estate, in order that Mrs.
Evans might enjoy the annuity of 701. left her by the will.
His lordship observed that he hoped this arrangement would tend to the
reconciliation of the parties. It was his opinion that the defendant had not
the slightest chance of success, and he should have felt bound, however reluc-
tantly, to have condemned her in costs, if the plaintiff had applied for them.
The jury expressed their concurrence in his lordship's opinion.
The verdict was accordingly entered for the plaintiff, and probate of the will
of December, 1856, was granted; the costs, by consent, to be paid out of the
estate.
