Pauper Lunatics
=================

109
Art. VIII.-

I. The Commissioned in Lunacy and the Poor-Law Board.
II. Statistics.
I.
In April last a Supplement to the Twelfth Report of the Commissioners
in Lunacy was published, containing an account of the condition,
character, and treatment of lunatics in workhouses. The matter of
this supplementary report appeared to us at the time so important that
we devoted an article to the question of Pauper Lunacy.* From the
statistics accessible to us we came to the conclusion that there was a
steady and progressive increase in the amount of pauperism from
lunacy in the country ; that the explanations advanced to show that
this was more apparent than real were not satisfactory; and, on the
authority of the Lunacy Commissioners, we ventured to express the
opinion that it seemed as if our workhouses, in reference to lunatics;
were "little better than liot-beds in which pauper lunacy was fostered and
matured." The Lunacy Commissioners had, indeed, asserted that the
detention of lunatics in these institutions was " one of the most fertile
causes of the increase of lunatic paupers throughout the country: It
is this that mainly tends to fill our county asylums with hopeless
chronic cases, and is most directly responsible for the heavy and per-
manent burdens upon parish rates."t Moreover, in his evidence before
the Select Committee on Lunatics, Session 1858-59, Lord Shaftesbury,
the Chairman of the Lunacy Board, had stated the condition of lunatics
in workhouses in stronger terms even than those used in the Supple-
mentary Report of the Commissioners.
The very grave charges advanced by the Commissioners have not
been suffered to pass unnoticed by the Poor-Law Board; and Mr.
Andrew Doyle, one of the Inspectors of the Board, gave evidence before 7 ,
the last Select Committee on Lunatics, with an intention to show that
the Lunacy Commissioners had been guilty of great exaggeration in
Avhat they had reported concerning workhouses. As we had conceived
that, from the evidence adduced in the text and appendix to the Com-
missioners' Report, we were warranted in assuming the correctness of
their conclusions, it is but just that we should put our readers in pos-
session of the principal objections made by Mr. Doyle.
-This gentleman characterizes the statements of Lord Shaftesbury and
the Commissioners' Report in the following terms:?
"I have to observe of the evidence of Lord Shaftesbury, as of the statements
published by the Commissioners, that they are general ahegations, almost im-
possible to lay hold of, but that whenever I have beeifable to put my finger
llpon particular statements, I have found nine out of ten, in some important
respect or other, at variance with the facts as I have found them upon investi-
gation.
Do you confine your contradiction to your own district only, or do you
* See Vol. xii. p. 337.
+ Supplementary Report, p. 34.
110 PAUPER LUNATICS.
apply it to the rest of the kingdom generally ??I apply it emphatically to the -
whole of the kingdom, upon evidence -which I am prepared to give before the
Committee. I shall show that the cases selected by the Commissioners, as
illustrations of the bad condition of workhouses, are the only cases that have
occurred, and that their complaints are, in nine out of ten cases, inconsistent
with evidence in the office of the Commissioners in Lunacy. That I am pre-
pared to prove."*
Mr. Doyle, however, makes an important distinction between the
Special Reports of the Commissioners on different workhouses and their
General Report. He says :?
" As I have stated before, I have not found, so far as I can judge, one word
of exaggeration from the beginning to the end of the Reports of the Commis-
sioners. Accidental mistakes I have found. But I have found exaggeration,
misstatements, and incorrect quotations of the Reports of the Commissioners in this
Supplemental Report. Of the separate Reports of the Commissioners, as to
their impartiality and general fairness, I cannot speak too highly. It is
impossible that any document can contrast in those qualities more remarkably
with them than the Supplemental Report which professes to be founded upon
.them."?(Qy. 1983.)
In support of these assertions, Mr. Doyle instanced, first, a state-
ment made respecting the Blackburn workhouse, at p. 23 of the
Supplemental Report. It is there said that, " at an inclement season
of the year, there was not more than one blanket on any bed, and on
many there were none whatever." In the special reports on the
Blackburn workhouse contained in the appendix to the General Report,
it is stated, under the date of 29th October, 1859, simply, that " only
one blanket is allowed to each patient in the coldest weatherand
under date of 31st July, 1858, that the beds were clean, " but there is
no blanket either above or below the patients." Mr. Doyle remarks
that when the last statement was referred to the guardians, their
answer was, " that there were no blankets upon the beds, in conse-
quence of the heat of the weather, the paupers having requested that
they might be taken off." This was given as one illustration of
inaccuracy and misstatement, and may be fairly granted.
Again, the Commissioners recorded several examples of the dangers
arising from discharging imbeciles or idiots from workhouses without
medical sanction. In the Newark workhouse there had been found,
"among other instances," two females, "who, although classed as of
weak mind, were in the habit of discharging themselves, and after
a short absence returning in the family way." Upon this statement,
Mr. Doyle remarks?" That is perfectly true ; the guardians assumed
that they had no right to detain them." In the Walsall workhouse
an idiotic female was found who had had four illegitimate children.
It would appear, however, that the youngest was six years old before
the woman was admitted to the workhouse. This, therefore, is not a
legitimate illustration. In the Monmouth workhouse two imbecile
paupers were met with, " each of whom had had three illegitimate
children, and one of whom was again pregnant." To this Mr. Doyle
answers, that " they were not certified as idiots, and the guardians could
* Report of Selcct Committee on Lunatics, Session 1859. Queries 1972?1974-
PAUPER LUNATICS. Ill
</J
not detain them." This is simply a quibble. In the Tamworth work-
house there were two idiotic women who had each had a child, but it
would seem that they first came into the workhouse pregnant with those
children. The last case referred to by Mr. Doyle occurred at the
Mortley workhouse, in Worcestershire. " A female who had for some
time been classed as of weak mind, was struck off the list in 1856, and
was allowed to leave the house for the purpose of saving expense to
the parish by earning something at hop-picking. This woman had pre-
viously had two illegitimate, children by paupers in the house, one of
whom had died ; the other (a girl about ten years of age) she took
with her, on quitting the house, to her mother's home. When there,
she and her daughter slept in the same room with her father-in-law and
her mother, and in the same bed with two of her brothers. The result of 1
this indecency was, that she returned to the workhouse in the family way,
and was delivered of a child, the father of which she distinctly stated to be
?ne of her brothers, but which she was unable to specify. This woman,
though able to perform some useful work, was decidedly of weak mind,
and there can be no doubt that, under the circumstances, the guardians
were justified in detaining her in the workhouse, and that they ought
not to have sanctioned her quitting it." Mr. Doyle's explanation of
this is, that the woman was not classed as an idiot in 1856, she having
heen struck off the list of idiots, by the medical officer in October,
1855, and that " the statement that the guardians had the power to
detain her was perfectly preposterous, even if their medical officer had
not certified that she was not an idiot."?(Qy. 1997.) This may ex-
plain the mode in which freedom of action was given to an erotic* '
imbecile, but it is no justification of that freedom. For the credit of
humanity we will admit that the guardians did not allow the woman
to leave the workhouse in 1856 " for the sake of saving a few shillings
but can we justify them for not having taken the necessary steps to
remove her to an asylum if she could not be legally detained in a
Workhouse ? Could any argument show more emphatically than this
last story and the exculpation offered for it, the unfitness of workhouses
for the confinement of lunatics or imbeciles. This woman had had
two children to paupers in the workhouse (a curious comment on the
propriety of keeping persons of weak mind in these institutions), and
although manifestly an erotic imbecile, as the remarks of the visiting
Lunacy Commissioner and the history of the case show, she is allowed to
leave the house uncontrolled, under the cover of a legal quibble?forMr.
poyle's objection amounts to nothing more than that. We admit the
inaccuracy of the illustrations from Walsall and Tam worth ; but Mr.
Movie's explanations have clenched the truthfulness of the remainder. <
Mr. Doyle next makes a trifling objection to a remark concerning
the Blackburn workhouse, and he then proceeded to the question of
restraint, and said:?
" I find it stated by the Commissioners that mechanical control 'is habitually
employed to restrain the idle and mischievous propensities of patients.' I have
gone through the whole of the Reports of the Commissioners in Lunacy (for
two years) that were accessible to me, nearly GOO out of the whole 650, and I
the number in which they complain of restraint being imposed is only
112 PAUPER LUNATICS.
nineteen from the whole of the workhouses to which they refer. . . With the ex-
ception of, I think, three, every one of those cases of restraint being, in my
opinion, open to satisfactory explanation."?^Queries, 2015, 2017.)
The Commissioners had asserted that the law respecting the removal
of pauper lunatics to asylums was constantly evaded; Mr. Doyle
states that of the total number of 7000 lunatics found by the Commis-
sioners in workhouses during the period referred to in their report,
" they recommended the removal of only 153."?(Qy. 2018.)
These objections are certainly of considerable importance, and
would incline us to modify our views in several respects as to the
extent to which the evils animadverted upon by the Lunacy Commis-
sioners exist.
Mr. Doyle is less happy in several other objections, but we need only
mention one of these. He remarks, in reference to certain observations
in the Supplementary Report which " would lead an}r man to state that
the poor in workhouses are ' stinted or starved " that " nobody
who is acquainted with the practice of the Poor Law Board can appre-
ciate the pains they take to ascertain that every dietary table which is
?issued contains an average quantity of nutritious food. In point of
fact, every dietary table of every union in England is submitted to the
Poor Law Board; it is analysed scientifically by them before it is
issued, and upon that analysis they frequently make suggestions for
improvement; and no dietary table can be issued in any workhouse
without having the seal of the Poor Law Board, after having under-
gone that examination, affixed to it."?(Qy. 2056.)
Mr. Doyle had surely forgotten the examples of minimum work-
house diets recorded in the Supplementary Report when he made
this statement. At the Hailsham workhouse the lunatics have but
one spare meat dinner during the week, four ounces of meat only
being allowed to the men, and two and a half ounces to the women ;
while bread and cheese, without beer, constitute the dinners on four
other days, and pudding on the remaining two. In the Amesbury
workhouse the inmates are restricted to bacon twice a week (four
ounces for men, and three ounces for women) pudding twice, and a very
weak soup twice. " In many other workhouses," the Lunacy Com-
missioners assert, ,? meat is only given to the insane once a week, and
even then in very small and insufficient quantity."* Mr. Doyle seems
also to have forgotten that, shortly before he made his statement
respecting workhouse dietaries, the following passage had been read
to him from a report made by three local magistrates, concerning the
treatment of lunatics in the workhouse at Dursley.
" We saw and ascertained that about one quarter of the dinner given to the
females in the idiot ward consisted of boileu sweed turnips, an article grown
for the consumption of cattle and sheep, but not of mankind; that it is used
for the inmates generally, as well as for the three or four females of this class,
may be inferred from the strong smell arising from its being boiled per-
vading the house.
"PURNELL B. PURNELL."
* Supplementary Report, p. 18.
PAUPER LUNATICS. 1 1 3
Mr. Doyle and the Commissioners of Lunacy regard the subject of
tne care of lunatics in workhouses from very different points of view.
?The latter use the term lunatic in its widest signification; the former
would restrict its meaning very considerably, hence it is that he says:
" In nine out of ten unions I find no lunatics at all, or only two or
three harmless people out on the land working, and if they are women,
in the body of the house, doing household work ; in fact, they are ser-
vants of the establishment, and not lunatics or idiots in the sense in
which any man of common sense would call them so; they may be
brought, by the very large definition given by the Commissioners of
Lunacy to the medical officers, within the scope or the meaning of
lunatics and idiots, but lunatics and idiots, properly speaking, they are
not."?(Query 2054.) Unfortunately, Mr. Doyle had a few moments
before spoken thus of his knowledge of lunacy :?" I have no knowledge
whatever, and I have no pretension to give an opinion upon the ques-
tion with respect to the treatment of lunacy or lunatics.?Or with regard
to the characteristics of insanity ??Certainly not."?(Queries 2035,
2030.) Common sense, therefore, as used by Mr. Doyle in the above
expression of opinion, must mean entire ignorance. The Commissioners
conceive that workhouses cannot, under any circumstances, become a
satisfactory place for the care or treatment of lunatics or idiots. Mr.
poyle believes tlir.t these institutions are well fitted for the care of idiots,
imbeciles, and chronic cases of insanity ; but by the announcement of his
ignorance both ol the characteristics and treatment of the insane he
has cut the ground from under his feet entirely. The Commissioners
knowing what insanity is, and what is required even for the ordinary
care of the mildest or the most confirmed case, and seeing how im-
practicable it is to mould the rules necessary for the government of a
workhouse, or the accommodation requisite for paupers, into a form
adapted for lunatics, idiots, or imbeciles, have concluded the worst
from the facts ascertained during their inquiry. They have painted
their picture, therefore, in gloomy colours. Mr. Doyle has evidently
never before given much attention to the lunatic inhabitants of
workhouses; he regards the workhouse as the proper place for the
pauper; he can see no reason from want of previous attention to
the subject, why the quiet lunatic, idiot, or imbecile should not be
treated simply as a pauper; he has admitted his ignorance of the
Very points which would alone have enabled him to judge rightly
of the general question, but strong in his convictions, he has opposed a
vigorous, if not very coherent, defence against the assertions and
conclusions of the Commissioners. He has said amply sufficient to
show (if any 0ne, indeed, needed that showing) that Lord Shaftes-
bury Was not justified in asserting that the idiots in our work-
houses were exposed to the "very greatest cruelty," and that " we are
now returning, in these workhouses, to the system of things that pre-
vailed in 1828, there being no means of classifying these persons; a
jarge proportion of these were then chained down, and kept in the most
lorrible state of filth and suffering." He has said sufficient also to
convince us that the impression we had derived from the Supplemen-
ary Report respecting the general treatment of lunatics in workhouses
No. XVII. NEW SERIES. I
114 PAUPER LUNATICS.
is a somewhat exaggerated one, and so far wrong; but he has said
nothing to convince us that the evils detailed in that Report are not
peculiar to, and probably inseparable from, the rules regulating work-
house management, and that the opinions' founded upon these evils are
not, at the bottom, essentially correct. Mr. Doyle has painted his
subject in the brightest colours, but we cannot avoid thinking that he
has helped to bring out in a clearer light the unfitness of workhouses
either for the detention or treatment of lunatics.
With the exception then of modifying our notions somewhat as to the
extent to which the grosser evils arising from the detention of lunatics
in workhouses prevail, we see no need to alter the conclusions we arrived
at in our article on " Pauper Lunacy."
