The Parliamentary Inquiry and Popular Notions Concerning the Treatment of Lunatics
===================================================================================

Akt. III.A recent writer* lias well and truly said that, "Falsehood is so
easy, truth so difficult. The pencil is conscious of a delightful
facility in drawing a griffin?the longer the claws, and the longer
the wings, the better; but that marvellous facility which we took
for genius, is apt to forsake us when we want to draw a real unexaggerated lion. Examine your words well, and you will find
that even when you have no motive to be false, it is a very hard
thing to say the exact truth?even about your own immediate
feelings?much harder than to say something fine which is not
the exact truth."
No apter illustration of the accuracy of these remarks could
he found than that which is afforded by much of the evidence
laid before the Select Committees which sat in the last and preceding sessions of Parliament to inquire into the operation of
the laws affecting the care and treatment of lunatics. Six
months ago we reviewed the evidence laid before the Committee
of 1858?59; we have now before us the evidence tendered to
the Committee of last session.t In our notice of the proceedings of the first Committee our attention was chiefly .occupied with the evidence given by the Eight Hon. the Earl of
Shaftesbury, the Chairman of the Lunacy Commission. This
evidence claimed particular attention at our hands, not only
from the official position which his lordship occupies, but
also from the extraordinary character of many of the opinions
which he expressed, and statements that he made. It will be
well to recal here to memory one or two of the most notable
points of his lordship's evidence.
On the question which of all others, in reference to lunatics,
* George Eliot.?Adam Bede.
t Report from the Select Committee on Lunatics?Blue Book. Ordered to be
printed, 5th August, 1859.
46 THE PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING
liad most occupied the public attention, the regulations respecting the admission of lunatics into private asylums,
his lordship on helialf of the Commissioners in Lunacy suggested a modification of the existing law?not that he himself,*'
or, indeed, the Commissioners either, as it -was implied, saw any
necessity for, or believed that any good would arise from, altering the present regulations, but " only as an expedient with a
view of satisfying the public feeling, and not ivith any hope that
it u'oidd really be effective."+
Again, on another question of very great interest for the public,
in so far as it affected its confidence in present or future
legislative arrangements, his lordship's opinions were characterized by singular inconsistencies and contradictions. He emitted
" (1) an assertion of the comparative wortlilessness of the opinion
of most medical men on cases of lunacy; (2) an expression of
" firm belief" that the opinion of a sensible layman on such cases
is of greater value than that of a medical man ; (3), an assertion
that the opinion of a magistrate is valueless, from his knowing
nothing whatever about the matter ; (4) another assertion that the
opinion of a clergyman is even of less value than that of a medical
man; (5) a statement that an opinion depends for its value on
the experience of the person giving it; and, to crown all, (6) an
approval of a suggestion by which the bulk of the most experienced practitioners in lunacy in the kingdom would be
debarred from altering an opinion at all in the form in which a
medical opinion on lunacy is of the greatest importance?to
wit, when .expressed in a certificate of insanity.''^
With regard to insanity itself we may remind our readers that
his lordship's views were so peculiarly vague? that they would
have been amusing were it not for the speculative dogmatism
which he developed from them, and which derived from his position no small amount of importance. We need only recal on$
more point, to wit, the exaggerated assertions of his lordship
respecting the " utterly abominable and indefensible|| system of
private asylums"?assertions which he endeavoured to support
mainly, (1) by facts derived from the state of these institutions
before 184G ! since which year the powers of the Commissioners
have come fully and effectively into operation; and (2) by
speculations alone as to the existing state of things.
We protested against the unfounded, nay, entirely gratuitous,
character of the surmises upon which Lord Shaftesbury built
up his evidence concerning private asylums, and expressed
the opinion that if such surmises, or such a system of reasoning,
* Report, 1858-59, Query 823. ? + Report, 1858-59, Query 81.
J See Vol. xii. of this Journal, p. 382.
? Reports, 1858-59, Queries 193, 19?. U Report, 1858-59. Query 101.
THE TREATMENT OF LUNATICS. 47
was to prompt the action of the Lunacy Commission, or influence legislation, it must necessarily debar all right-thinking
medical men from giving attention to the care and treatment of
private lunatics, and must place these at the mercy of those who
were actuated by mercenary considerations alone.
We are glad to observe that one of the Commissioners of Lunacy,
W. GL Campbell, Esq., has in his evidence before the late
Committee, expressed a species of protest against the speculative
?character of Lord Shaftesbury's statements on this subject. At
"the commencement of his evidence Mr. Campbell made the
following remarks:?
" I wish to call the attention of the Committee to a point which
seems to me to have been forgotten by some of the witnesses, and that
is, that asylums are places for the cure and treatment of the insane as
well as places of detention, and I think that great care should be used
when we surround asylums with so many safeguards, that we do not
degrade them, and also those who keep them ; I speak of licensed
houses; I am fully aware of the defective and very unadvisable
?arrangement of having a licensed house for the detention of insane
persons, because the treatment of the insane involves the detention of
"the person. The fact of a person receiving another for profit, and
having the power to deprive him of his liberty, is, I think, a most
objectionable arrangement; but the question is whether that arrangement can be got rid of, and whether all persons can by law be forced
into chartered hospitals or public asylums ; I think, if that cannot be
accomplished, that it is desirable to try and induce persons of the
highest character only to take licensed houses and receive patients. I
am afraid thai by degrading them and showing such extreme suspicion
of all these persons, by treating every one who has the care of an
asylum or licensed house, as a person who is prima facie a man who
would talce advantage of his patients and deprive them of their liberty
for profit, ice shall be doing an injury to the cause."*
We welcome warmly the protest against Lord Shaftesbury's suspicions which is contained in these observations, but we would ask
the Commissioners in Lunacy if it never occurred to them that the
"principle of profit" (as they phrase it) has, in reference to private
asylums, a good as well as an evil side, just as it has to every?
thing else in the business of life. If the Commissioners will
look about them, they will see among the proprietors of private
asylums abroad and at home many men who, having given themselves up to this specific and legitimate mode of obtaining a livelihood, have made and still make it available for the advancement of our knowledge in all that relates to the care and
treatment of the direst disease which affects man?men to whom
the world is indebted for almost all the knowledge that it has of
* Report 1859, Query 380. The subsequent references to Queries will apply to
"lis Report, unless otherwise stated.
48 THE PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING
late received concerning the best care of lunatics?men, the fagends of whose notions constitute the stock-in-trade of the qnasilunatics'-friends philanthropists of the present day. Would the
experience, which these medical men have lavished upon the
public, have been acquired in a public asylum alone ? Has any
public asylum hitherto afforded the means for a full and comprehensive study of insanity among all classes of society ? Has it
not been from the combined information obtained both in public
and private lunacy practice, that the great advancement in the
care of lunatics which we now rejoice in has been secured ? To
speak of the "principle of profit'' as an evil per se, is simply
absurd. It has been formerly, and may be in some instances now,
unrighteously exercised in private asylums; but it is the man,
not the principle, which is in fault, and the law rightly provides
a remedy for this by assigning to the Commissioners as one
duty among others, that of ascertaining the fitness of all persons
who are or who wish to become proprietors of private asylums.
Hence with the Commissioners rests the responsibility of, as
Mr. Campbell would put it, "inducing persons of the highest
character only to take licensed houses."
We have already seen that Lord Shaftesbury suggested legislative interference upon one point of lunacy law, not because it was
required in reality, but because it was expedient on account of
popular feeling. Mr. Campbell has a remark about popular
feeling which is w7ell worthy of note. Speaking of private
asylums, he says, " The great objection to them is the impression
that they produce upon the mind of the public that the patients
in them are detained for profit, and that, therefore, persons who
are not of unsound mind are sometimes detained improperly as a
source of profit."* Mr. Campbell tells usf that he does not consider it possible to abolish the system of private asylums by law,
and that that being so, all the Legislature can do is to subject
them to rigid supervision, adding, " and they are subject to rigid
supervision at present.";}: Lord Shaftesbury told us that the
notion of improper admissions or detentions wras essentially
wrong,? and left it to be implied that such occurrences could only
take place at rare intervals and under unusual circumstances.
The public idea, therefore, can have no sufficient foundation in
fact, but must be a corollary deduced from the theoretical idea of
the " principle of profit,"?as Mr. Campbell puts it. Be it so.
But the facts, according to Lord Shaftesbury, are not such as to
warrant a " great objection;" and Mr. Campbell says nothing to
the contrary; hence the theory must be wrong, and the popular
notion quite astray. What then must be done with it ? Oh ! the
.course is plain before us ; we must turn over our books, and lay
* Query 612. + Query 615. J Query 614. ? Eeport 1858-59. Qy. 185.
THE TREATMENT OF LUNATICS. 49
before the public such details as will at once allay its fears, and
convince it that any instances of unjust detention or committal
which may have come before it of late have and probably would
have been unavoidable under any system of management. Have
the Commissioners done this ? Turn to Lord Shaftesbury's
evidence, and you will see that he has, upon suspicion alone,
expressed opinions which surpass in gravity the worst fears of
an alarmed press; that upon merely speculative grounds, unsupported by hardly a particle of evidence, his lordship has
said more to depreciate the moral and general character of
the medical profession practising in lunacy?of those men to
whom alone, as his lordship himself states, it is best to give the
charge of the lunatic*?than has been said at any one time by
any individual of station for several years. More, lie has spoken
generally of the private asylums of this day much as if they were
the lunatic hells of a former day. He, and by implication the
Lunacy Commissioners, have said all that could be said which
might confirm a popular notion that cannot be substantiated in
fact; they have brought the weight of their authority to establish
the notion; and yet, strangest of culminations! the public
feeling is paraded by them as a reason for legislative interference !
Thus much for the official representatives of public feeling in
the inquisition ; now for a few examples of the lay representatives.
The gentlemen who come within this category were Mr. John
Thomas Perceval and Admiral Saumarez.
The former gentleman is the honorary secretary to the alleged
Lunatics' Friend Society, and considers himself the " attorneygeneral of her Majesty's madmen." Contrast for a moment the
Professed interest he takes in reference to lunatics, and the actual.
J-he question was put to him, "I think you have heard a good
deal of the evidence that has been given before this Committee ?"
He replied, "Not a great deal; I am rather dull of hearing; but
1 have had a copy of the report, and 1 have read a great deal of the
evidence ; all of Lord Shaftesbury's evidence, and a great deal of Mr.
^olden's and Mr. Everest's evidence, and some of Dr Gaskell s
evidence, and other portions of the evidence, t Truly one
would have thought that the perusal of a Blue Book containing only three hundred and seventy-eight pages, including
the index, would not have taxed too much the time and patience
?f a gentleman arrogating to himself so lofty and philanthropical
a position. Surely the evidence of Dr Conolly, Dr Sutherland,
Lr. James Bright, or Dr Hood; Messrs. Wilde, Barlow, Purnell,
* Report 1S5S-59 ; Queries 82, 87, 94, &c. + Query 159.
NO. XVII.?NEW SERIES. E
50 THE PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING
Cottrell, or Woodward; Sir Joshua Jebb, Sir A. Spearman, and
Sir G. Robinson, was at least worthy of perusal. But some
persons have an instinctive knowledge of things ; we shall see
in the context if this be Mr. Perceval's case.
Mr. Perceval has certain peculiar views which he very rightly
places in the fore-front of his evidence, for they serve well as a
gauge of its quality. He says :?
" I would add my peculiar views, and what has been perplexed in
some manner, but still has been my guiding star, and I may say my
chief principle in interfering in this matter. It has been a motive
of piety as regards the Founder and Establisher of our own faith. It
appears to me that no Christian nation should leave a loophole open
for any preacher or teacher of any kind to be confined as insane when
it is recollected that the Founder of our faith and his apostles were
accused of being possessed with demons and being madmen.
" 162. These are abstract and rather metaphysical questions. What
the Committee rather desire to obtain from you is such suggestions
as you could make as would prevent a person being confined as a
lunatic, when only under an hallucination, or in fact in perfect health.
How would you meet the dangers of the system P?I would say that
the same observations which I have made in a religious sense apply
also to men of science, to men of political or any other science. We
know that it is chronicled in history, that Galileo-was supposed to
be out of his mind for simply teaching that the earth moved round
the sun. Mr. Forster, the original inventor of railroads, before
Stephenson took them up, went about from England to Belgium, and
from Belgium to France, and he was looked upon as half an insane
person. Therefore I think that the Government of any country,
without any regard especially to religion, should be particularly jealous
of any man, or of any ' original mind,' as the French describe it,?
we call it ' eccentric,'?being shut up on a false charge of insanity.
It appears to me, said a young Frenchman to a friend of mine, that
you may put any man who is a little original in an asylum ; and it is
the case on account of the lax way of legislating on the subject. And
it must be remembered that they have been men of original minds
who have changed the destinies of nations and the destinies of the
world."
What a charming delicacy in the young Frenchman's remark,
and how pretty the conceit, " eccentric,"?" original mind." We
commend this notion to the distinguished author of the Thesaurus
of English Words and Phrases.
" All that is conceded to you," was the polite expression with
which the chairman of the Committee checked any further exposition of Mr. Perceval's abstract notions; and so to business.
As might be anticipated from the premises set forth by Mr.
Perceval, the class of patients which he would admit to asylums
would be somewhat restricted. In reference to Lord Shaftesbury's
1
TIIE TREATMENT OF LUNATICS. 51
remark, that no case is admitted into an asylum without some
plausible ground for confinement, Mr. Perceval said, " I do not
allow in these cases of any plausibilities. I want plain matterof-fact to be ascertained, whether a patient is a dangerous person
to himself or to others. Whether he is a dangerous person to
himself directly?I mean in a suicidal sense, or indirectly by
heing exposed through weakness to robbery, or that they might
he guilty of acts of robbery, or petty theft, or libel, which might
bring punishment upon them. These, I think, are the only grounds
upon which persons ought to be confined in an asylum."*
It will be seen that Mr. Perceval's plain matter-of-fact is of a
very imaginative character, and quite consistent in its coherency
with his abstract notions. It is evident that he has given as
little attention to the cases of even very manifest insanity usually
confined in asylums, as to the preliminary stages of the inquiry
upon which he gave evidence.
As an example of Mr. Perceval's method of observation and
reasoning take the following :?
" 229. Are you not aware that it is the general opinion of persons
who have dealt with lunatic patients, that, from the nature of the
disorder, private conversations between ministers of religion and the
patients are very injurious, although, in many instances, they may be
very beneficial, so that the superintendent must exercise some discretion
in such matters ??I am not aware of that. I am aware that there is
a great prejudice to that effect; but whether it is the case or not, I
am certainly not aware. On the contrary, we have heard from the
evidence, and from the Commissioners in Lunacy themselves, that
great benefit has been derived from it. But, at the same time, I have
no doubt that there are cases in which a clergyman might interfere
very injudiciously. Certainly a latitude should be given to the superintendent ; so long as the present system exists, you must leave it to
him to say whether a patient is fit to see a clergyman or not.
" 230. I meant to draw you to the conclusion, that in all these cases it
must be left to the discretion of the superintendent ??At present it
must be so ; I have remonstrated against that state of things ; I think
it contrary to principle that the spiritual should be put under subjection to the physical."
As a further example of the value of Mr. Perceval s evidence,
we find him5 iu answer to Query 290, describing with vigour the
brutal treatment of patients in Bethlem and another asylum in
1853. The chairman of the Committee asked?" Is there any
reason to suppose that there is any asylum in which that practice
is continued now ?" Mr. Perceval replied, " That I cannot tell;
I do not think that we have any evidence for it, but I should not
* Query 373.
E 2
52 THE PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING
be at all surprised to find it so again."* Just so ; what have I
to do with facts ? I am concerned solely with my own ideas.
Let us glance for a moment or two at this gentleman's style of
assertion. For example:?
" There is a gentleman of the name of Mr. , who has known
many cases where persons have been guilty of criminal acts in the full
possession of their senses, and they have been enabled to escape the
consequence of their acts by being confined as insane, under the
certificates of medical men.
" 245. Mr. Henley. They simulate insanity to escape the consequences
of their criminal acts ??Yes, under the direction of their friends."
Not a single example was mentioned by Mr. Perceval in confirmation of this?assertion (we had better perhaps omit placing the
correct adjective which should precede this word). We have not
the least doubt that he could not recount one solitary instance of
the kind named of late, and probably even of former years.
Again :?
" I wish to notice one part of the evidence that I gave as to the
propriety of the friends and relations of the patients having power to
visit them at all reasonable hours. The Honourable Member, Mr.
Henley, objects to that, and I think with some good reason, and said
that he thought even in small as3'lums it would be better that there
should be fixed hours for visiting them. One of my friends, who has
suffered under this law, said to me, ' I am sorry that you gave in to
the Honourable Member in this respect, because if they are visited
at fixed hours, the keeper of the asylum knows when they may come,
and he may drug tlie patients for the occasion.' This is, certainly,
I am sorry to say, a possibility in some asylums, and perhaps in particular cases.''''
And so Mr. Perceval goes on from surmise to surmise with a
felicity of imagination, and an indifference to fact, which are
verily astounding.
To proceed:?
" 282. What is the next point to which you wish to call the attention
of the Committee ??The next point is as to the existence of cruelty in
asylums, and I wish to point out what I consider the only manner of
thoroughly preventing it. With regard to that question, I think it
is a doubt in some minds in the Committee whether cruelty docs take
place in asylums generally, but in private or public asylums particularly. With regard to that impression, I have no hesitation in saying,
that I believe generally, as respects all asylums, there is not one of
them in which cases of cruelty and atrocious violence do not continually
occur.
"283. Do you apply that remark to public asylums as well as to private
asylums ??Yes ; that is my impression. There is an old saying, that
* Query 297.
THE TREATMENT OF LUNATICS. 53
one swallow does not make a spring; I know that; but when you see
a swallow ox- a martin in the month of May, it is natural to look
about and think that you will find a great many. Then I apply
that to the system in these asylums; one case of cruelty in a private
asylum would not prove anything against the whole of the asylums.
But if you can trace it to the system of the law, and to the want of
inspection and proper protection to the patients, and to the laws
governing all asylums as well as that particular asylum, then you have
a right to say, that by analogy it is not at all unlikely that the same
system prevails in other asylums, as you have detected it in one
instance. This was the impression on my mind when I first Jcnew of
the atrocious cruelties which could be practised in private asylums,
and that not only from personal violence, but from what you may
call a normal state of ignorance and cruel treatment."
The nciivete of this confession respecting the origin and
foundation of his belief on this head in suspicion alone is truly
exquisite.
Again, speaking further of cruelties exercised in asylums,
Mr. Perceval said :?
"What I call cruelty in an asylum, and reckless cruelty, is, where the
patients are very often, not from any fault of their own, provoked and
tantalized, and worked up, as ifc is called, by an allusion to their own
infirmities, and where they are all of a sudden seized and thrown with
any amount of reckless violence on a stone floor, or across an iron
bedstead, and they are then kneaded with the knee on the chest, at the
risk of breaking their ribs; then they are seized by the throat until the
e3'es start out of the sockets, and the blood comes out of the mouth.
They are also taken by the neckcloth and their heads thumped against
the floor or banged against the wall. That is the normal treatment,
I fear, of the patients in the refractory wards generally throughout the
country.
" 310. You say that that is the normal treatment. There has been a
great deal of evidence given, that the normal treatment of lunatics and
people unsound in their minds, some years ago, was entirely different
from the normal treatment going on now ??Yes.
" 311. I think you had better keep the two classes of cases distinct.
-Lord Shaftesbury stated that he believed there were great cases of cruelty
going on in private asylums, almost as great as before; and I asked
him whether he had got any facts to justify his observation, but he
could give the Committee none. Do you think that it is so ??Yes;
vve have plenty of cases.
"312. Have you any reason to believe that the normal treatment of
lunatics in private asylums, is, that their heads are thumped against
the floor, and that they are seized by the throat, as you have described,
and so on??When I used those words, I was referring to the refractory
wards of a county asylum. I did not say Bethlem; I suspect that
*hat is the normal way of treating them."
Still suspicion alone; nothing but baseless suspicion. Turn for
54 THE PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING
a moment now to Mr. Perceval's opinions respecting the Lunacy
Commission and its members, and admit at least the consistency
of his assertions on lunacy matters. He speaks of the Commissioners in Lunacy in the following manner :?
" The Board of Commissioners in Lunacy is another inquisition
before which the patient has no right to be present, either in person or by
attorney; he does not know when the court is summoned, nor what takes
place, restoring to us the cruelty of the inquisition, to the mind, and
sometimes to the body of the individual."?(Qy. 179.) " It has been
a complaint against the Commissioners in Lunacy, that they act with
a pettifogging mind on the subject; they have never taken a liberal
view of their duties."?(Qy. 243.) " I consider the protection
afforded by the visits of the magistrates and Commissioners in Lunacy
is very often a mere mockery, aud worse than nothing, because it tempts
the patients to complain, and then they are punished vindictively for
complaining of anything."?(Qy. 321.) "There is something in the
character of the Board of Commissioners in Lunacy that I do not
like; I look upon it with suspicion, and I would rather always be
under the protection of the magistrates than under the Commissioners
in Lunacy. There is a frankness of character in the magistrate,
while on the contrary, there is in the Board of Commissioners in
Lunacy a duplicity, I rather think; and what is more, although I do
not know how to express it, except by the use of a very common
word; I will call it an adherence to technicalities."?(Qy. 374.)
We will append here the only quotation it is necessary to make
from Admiral Saumarez's evidence to show that his method of
assertion was very similar to that of Mr. Perceval. Speaking of
the Chancery Court, Admiral Saumarez said :?
" The whole proceedings in Chancery are a sink of iniquity ; it is the
plunder of the many for the benefit of the few. . . . The Committee
were pleased to ask Mr. Barlow how it was that the increase of commissions in lunacy had become so great, there having been eighty last
year, and a few years before only forty. I take the liberty to say,
that it is from the facility now afforded to designing persons to sue out
commissions of lunacy upon parties whom they wish to confine, and
whose estates they want to get possession of."?(Qy. 70.)
We wish simply to show the parallelism between the style of
assertion of the chairman of the Alleged Lunatics' Friend
Society and the honorary secretary of the same society. We
shall not have to return to Admiral Saumarez's evidence, as he
confined himself almost solely to legal matters, which we should
certainly not presume to judge of from the light of his so-called
facts.
We might now perhaps leave Mr. Perceval's evidence to the
contempt of our readers, and we can fancy that some are indignantly asking why we take upon ourselves the liberty of
THE TREATMENT OF LUNATICS. 55
nauseating them, and upsetting tlieir moral digestion for a brief
space with such stuff? The fact is that it is of more importance
than at first seems. The public in its notions of lunacy
matters errs from ignorance solely. Evidence like that of Mr.
Perceval, Admiral Saumarez, and (we regret to class this nobleman in the same category, but facts are relentless) Lord Sliaftesbury, coincides with the public notions, and goes beyond them in
exaggeration. The public, judging of these gentlemen from the
positions they hold, looks upon their opinions as founded on a
careful consideration of facts; it is our duty?and an exceedingly
important and painful duty?to show that they are the product of
a too active imagination only. The interest of the profession,
^nd more particularly that of the unfortunate lunatic, is dependent in no small degree upon the success with which we discharge this duty. We claim the assistance of our readers in
executing it; and if it be done well, we have little doubt we
shall soon see the quasi-philanthropical motives which appear
to have actuated these witnesses rightly appreciated.
Before taking leave of Mr. Perceval's evidence, it is but just,
however, as a species of corrective to the obnoxious quotations
we have given from it, that he should be made to minister occasion for the exercise of the nimbleness of our reader's lungs.
I his certain of his suggestions for bettering the condition of
lunatics are well calculated to do.
" According to my ideas, every asylum ought to be constituted in
this way ; there should be a governor, as well as a medical superintendent and a clergyman. My reason for stating that is this, that
I think patients have sometimes to be protected against medical
advice and experiments, as well as against any other danger. Another
reason is this, that the science of treating the insane is still very
impevfect. How far it is proper to admit a minister of religion to
interfere with those cases is still very little known, and very much
questioned and doubted. Cases might arise where a person, knowing
his own constitution and what he had suffered from certain medical
treatment, might object to a medical officer's way of medically treating
him. He ought to have some one to appeal to to rescue him from it.
He might sustain very great injury from it. I know a patient who
to the last hour of his life will regret an operation that was performed
uPon him, by which the temporal artery was severed, and by which
he believes that the operations of his mind have ever been in a manner
constantly affected; and he does so not only from his own subsequent
experience in observing the operations of his mind, but also on a
principle that he believes in, that lunacy depends more than anything
else upon the state of the blood and the circulation of the blood. I
thi nk, therefore, on that account, that every patient should have an
?P portunity of referring immediately, and appealing to a person such
as a governor, against medical treatment which he thought would do
56 THE PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING
him an injur)'. At present he is like a child ; if he will not swallow
the dose, it is forced down his throat. I suppose that a governor, in
such a case, would either consult the man and respect his experience,
or consult his friends to ascertain whether that experience was true,
or send for another physician to ascertain what was best to be done.
Again, I imagine in the present state of things that there might be
improper interference, either on the part of the clergyman with the
patient as to his medical state, or by the medical man with the
clergyman's interference with the patient from prejudices of his own.
I think it is requisite that there should be a governor appointed, a
man of liberal education and mind, to whom such cases should be
referred for decision, and from which the clergyman might appeal, if
he chose, to the Commissioners in Lunacy; but I think it very often
might be the case that a medical man would improperly interfere with
the clergyman's duties, and also with more probability that the clergyman at this day might interfere injudiciously with the medical man." . .
" 231. Mr. Kendall. " What class of persons would you select for
governors; is he to have a veto in all matters of dispute between the
medical officer and the clergyman ??There would be a difficulty, I
think, at first; the Government would be compelled perhaps to make
the governors of some of our private lunatic doctors; I should not
object to that, and for this reason ; when you abolish private asylums
you abolish the means of living of a great number of men, and I should
not like to see that done; at least, it would be very cruel upon them
that they should be deprived of those means of living, and I think if
they, with their experience, were appointed, in the first instance, as
governors, they might act very well as governors, and without suspicion of any misconduct, though as proprietors where their own interests are concerned they are not to be depended upon. But I do not
hesitate to say that 1 think the persons that ought to be employed by the
Government are young men of the aristocracy, and young men of any
liberal profession, and I have no doubt that you, would find them. No
doubt as years went on, there would be many who would come forward,
and that some would be found now. I think it would require men of
well-educated, liberal, and delicate minds to undertake these cases;
they also must be men of firm temper and resolution; I quite conceive
that it would be a difficult thing to get many such men at first, but I
think as the subject was discussed, and as men's minds opened to it,
what is perhaps ridiculed now, they would really feel it to be an honour
and a pleasure to be engaged in, that is in carrying out the benevolent
objects of the Government."
As to clerical visitors, Mr. Perceval remarks :?
" Clerical men might see a,t first, but I think they are entitled to
acquire experience in the working of these hospitals as well as medical
men. The medical men have been walking the hospitals for years,
and practising sufficient cruelty, and causing the death of many
patients, and are at last only arriving at a certain amount of knowledge
how to treat those disorders. Therefore, I think it no objection to
THE TREATMENT OF LUNATICS. 57
clergymen to say they may err at first in their treatment, and I think
that they might be allowed to walk the hospitals and acquire information."*
In his reply to the one hundred and seventieth query, Mr.
-I erceval gave as one of his reasons for the modifications he suggested, the protection of the patients from medical experiments,
and yet he would make the poor lunatic the ground of a gigantic
experiment with unskilled hands !
Finally, Mr. Perceval culminates in the following remarks and
reference?
" The great object of all my observations is this?if I can, to break
through that constant routine and reference to the medical man ; and
l ean, to elevate the view which the Legislature should take of this
subject, and that they may consider more the spiritual and moral
part of the subject than the medical part of5 it. I find that Lord
Shaftesbury states, that only in one out of twenty boards did they
hnd a case in which medical circumstances were combined with the
disorder. I think that that is a proof how much the subject should
be treated in a moral and a spiritual sense."f
And now to more serious matter again. Mr. Campbell was
questioned upon the occurrence of gross acts of Gruelty in both
public and private asylums (Mr. Perceval having asserted the
occurrence of such acts) ; he was asked if he had any reason to
believe that these cases were numerous and frequent. Mr.
Campbell answered, " I can hardly say numerous and frequent, but
I am certain that they occur at the present time ; it is very rare that
several months pass by without some cases coming under our
notice."| This is the reply of one of the Commissioners of
Lunacy, and we might reasonably hope now that we have got
upon some stable ground. We shall see in the sequel. Mr.
Campbell was further asked :?
"404. Can you put in, on another day, the number of the entries as
o violence which you or any other Commissioner joined with you in
he visitations have made ??I can look over them. I wish to convey to
the Committee my impression, that there is truth in the statement
that violence is used towards patients by the attendants, and I wish
strongly to urge upon them my opinion, that the persons employed as
attendants in all asylums, both public and private, are all of too low
a class ; they are an uneducated class.
405. You, stating as a public officer that that is your impression, the Committee have a right to know upon what facts it is that
} ou base that opinion; because an impression is good or bad according as
3 ?u can substantiate it by facts ??The reason why I think that
superior persons ought to be employed is, that the duties of an attenc on an insane person are very trying and difficult.
406. Could you not before the time when the Committee meets again,
* Query 373. t Query 377. ? Query 384.
58 THE PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING
refer to your books, and see whether, not merely as to your inspection,
but as to the notice generally of the cases of supposed cruelty which
have occurred either in public or private asylums, or in both, and,
without enumerating them, give us upon your official authority something like an account of the amount of cruelty which exists in these
asylums, and the report you have made in your visiting entries to the
authorities of the asylums at the time ??I have no doubt that I shall
be able to bring some cases before the Committee; but I am afraid
they will appear very small, and hardly to back up what I have stated.
I was only stating my impression."
In liis evidence on a subsequent day Mr. Campbell produced
the evidence for liis impression. He said:?
" I was requested to procure some documents in order to show that
those acts of cruelty were occasionally committed in asylums ; and I
have accordingly searched a number of entries, which have been made
for some time past; I may say that ive Jceep no register of those acts
of cruelty, which are investigated on the occasion of our visits, and
therefore it is with some difficulty that I have got at a few cases. I
have had to go through the entries."*
No register of acts of cruelty ! Difficulty of referring to sucli
facts ! This seems passing strange. Let us proceed however.
We are told that the cases of complaint of acts of cruelty
frequently break down on investigation. Next we are given to
understand that only two cases of dismissal of attendants for
cruelty could be found to have occurred in county asylums in
1858 and 1859 ; " but I have noticed in a register that we keep,
that a fortnight ago two nurses were discharged from a county
asylum in the neighbourhood of London for violence to a patient;"t
discharged, that is, without the interference of the Commissioners.
What follows of immediate interest to us is too important not to
be given in Mr. Campbell's own words:?
"462. From 1847 to 1853, what returns have been made to you of
cases of cruelty, and the grounds upon which the allegations have
been made ??They have been taken out as they stand in the book,
and they are entered in the book according to the alphabetical arrangement of names; and I find that 49 male attendants have been discharged from county asylums for striking and ill-using patients.
* Query 432.
*t* Query 445.?This is Mr. Campbell's account of the cause of dismissal of
these attendants :?" In the month of July, 1858, a patient at a county asylum
stated that he had seen two other patients struck with a rope by one of the attendants. That complaint was investigated, I happened to be the Commissioner who
visited the asylum. The facts of course were denied by the attendants, but we had
them before us, and we came to the conclusion that the facts as stated were true,
and that the man had been struck by one of the attendants with a rope. He
stated it was a little piece of string which had come out of a bedstead. The
patient stated that it was a heavy rope, and the result was that this attendant and
another who was implicated were discharged on that occasion. We made an entry
of this case at the time, and although the medical superintendent of the asylum
stated that the men bore very good characters, they were discharged." This is an
example of cruelty.
THE TREATMENT OF LUNATICS. 59
"463. That is to say, tlie superintendents of the county asylums,
or the committee of management, have dismissed those attendants ?
Yes, they are cases which have been investigated and decided upon.
464. They are cases in which the superintendents of the asylums, or the
committee of management, have dismissed the attendants for not discharging their duty??Yes; that is, in which they found that the
attendants had struck or injured patients. 465. Mr. Briscoe. Or
otherwise ill-used them ??Yes. 4G6. Sir George Grey. The words
the Act are, ? Dismissal for misconduct of any nurse or attendant' ?
-Yes. 467. Do you include misconduct of every kind that has led to
the dismissal of an attendant ??No ; I have only directed such cases
to he extracted as show real cruelty, in order to hear out what I stated
a former occasion. 46S. In addition to those cases, do you believe
that there are numerous other cases in which attendants have been
dismissed for misconduct of another kind ??I know that there are a
great many; I cannot say how many. 469. Are not those cases
equally reported to the Commissioners under the terms of the Act of
Parliament ? Yes, and they are in the book; but I have not looked
to see how many. 470. Are they numerous ??Yes; I may mention
that not even cases of neglect are set down in this list
" 4S0. Then the proportion of cases in which alleged cruelty was
complained of have been, in the course of twelve years, forty-nine in
1000 or 1500 attendants ??Forty-nine men and twenty-five women ;
hut I should remind the Committee, that these are cases which have not
heen complaints only, but cases which have been proved and followed
UP by dismissal, and in some cases by prosecutions, and fine and imprisonment. 4S1. Colonel Clifford. Have you not returns for two years
which are more close ??I find that of those forty-nine male attendants
who were discharged, ten were discharged in the years 1858 and 1859 ;
and of the women, five were discharged within the same period. 482.
?Mr. Henley. Can you state how many were discharged in consequence
?f the recommendations of the Commissioners, as compared with those
who were discharged by the managers of the asylums ??I have no
means of knowing, but I suspect that these have been all discharged
independently of the Commissioners. 483. If that be so, have you any
reason to doubt that, as far as can be, a remedy is immediately applied
in those cases where cruelties occur in these public asylums ??Where it
is proved, I have not the slightest doubt that punishment immediately
follows; I have no doubt that the managers of the public asylums at
once dismiss the attendants who have been proved to have committed
any act of cruelty. 484. Mr. Tiie. Does that answer apply to private
asylums as well as public asylums ??I think so. 485. As much to one
as to the other ??I think it does
" 502. Have you anything to add that will lead to the conclusion
that there are more cases than those which appear to have been imported
to your office under the directions of the Act of Parliament F?I have
before stated that these cases do not include cases of gross neglect,
or any minor instances of cruelty. 503. Will you be good enough to
answer my question ??I have no more that I can bring forward. 504.
60 THE PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING
I am not inquiring into any cases of neglect; I wish to confine my
inquiry to cases which come under the description of cruelt}-.?That
has been strictly attended to in the lists which have been prepared.
505. You cannot add any facts but those which you have already stated P
?No. 506. Chairman. Will you now, if you please, go to the private
asylums p?The complaints in licensed houses, which I shall now
mention, have occurred within the last two years, 1858 and 1859, and
there are only four of them. 507. Those are cases which have been
brought under the notice of the Commissioners ??Yes ; in the metropolitan licensed houses. 508. Are they cases of dismissal ??In some
cases, of dismissal. 509. Are these only reports of cases that you have
received during the last two years ??No : these cases came under our
own knowledge. 510. How many cases of alleged cruelty have been
reported to }rou during the last two years in private asylums ??
Nine males and one female in 1858 and 1859. 511. Can you give a
comparison between 1847 and 1858??The total was 48 male attendants in licensed houses discharged for violence towards the patients,
and 20 females. 512. Chairman. Making together 68 ??Yes. 513.
Sir Er shine Perry. Does that number contain all: I understood you
to say that you did not get all the returns ??I can only say that we
sent the circular to which I have referred some time ago....
" 519. Were those persons discharged in consequence of reports made
by the Commissioners, or were they discharged by the proprietors of the
asylums ??I should say that they had all been discharged by the proprietors of the licensed houses. 520. Then with regard to the management of asylums, with reference to the cases of dismissal for cruelty, the
private and public asylums seem to be pretty much upon a par ??It
seems so by the return. 521. Have you any reason to believe, either as
to the private or public asylums, that the managers ,of either one or the
other do not take pains to dismiss attendants, either male or female, in
cases of cruelty which are brought to their notice ??No; I have no
reason to believe that. 522. Have you any reason to believe that they do
not take sufficient pains to ascertain that the cases of cruelty are properly inquired into as soon as they occur ??No; I think all proprietors
of asylums, as well as superintendents of asylums, are anxious to get the
best attendants that they can. 523. Have you in your visits to asylums,
whether public or private, heard any complaints made on the part of
patients, that cases of cruelty have been brought to the notice of the
superintendents, proprietors, or managers of those asylums, which
cases have not been attended to ??Yes ; I think I may say that that
has been the case. 524. To any great extent ??No ; a patient will come
and say, ' I complained that such and such a nurse had been rough
with me, but Mr. So-and-so would not believe me.' I have then
seen the nurse, and I have said, ? Is that true?' and, as a matter of
course, she has said that it was not true. 525. You have no reason to
believe that cases of cruelty occur and are complained of, without their
being attended to on the part of those who ought to take notice of
them ??No, I have no reason to believe that
" 531. Mr. Henley. Do you think that the fact of the number of the
THE TREATMENT OF LUNATICS. . 01
complaints being sixty-eight in the private houses, and seventy-four in
the course of twelve years in the public asylums, bears out the former
part of your evidence, that you thought cruelty was especially practised
in county asylums P?With reference to that, I beg to state that I
contradicted myself, when I said especially; I believe I intimated to
the Committee at the time that I did not mean especially in public
asylums. 532. You stated in your former evidence that you agreed
with what Mr. Perceval had stated in many things ; do you wish to
amend that part of your evidence ??I wish to take away the words
'especially in public asylums,' because I do not mean that. 533.
^-gain, at Question 385, in answer to this question by me, ' You have
stated that it is especially so in public asylumsyour answer is, ? I
think, perhaps, I may say so.' Having given that opinion in two cases,
do you wish to adhere to it ??I think I would amend it in this way ;
I may say in some of the refractory wards of county asylums."
If we turn now to the Appendix of the Report, to see in what
Wanner Mr. Campbell's returns of cases of cruelty bear out his
^impressions with regard to the occurrence of such cruelty, not
forgetting that gentleman's assertions that he had " only directed
such cases to be extracted as show real cruelty," we find, first,
that the whole of the returns of dismissals of attendants are
simply headed for " ill-treatment of patients." Again, of the
cases of dismissal recorded, forty-four were for striking a
Patientone for returning a blow ; one for impertinence to a
Patient; against two attendants only does it seem to have been
Necessary to proceed at law ; one attendant was dismissed for maltreating a patient, though in a trifling manner; in three cases
only does there appear upon the face of the return cruelty, properly
So called; and all the rest were cases of dismissal for various
degrees of ill-usage of, or harshness towards patients.
It is evident, therefore, that if Mr. Campbell's use of the word
cruelty is to be received in the ordinary signification of that word,
inhumanity, savageness, barbarity," his returns bear out his
assertions very imperfectly. And thus it would appear that
whether we take these returns at that gentleman s estimate, or if
AVe take them at our own estimate, as obtained from the returns
themselves, the charge of cruelty in asylums, as received, approved of, and expressed by this representative of the Lunacy
Commission, is baseless. All the facts go to piove that, under
piesent circumstances, instances of cruelty in our asylums are
*are, and that the Commissioners of Lunacy are in a position to
Prove this.
It is much to be regretted that gentlemen occupying highly
Responsible official positions should make serious charges against
a respectable bodv of men, without being able to suppoit such
^nputations by a "reference to specific facts.
62 THE PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING
Dr Bucknill put the question of so-called cruelty on its right
foundation when he told the Committee, speaking of public
asylums, that he believed " cases of deliberate cruelty are exceedingly rare; but the stress upon the temper and patience of
the attendants is so great that loss of temper is not uncommon."*
That stress "will always remain unless automaton attendants
can be invented, and the evils naturally resulting from it
can only be met by strict supervision, and a large number of
attendants. Mr. Campbell's own statements show how strict is
the discipline kept both in public and private asylums. Immediate dismissal is the punishment of any violence or harshness
towards a patient, except it be in the most manifest self-defence.
This is the only plea allowed in exculpation, and so efficiently
do the superintendents of public asylums, and the proprietors of
private, carry this rule into action, that the Commissioners
have very rarely to interfere.
We now come to the suggestions offered to the Committee.
First in importance are those of the Commissioners in
Lunacy, contained in a memorandum printed in the Appendix
to the Report, f These, however, although of most moment,
require only to be briefly glanced at, since they formed the basis
of the suggestions made by Lord Shaftesbury, and we noted their
general character and objectionable points in reviewing the propositions contained in the proposed Bills discussed by the Committee of 1858-59. The Commissioners' suggestions contain the
following provisions:?1. For an increased number of visits of
the Commissioners and visitors to licensed houses during the
year. Every house to be visited regularly six times a year by
the visitors, and three times at least by the Commissioners,
" altogether at least nine times, or, on the average, once in six
weeks." 2. The Commissioners to be empowered to demand
information as to the payments and expenditure for private '
patients.?No facts have been laidbefore the Committee warranting
such a provision; it is based almost entirely upon an unjustifiable suspicion; and it is not needed, as the following extract
from a letter of the Secretary of the Commissioners to the Lord
Chancellor will show :?
" In the course of their visits, the Commissioners have from time
to time had great reason to believe that the patients did not derive
such comforts and accommodation from their income and allowance
as they were entitled to, and they have, therefore, in many cases,
required from the persons in whose care patients have been placed,
and others, a statement of the patient's property, and of the sums
* Query 1008. + P. 209.
THE TREATMENT OF LUNATICS. 63
disbursed on their account. This information has generallg been
very readily given, and for the most part with beneficial results."*
Just so; give the Commissioners, if necessary, powers by
which they could obtain the information required by the aid of the
magistrates or some other tribunal, upon due and sufficient cause
being shown; but to give them a general and unlimited power to
obtain information which is already willingly given in most
instances, would be a piece of the most vexatious legislation.
'jThe proposition is not a bond-jide one, and, supposing it enacted,
if it were carried out in the spirit indicated in the evidence of the
chairman of the Lunacy Board, it would probably lead to endless
interference as to rate's of payments, since the opinions of the
members of the Board would become the standard of reference,
not the professional character or position of the medical man
to whose care the patient was consigned. ? 3. More careful
provisions respecting the signing of certificates for admission
Jnto asylums by relatives ; for the discharge of patients; and for
amendment of informal certificates. 4. Provisions for the
tetter medical charge of licensed houses ; every house for 50
patients to have a resident medical proprietor or medical officer;
every house for 30 patients and less than 50, to be visited daily
by a medical man, if one be not resident; every house for less
than 30 to be visited by a medical man thrice a week, unless
in cases of dispensation lay the Commissioners or visitors. 5.
Copies of Commissioners' entries to be sent to visitors; copies of
both Commissioners' and visitors'entries to be laid before justices
in Quarter Session. G. Provision for discharging patients by
Commissioners in certain special cases. 7. Provision by which
Commissioners could grant leave of absence " on trial," from an
asylum to a patient. 8. Provisions for the registration of
persons who take single patients under care, the Commissioners
also to have the power to call " for any particulars relative to
Slngle patients or their property and payments which they may
think fit." The provision not to extend to persons residing with
relatives, no one of whom, directly or indirectly, receives payments
for the charge.?The unlimited power to demand information as
to payments of single patients is open to the same objections as
that referring to patients in licensed houses.?9. Provision that
the definition of physician, surgeon, apothecary be conformable
to the Medical Act. 10. Certain provisions facilitating
arrangements for providing additional accommodation, whether
temporary or not, and for obtaining burial grounds in connexion
with public asylums.
Mr. Campbell laid before the Committee a separate memorandumf of suggestions, of which we may note the foliow* P. 214. + P. 195.
64 THE PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING
ing particulars:?1. Every order, statement, and medical
certificate, to be written in duplicate by the persons signing the
same. One of the copies to be sent to the office of the Commissioners in Lunacy, instead of the copy now required to be made
by the proprietor or superintendent. 2. Any one Commissioner
to be empowered (in addition to the ordinary statutory visits by
two Commissioners) to visit at his discretion any asylum, licensed
house, hospital or gaol, and make such inquiries as he may think
fit. "Give unlimited powers of inquiry, but add some of the
most material matters, including for payments and dietary of all
classes."?Is not this highly significant of the mode in which the
unlimited power sought by the Commissioners would be carried
out??3.?1G and 17 Yict. c. 96?"Provide that persons signing
order, shall have seen patient within one week of signing such order,
and have satisfied himself that the patient is insane; that he or
some person deputed by him should visit patient within three
months after first admission, and subsequently every six months.
Medical statement accompanying the notice of admission to be
much more specific, and give ' facts or symptoms' showing
insanity. Empower Commissioners in all doubtful cases to call
for second statement within a month." 4. " Require a report
from medical proprietor or medical superintendent or attendant
after three weeks, and within four weeks, after admission of a
patient, in such form as it by order may require. This to
be in addition to the full statement required with the notice of
admission. Add a penalty for failure. Where, upon such second
report, the insanity of the patient appears doubtful, be shall be
visited specially, within seven clays, by a Commissioner or the
medical visitor (in the case of a provincial licensed house), or
(in the case of a hospital) by two members of the Committee, or
(in the case of a metropolitan house) by a Commissioner."
Mr. Purnell Bransby Purnell, Visitor of the several lunatic
asylums of the county of Gloucester, laid before the Committee
a paper containing liis views respecting the Law of Lunacy as it
referred to magisterial districts. We commend Mr. Purnell's
paper to the notice of our readers, not that we coincide with many
of its details, but because it bespeaks a careful and thoughtful
consideration of the subject on which he writes. One remark
of this gentleman, referring to magistrates, may be especially
noted as having a much wider application. He says:?
" It bccomes a mistake in legislation, as in the sections alluded
to, by abridging their powers and duties, and transferring
them to the Commissioners, to show a distrust either of the
ability or fidelity with which they would exercise and perform
them, the result being that magistrates the best qualified for
THE TREATMENT OF LUNATICS. 65
visiting might decline to act." Mr. Puraell lias, we think,
overlooked the principle contained in this remark in his depreciatory observations on apothecaries, which observations are evidently founded on some erroneous conception of the qualifications
of the apothecary, properly so called.
Of the suggestions and suggestive information scattered through
the evidence, we may notice propositions for a greater freedom of
correspondence by lunatics in asylums, and greater facilities of
admission to friends. These are points with regard to which no
definite rules can be laid down, as they must in the end be left to
the decision of the medical man in charge, the friends, and the
Commissioners. The Commissioners urge that higher rates of
wages should be given to attendants in asylums, hoping thereby
to attract a better class of persons to such posts. Dr Bucknill
doubts whether a better class could be obtained than now, and
asserts that it is an increased number of attendants that is
wanted. The instances of harshness now occurring from time to
time towards patients, depend more upon the stress of duty upon
the attendants from being insufficient in number, than upon
their personal character. Dr Coxe, one of the Medical Commissioners of the Scotch Lunacy Board, modifies our ideas somewhat respecting the working of the chartered asylums of that
division of the kingdom. He tells us that on the whole the
system works very well; but he thinks it a bad plan when the
pauper and wealthier patients are kept under the same roof.
He approves of the system most when the two classes are
kept in different buildings?when, in fact, they are provided for
in different, although it may be contiguous, asylums. He tells
us also that the treatment is regulated by the payment,* and that
there is a considerable saviu? from the rate of maintenance
paid for the private patients, which goes not so much to increase the comforts of the pauper patients, as to extend the
institution.f Other, to us, rather serious objections, also are
made known in Dr Coxe's evidence, to which we would refer
our readers 011 account of its quiet, substantial value. We so
recently gave an analysis of the First Annual Report of the Scotch
Lunacy Board, that we need not dwell any longer upon this
evidence. Hitherto we have not alluded to the evidence given
hy Mr. A. Doyle, one of the Inspectors under the Poor-Law
Board. This is, indeed, so important in regard to pauper lunacy
that we have noticed it apart4
Before closing this abstract of the suggestions, we would briefly
refer to one made by Dr Bucknill?to wit, that an asylum should
be established for the testing of doubtful cases of lunacy. This, to
be termed a Probationary Asylum, he proposes to put under the
* Qy. 1414. t Qy. 1324. J See page 109.
NO. XVII.?NEW SERIES. F
66 THE PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING
sole charge of the Commissioners in Lunacy, and^tliat it should
be available for all parts of the kingdom. The cases to be
admitted are those which have already been sent to some asylum,
but upon whose insanity doubt rests. Even on the supposition
that this would be a feasible way of getting over the difficulty
named, it would be necessary first to show that the difficulty
really existed to an extent to warrant a special interference. No
such necessity was, however, shown, and we regret that, by an
ill-considered and gratuitous project, a portion of the medical
evidence given before the Committee should have been made to
approximate, however slightly, in laxity to some of the lay-evidence
which we have had so strongly to condemn.
We have purposely avoided making any observations on the layevidence as it bears upon Chancery lunatics. The wild speculation thrown over that branch of the inquiry with which we are
most familiar warns us against treading upon ground with which
we have a slighter acquaintance.
Our examination of the evidence laid before the Committee of
last session is now ended. The first conclusion to which we
have been led by that examination has been this:?That the
popular outcry which led to the parliamentary inquiry has been
in a great measure devoid of foundation. The second, that, in
so far as asylums are concerned, the majority of the suggestions
brought forward for the amendment of the law, are based upon
surmise, and not upon fact. The third, that, if legislation to
any extent be carried out upon the said suggestions, it will simply
complicate still more an already sufficiently complicated subject;
it will, in fact, be vexatious, and would probably tend to increase
the very evils it sought to amend.
Further, we doubt whether any of the propositions submitted to the Committee (except in relation to workhouses) will
add to the protection already afforded to the lunatic, either
before his admission into an asylum or after. It is not to increased legislation that we must look most for increased protection. The law gives the Commissioners in Lunacy even now more
power for the care of the lunatic than they feel justified in using*
Let the public be disabused of the erroneous notions it entertains
respecting the treatment of lunatics, and it would soon perceive
that under the care of the Lunacy Commissioners such evils as
still beset the proper management of the insane are being gradually hut steadily done away with, and that further improvement
is to be attained rather by a right accord being kept between
public feeling and the Commissioners on the one hand, and the
Commissioners and the medical profession and proprietors of
* See 13th Report of Commissioners, p. 52.
THE TREATMENT OF LUNATICS. 67
asylums on the other, than by legislation. The present popular
outcry, in whatever manner it may have been apparently justified
at the commencement, cannot be supported by any sufficient
series of facts, upon the showing of the Commissioners; but
being made by them a plea for further legislation, it must almost
necessarily lead to harm, not solely by occasioning the enaction of
unnecessary laws, but by directing public thought into a false
channel.
Again, the $rave, yet unsustained charges made by the Chairman of the Lunacy Commission, and not dissented from by the
other Commissioners examined, against the medical profession
practising in lunacy and the proprietors of private asylums, must
tend to interfere with that cordial co-operation between the one.
and the other which is so important for the proper carrying out.
of the delicate and responsible duties of the Commission.
We might justly complain of the tone adopted by the official
?witnesses towards the medical profession in the course of this inquiry; we might rightly ask, how it happens that a profession which
has lavished so much labour and pains upon the care of the
lunatic, which has withheld none of its experience from the
public, and to which the public is indebted for all the knowledge
by which the condition of the insane has been ameliorated,
is at this day exposed to wanton charges, touching nearly
its moral character ? But we forbear : we shall be content if we
can disabuse the public mind of a portion of the errors which it
entertains concerning the treatment of lunatics, and facilitate in
some degree a clearer knowledge of what is required for further
benefiting them.
We, however, protest against the persistent attempts made
in the present inquiry by manv of the witnesses to elevate
the so-called civil rights of the lunatic above his rights as a
sick man. Is the nascent lunatic to be matured into a perfect
one, in order that a few individuals may parade, under a
pseudo-philanthropic guise, their care for the "rights of the
subject"? Has not the ailing subject a right to be cured, and is
irot this his primary right ? But we have not a word as yet on
the important question how this right is to be secured in the
early stages of insanity, without needlessly affecting the liberty
of the individual, or stamping him prematurely as a lunatic. Put
it aside as we may, this is the great question in lunacy legislation. To set it rightly to rest would require a liberal appreciation, on the part of the people, of the duties of the medical man;
and we greatly fear that the unfortunate tone assumed by the
official witnesses in the present inquiry, will blast any hopes of
this feeling being brought about rapidly among the public.
F 2
