William Cullen
===============

Art. V.-
?:?A PSYCHOLOGICAL
STUDY*
William Cullen was born at Hamilton, in Scotland, on the
15th of April, 1710. Of liis boyhood little is known, save
that he was a lad of lively manner, uncommon quickness of
apprehension, anrl great retentiveness of memory. From this
text the psychologist seeks to ascertain in what manner grew
an intellectual superiority which placed its possessor among the
giants of medical science, and in what that intellectual superiority
chiefly consisted. The substratum, so far as known, cannot be
said to be a rare one ; for there are few schools in which could
not be found lads whose disposition, readiness of apprehension,
and power of memory might not be described in terms similar
to those which have been used to distinguish Cullen's boyish
characteristics. Hence it may be that, in tracing the develop-
ment of Cullen's mind, we may learn in some degree why it is
that Cullens are so few, while the species of soil from which he
grew is plentiful.
Cullen received his preliminary tuition in the Grammar School
of Hamilton, at the hands of a teacher of much repute. That
this instruction was solid and substantial is certain from the
circumstances under which it was given; that Cullen benefited
by it to the full is evinced by the opening of his medical studies.
From the Hamilton Grammar School he was sent to the Uni-
versity of Glasgow. We know little of the character of his
studies in that university, except that his name is to be found in
the list of students who, in 1727, attended the mathematical
lectures of the celebrated Dr. Simson. The principal facts of this
period of Cullen's life are these :?He was bound an apprentice to
a Mr. John Paisley, a member of the Faculty of Physicians and
Surgeons at Glasgow, and in extensive practice in that city, and
* "An Account of the Life, Lectures, and Writings of William Cullen, M.D.,
Professor of the practice of Physic in the University of Edinburgh. Commenced
by Dr. John Thomson and Dr. William Thomson, and concluded by David
Cragie, M.D." Edinburgh : Blackwood and Sons. 1859.
WILLIAM CULLEN : A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 83
wliile with that gentleman he had an advantage which may be
fairly presumed to have been a chief fostering cause of Cullen's
future greatness.
Mr. Paisley was a man of studious disposition, and he had col-
lected a large and valuable medical library. To this Cullen had
free access. He had received an education fitting him to compre-
hend what he read; he had a master who knew the value of
reading; he had books?at that time a rare advantage?and
so prepared and so guided, he early cultivated a taste for
reading. Thus, while he listened to professorial lectures, while
he was enabled to mark the practical working of the medical art,
he had at his command the teachings of the great masters of
that art. That this latter advantage was the differential
element which determined the active habits of inquiry that
marked the whole of his life, may be assumed from the
literary characteristics of that life, and from the value which he
attached to the use of a library by students during his professorial
career, as shown by the following incidents.
When Cullen, many years after his apprenticeship, became
a lecturer in the University of Glasgow, the library of Mr.
Paisley, as a mark of regard to Cullen, was thrown open to
all his students; and, subsequently, in Edinburgh, Cullen gave
to his class the use of his library.
" Home-keeping youths have ever homely wits," is as true
of the student who has read little as of the untravelled.
Books are the world of the student, and he who has not made
good use of them while a student will be apt to turn out a mere
academical mental instrument. It may be a highly polished and
well perfected one, but one which the possessor knows not how
to use, or sees the necessity for using. For if he lack a wider
acquaintance with those giants of humanity whose thoughts
govern the world's mind, than what is contemplated in an
academical course, he will be apt to lack the means wherewithal
truly to gauge his own knowledge, and will fail of those great
mind-born incentives to research and labour which stir up the
thoughts of man from the foundation. He will be apt, indeed,
to look upon, his academical career as the highest aim of his in-
tellectual life, and not the means to a higher life; to regard as
the culmination of his mental training what should be simply
the foundation of his own self-dependent efforts of research. In
Mr. Paisley's library we deem that Cullen laid the groundwork of
his after fame.
11 Blest
Is he whose heart is the home of the great dead,
And their great thoughts."
G 2
84 WILLIAM CULLEN : A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
During liis student life Cullen was noted for great dili-
gence, and an active observation. If, when in conversation
with his fellow-students, any subject was introduced with which
he was imperfectly acquainted, he would take little share in the
conversation ; but if, at some future period, the subject were
again broached, he would show that in the meantime he had
gained an accurate familiarity with it in all its details. A dispo-
sition of this kind lets few things escape it; hence we are not
surprised to find during the course of Cull en's life, that he mani-
fested an intimate knowledge of many subjects.
Very early in his medical career he had directed his attention
particularly to the subject of Materia Medica, and when studying
at the University of Edinburgh, he, along with other students of
congenial habits, formed a society for mutual improvement, which
proved the foundation of the Medical Society of that city. After
leavingEdinburgh and commencing the practice of his profession
at Hamilton, he devoted considerable attention to the study of
general literature and philosophy, and about the same period,
" being much addicted to study," as he himself says, he began to
review the system of medicine then taught in Scotland. "* Indeed,
during his several years' residence at Hamilton, he devoted him-
self unremittingly to a critical study of medicine and the collateral
sciences, as well as to the actual practice of his profession ; and
there first were developed those medical notions, as well as that
exact acquaintance with disease, which many years afterwards
caused his name to become so celebrated as a philosophical
physician, and a teacher. At this period of his life, he pursued
his researches in physical science experimentally as well as theo-
retically, and he collected a library containing a number of the
most rare and valuable books on medicine. After this probation
of severe study and observation, he removed to Glasgow, and
very shortly after taking up his residence there, he commenced
lecturing on the Theory and Practice of Medicine in the Univer-
sity ; and subsequently he lectured also upon Materia Medica and
Chemistry, delivering the Physic and Chemistry lectures annually,
until, in 1755, he was appointed to the chair of Chemistry in the
University of Edinburgh
When Cullen took up his abode in Glasgow, the medical cur-
riculum of the University was very imperfectly carried out, and it
was Cullen's ambition to found at Glasgow a medical school
similar to that which had been already established at Edinburgh.
To achieve this aim he laboured with characteristic diligence and
ardour, until he removed to Edinburgh.
The readiness of apprehension, retentiveness of memory, and
energy of disposition which had distinguished Cullen as a boy,
characterized him also as a man; but, matured by persistent study,
WILLIAM CULLEN: A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 85
these qualities were manifested by great accuracy of observation,
clearness of perception, precision in reasoning, and soundness of
judgment. Whether as the medical practitioner, the magistrate,
or the professor, he was the same energetic, precise, clear-headed
man. As a doctor he early inspired unbounded confidence; as a
magistrate he was much looked up to from the minute know-
ledge he displayed of rural and agricultural affairs, and from the
activity he showed in local improvements; and as a professor,
his facility of diction, aptitude of description, and above all his
admirable method of tuition, quickly secured the admiration of
students, and cannot well be surpassed.
At the very outset of his professorial duties he cast aside the
effete scholasticism which hung about the academical medical
tuition of the period, and addressed himself to the task of con-
veying in the clearest modes the truths which he had to teach.
He laid aside Latin, then the received language for conveying
scientific instruction, and adopted the vernacular, delivering
his lectures from notes. In the first lecture he gave in the
University of Glasgow, he remarked, " written lectures might
be more correct in the diction and fluent in the style, but they
would have taken up too much time, that may be rendered other-
wise useful. I shall be as correct as possible, but perhaps a
familiar style will prove more agreeable than a formal one, and
the delivery most fitted to command attention."
The great feature of his lectures was the mode in which he laid
before the students his own peculiarly careful but sagacious
habits of thought. Every stage of the processes by which he
had arrived at this or that conclusion was fully set forth, every
word clearly defined, every fact or theory methodically arranged ;
so that each series of lectures constituted not merely a course of
tuition in the principles of this or that science, but an invaluable
practical illustration of the right mode of thinking. His teaching
was free from oracular dogmatism, and consisted mainly in the
submission of facts, theories, and opinions to the students the
value of which it might rest with them to demonstrate or contro-
vert. Hence the doubtful points were carefully noted, and a
method of testing clearly indicated. He, indeed, spoke and wrote
as he had thought. His lectures were an appeal to the students'
reason rather than their memory. To comprehend the lecturer, it
was necessary to think after him, and thus, while the most certain
facts of medicine and the collateral sciences were taught by Cullen,
he aroused the reflective powers of his hearers, which course,
while it raised them in their own estimation, gave birth to a
healthy emulation in their studies, and to an attachment towards
their teacher which brightens the whole course of his history.
It is impossible to depict Cullen except in his own words, and
86 WILLIAM CULLEN : A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
from tlie wealth of illustrations contained in his writings and
works we shall endeavour to cull sufficient to exhibit his habits of
thought.
Let us look upon him first in the chair of Chemistry, the philo-
sophy of which lay almost entirely unexplored when Cullen began
to teach. To quote his own story of the position of this science
at the time :?
" Chemistry is an art that has furnished the world with a great
number of useful facts, and has thereby contributed to the improve-
ment of many arts ; but these facts lie scattered in many different
books, involved in obscure terms, mixed with many falsehoods, and
joined to a great deal of false philosophy; so that it is no great wonder
that chemistry lias not been so much studied as might have been
expected with regard to so useful a branch of knowledge, and that
many professors are themselves but very superficially acquainted with
it. But it was particularly to be expected, that, since it has been taught
in universities, the difficulties in this study should have been in some
measure removed ; that the art should have been put into form, and a
system of it attempted, the scattered facts collected and arranged in
a proper order. But this has not yet been done; chemistry has not
yet been taught but upon a narrow plan. The teachers of it have
still confined themselves to the purposes of pharmacy and medicine,
and that comprehends a small branch of chemistry, and even that, by
being a single branch, could not by itself be tolerably explained. I do
not choose the invidious task of derogating from established reputa-
tions, but, were it necessary, I could easily show that the most cele-
brated attempts towards a system or course of chemistry are extremely
incomplete, as examining but a few of the objects of chemistry;
that of those examined a very scanty and imperfect account of their
relations to other bodies is given, and that even what is given is in a
method inconvenient and faulty."
The desire to reduce the facts with which he had to deal to
a methodic and comprehensive plan, not only as the most
philosophical course, but as the one best facilitating study and
research, was one of the most marked of Cullen's habits of
thought. It was the reflection, moreover, of a deep belief in the
uniformity of the laws governing every portion of the realm
of nature, and by his systematic arrangements he sought an
approximate expression to these laws. Yet to himself, as to
his students, he never for a moment concealed the fact that the
method of arrangement which he adopted did not terminate, but
simply aided research. Several years subsequent to the delivery
of the lecture from which the foregoing paragraph is quoted, he
said to his class :?
" After teaching for so many years, it might be supposed that my
plan was exactly fixed and sufficiently known: but truly I am yet far
from being satisfied with the perfection of my plan, and very certain
WILLIAM CULLEN: A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 87
that it is neither so complete, nor so exactly suited to your purpose as I
could wish. It will, therefore, be a long time yet?I hope at least it will
he long (for it will only he when the languor and debility of age
shall restrain me)?that I shall cease to make some corrections to my
plan, some additions to my course."
Equally illustrative of the character of the man is a paragraph
immediately following the one we have quoted on tlie state of
chemistry. It is this :?
"From what I have now said, you will judge of the state of
chemical learning, and what a difficult task I undertook when I
engaged to teach chemistry ; and it is very necessary to tell you, that
I did not engage in it from any confidence of my abilities, but because
it was thought proper to be undertaken, and nobody else was found to
do it, and if I can be so lucky as to engage you to apply to the study,
I dare say that the more you become acquainted with it, the less will
my performance need an apology to you."
The example which Cullen held up to his chemical students
for emulation is one which in no small degree applies to him-
self. He said :?
" If I were now to point out a model for the imitation of the students
of chemistry, I could prefer none to this excellent chemist (M. Maar-
graaf, of Berlin). The curiosity of his researches, his judgment in
the choice of experiments, the accuracy of his execution, the per-
spicuity with which he narrates them, and withal his temperance in
theory, are qualities that deserve to be much admired and con-
stantly imitated."
Cullen for several years devoted the whole of liis energies to
the experimental and philosophical study of chemistry. He
succeeded in taking the science out of the hands of artists,
metallurgists and pharmaceutists, and exhibiting it as a liberal
art, the fit study for a gentleman; and had not his talents been
diverted into another course, in all probability his efforts would
have been crowned with the richest discoveries. Cullen appears
to have been the first who made use of diagrams to illustrate the
obscure questions of double elective affinities. It may be noted
also that among his pupils was the celebrated Dr. Joseph Black,
the discoverer of latent heat.
When Cullen began to lecture on medicine, the writings of
Boerhaave constituted the chief authority upon the subject in the
majority of the medical schools of Europe. This distinguished
physician, guided by liis profound learning, and by the extensive
knowledge he possessed of the then existing state of medicine and
the collateral sciences; influenced also by the psychical and vital
theories of his distinguished contemporaries, Stabl and Hoffman,
had clearly seen the errors of the iatro-chemical and iatro-mathe-
matical schools of biologists, and adopted a system of eclecticism
88 WILLIAM CULLEN : A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
whicli long formed the basis of medical teaching. He admitted
that there were many truths in medical physiology which could
only he arrived at by the aid of chemistry; but with Boyle,
Hoffman, and others, he contended against the whimsical chemi-
cal theories of life and disease which had obtained vogue, and
asserted that one of the most valuable uses of chemistry was to
expose these pseudo-chemical errors. He contended also against
the opinion that the microcosm, as well as the macrocosm, was
governed by mechanical principles. He held that, for the forma-
tion of a complete medical physiology, it was requisite that the
anatomist should faithfully describe the organism; that the
mechanician should apply his particular science to the solids;
that by hydrostatics the laws of the fluids in general should be
explained, and by hydraulics, their action as they move through
the various canals of the body; and, lastly, that the chemist
should add to all these, whatever his art, when fairly and care-
fully applied, had been able to discover; " and then,"lie remarks,
" if I am not mistaken, we shall have a comple account of medical
physiology/'
While, therefore, this learned teacher had, as it were, selected
all that was most worthy from the different physiological
systems in vogue, and approximated the necessary elements of a
sound system of medicine, he had failed to link them together by
any comprehensive idea of the nature of the living body?his
physiology lacked life. This defect was ? early seen by Cullen.
He says:?
" When I studied in this university (Edinburgh), about forty-eight
years ago, I learned the system of Boerhaave; and, except it may be
the names of some ancient writers?of Sydenham, and a few other
practical authors, I heard of no other names of writers on physic ; and
I was taught to think the system of Boerhaave to be very perfect,
complete, and sufficient. But when I returned from the university,
being very much addicted to study, I soon met with other books that
engaged my attention, particularly with Baglivi's specimen T)e JFibra
JMotrice et Morlosd, and, at length, with the works of Hoffman.
Both of these opened my views with respect to the animal economy,
and made me perceive something wanting, and to be added to the
system of Boerhaave. I prosecuted the inquiry ; and, according to the
opportunities I had in practice and reading, I cultivated the new ideas
I had got, and formed to myself a system in many respects different
from my masters. About twenty years after I had left this univer-
sity, I was again called to it to take a professor's chair, when I still
found the system of Boerhaave prevailing as much as ever, and even
without any notice taken of what Boerhaave himself, and his commen-
tator, "Van Swieten, had in the meantime added to the system. Soon
after I came here I was engaged to give clinical?that is, practical
lectures; and in these I ventured to give my own opinion of the
WILLIAM CULLEN: A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 89
nature and cure of diseases?different, in several respects, from that of
the Boerhaavians. This soon produced an outcry against me. In a
public college, as I happened to be a professor of chemistry, I was
called a Paracelsus, a Van Hellmont, a whimsical innovator; and great
pains were taken in private to disparage myself and my doctrines . . .
I truly esteem Dr. Boerhaave as a philosopher, a physician, and the
author of a system more perfect than anything that had gone before,
and as perfect as the state of science in his time would permit of. But
with all this I became more and more confirmed in my own ideas; and
especially from hence, that I found my pupils adopted them very
readily. I was, however, no violent reformer; and, by degrees only,
I ventured to point out the imperfections, and even the errors, of Dr.
Boerhaave's system; and 1 have now done the same in the preface
which I have given to the new edition of the First Lines."
Cullen was peculiarly influenced by the doctrines of Hoffman,
and subsequently by the physiology of Haller, who liad seen
that" la pliysiologie n'etait que l'anatomie animee; pliysiologia est
animata anatome and lie endeavoured to effect for physiology
what he had attempted for chemistry. He sought to grasp
those laws which bound together the complex functions of the
human organism. In so doing he fashioned into a more com-
prehensive and simpler system the vast accumulation of facts and
opinions under which physiological and medical science still
languished ; and he stands prominent as one of the great archi-
tects, who in successive periods have added another story to the
slowy erected structure of scientific medicine.
The point of chief moment in Cullen's physiology, was the
importance which he attached to the nervous..system in the
animal economy. He believed that upon the functions of this
system " liiFTlepends, and that its energy, therefore, is necessary
to the whole." His contemporaries, Ilaller, Whytt, and Gaubius
had already beaten this track, but probing their notions, as it were,
"with the more abstract ideas of Hoffman, Cullen methodized, im-
proved, and extended the ideas entertained of the influence of the
nervous system in the animal economy. This was an important
step in advance, and gave an immense impulse to the philosophical
study of practical medicine in this country ; for upon his concep-
tions of the influence which the nervous system exerts upon the
organism, were mainly founded the opinions which Cullen taught
concerning the causes of disease and the operation of medicines.
It is sufficient that we should simply note the direction which
the growth of medical science took under Cullen's hands, as indi-
cating his habits of thought, without pursuing the subject with
any degree of minuteness. We have to deal with those points
which may serve to show the fundamental tendencies of his intellect.
* Blainville.
90 WILLIAM CULLEN: A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
-?
Now Hoffman was the most distinguished of those biologists
who have been classed by Whewell as the vital-fluid school. They
held that the whole of the peculiar functions of life depended
upon the agency of a subtle ethereal substance diffused through-
out the frame. The iatro-mathematical school had left unsolved
an essential question in the phenomena of organic life. Motion
being given, it was possible to construct on mathematical principles
a scheme of its modifications and transference. But in the living
organism there was manifested a spontaneous commencement
of motion, which was not explicable by any mechanical action.
Hoffman attempted to solve this difficulty by the assumption of
a principle higher in kind than that of mechanical force. He
held that the Ether, a hypothetical material agent of extreme
subtilty and energy, supposed to permeate all nature, was the
active agent by which was brought about the whole of the
phenomena of organic life. He conceived that in animals this
agent was separated from the blood, and stored in the brain,
from which, by means of the nerves, its energizing power was .
extended to the whole body.
The influence of Hoffman's views upon Cullen appears to have
been in directing his attention markedly to the nervous system
as the great source of animal energy and power. Gaubius' phi-
losophical views on the reciprocal influence of the mind and body
upon each othei*, Haller's profound researches upon "irritability,"
and Wliytt's ingenious speculations and experiments upon vital
and other involuntary motions, and his observations upon the
connexion of sympathetic movements with the nervous system,
as well as the scattered opinions and inquiries of other physiolo-
gists, all contributed to support Cullen's conception ; and in this
matrix he developed those views of the nervous system which
play so essential a part in his physiological and pathological
writings. He bound together the scattered physiology of the
period into a connected and coherent system, and this with a
philosophical acumen and depth of thought that has hardly yet
been appreciated.
Eejecting the notions which Hoffman attached to his hypothesis
of a vital fluid, and of the mode in which it was distributed in
the body, he nevertheless adopted the phrase nervous fluid to
express the capacity possessed by the nervous system to transmit
impressions. "By nervous fluid," he says, "I mean nothing
more than that there is a condition of nerves which fits them for
the communication of motion."
It is difficult to conceive a more inapt term to convey so clear
and philosophical an expression of the nature of nervous action.
The one devoid of theory, eminently calculated to facilitate in-
quiry, and far in advance of the physiological speculations of the
WILLIAM CULLEN: A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 91
period; the other conveying the notion of a "medium of action
absolutely hypothetical, and yet in its nature such as to give a
certain definite familiar notion to every one, and to furnish a
seemingly ready explanation of an abstruse subject. That the
term has been often retained by the followers of Cullen, while
the signification he attached to it has been lost, and that his
doctrines have at times suffered from this cause, is, we think,
certain.
No more striking illustration of this source of error in Cullen's
teaching, and at the same time no better example of his careful
distinction of theory from fact, can be given than in his definition
of the words excitement and collapse, the former of which in the
hands of one of liis disciples became the exponent of one of the
boldest and most unscrupulous theories that ever disturbed
medicine. Cullen writes :?
" I take it for granted that when you consider the weakness and
manifest mistakes of any other hypothesis, you will readily, with me,
think that the condition of the nerves fitting them for the communi-
cation of motion, consists in some state of the matter of the nervous
fluid itself, and of its having more or less mobility, in some cases being
capable of being moved with more ease and vigour, while in other cases
it is unfit for either. Now, I say, merely to avoid long expressions,
I shall choose shorter ones, and shall speak of the moveable state of
the nervous fluid, or of that condition of the nervous system which fits
it for the communication of motion, under the term of its excitement,
and a deficiency or lesser degree of this, I shall call collapse. Now,
37ou must merely consider these as terms employed for what I take
to be matters of fact, the increased or diminished force of the animal
power or energy of the brain, and not as imparting matter of theory,
or as expressing anything with regard to the action of the nervous
fluid, or wherein these different states of the nervous system consist.
Whatever hypothesis I may have fancied to myself, I consider these as
hypotheses still, and dare not trust you with them, unless you take
them as they pass in my mind, and be very certain never to apply
them in particular cases."
Elsewhere Cullen has remarked, "My business is not so much
to explain how this and that happens, as to examine what is
truly matter of fact." " My anxiety is not so much to find out
how it happens, as to find out what happens." This, indeed,
constituted a chief feature of his intellectual character and teach-
ing, and it is evinced in the carefulness with which he defines the
signification which he attaches to the words he makes use of, as in
the instances cited. But it unfortunately happened that the terms
mentioned necessarily involved in their mode of use a theoretical
form of expression, if not a theory, and the onward impulse given
to medicine by Cullen was quickly clouded in no small degree by
theories based upon these very terms. No more instructive
92 WILLIAM CULLEN: A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
illustration could be advanced of the evils arising from the intro-
duction of common words into science as technical terms, where
the meaning cannot be fixed without ambiguity.
The same remarks are also applicable to the use which Cullen
made of the term spasm, to express the state of the vascular
system in the different stages of fever. The word had been long
a common one in medicine, and was familiarly employed to express
certain well-known phenomena. Hence the precise conception
which Cullen wished to attach to it was exposed to the chance of
being jumbled up into a confused meaning, with every individual's
peculiar apprehension of the import of the word. Cullen's views
of the nature of fever were singularly enlightened and advanced,
but the word adverted to has been an unfailing theme of conten-
tion and misapprehension from his own to the present time.
Bead his description of fever without the use of the word, and we
must admit that we can add but little to the general expression.
He says:?
" I suppose that in every fever there is a power applied to the body
which has a tendency to hurt and destroy it, and which produces in it
certain motions which deviate from the natural state, and at the same
time, in every fever which has its full course, I suppose that, in conse-
quence of the constitution of the animal economy, there are certain
motions excited which have a tendency to obviate the effects of the
noxious powers, or to correct or remove them. Both these kinds of
motion are considered as constituting the disease. But the former is,
perhaps, strictly the morbid state, while the latter is to be considered
as the operation of the vis medicatrix naturcE, of salutary tendency,
and which I shall hereafter call the reaction of the system.
" In what manner the state of debility brings on, with respect to the
heart and arteries, a seemingly contrary state of force and activitv,
is a difficulty which we do not pretend entirely to remove. We can
only refer it to a general law of the system, which, however, is very
well established, and is shortly this :?That where a deviation from
the natural state of health happens, from the nature of the economy
this deviation naturally produces a tendency in the system to restore
itself to its former condition. This, I say, constitutes the vis preser-
ver ix and medicatrix natures
And yet no man was more alive than Cullen to the necessity
of the accurate use of terms. Explaining the reason why he
entered very fully into the meaning which should be attached
to the word symptom, he remarked :?
" The use of such generalities will not be immediately obvious, but
some accuracy in your ideas and language with regard to them, you
will find on many occasions to be of consequence. It is proper that
you should be sometimes exercised in forming abstract and general
notions. Without these you may think of acquiring a greater number
WILLIAM CULLEN : A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 93
of particular facts; but till the terms in which these particular facts
are expressed are accurately defined, and till the facts themselves are
digested into a system, they will not he very useful or even of much
practical application."
Cullen's views regarding the nervous system as the connecting
medium between the immaterial and material parts of man were
far-sighted and profound. He considered that mental changes
and certain physical alterations in the nervous system were
interdependent; he says :?
" Although the soul is certainly a distinct substance from the body,
it appears highly probable that the soul, while connected with the
body, seldom acts, but in consequence of motions first excited in the
latter. . . . The soul is, indeed, a necessary part of these motions, but
it cannot be said to direct and govern them independently of the con-
ditions of the body. . . . Whatever share the soul may have in sup-
porting the motions of the body, we can have no art of physic but in
so far as we suppose that the causes operating upon the body act by a
physical necessity, and that by a knowledge of such causes we can
produce certain changes in the state of the matter and organization of
the body."
The opinions with which Cullen set out in the formation of
his celebrated Nosology were eminently philosophical, and well
calculated to illustrate his method of thinking. In a clinical
lecture he delivered the year previous to the publication of his
first edition, he said, after reviewing the defects in the nosolo-
gies then existing:?
" These are the faults in the systems hitherto given. I must offer
you another. The matter is so difficult that I have hesitated much
about making an attempt; but I hazard something to be useful, and
an imperfect attempt is allowable here, though not fit to be offered to
the public. As it is now given out, it is to be regarded as a sketch
not finished."
He aimed at simplifying the existing systems of Sauvages
and others, and giving more accurate descriptions of the principal
genera of diseases. In the preface to the second edition of the
Nosology, he stated that probably as long a period would in-
tervene between the publication of Sauvages'nosology and a
good system, as did between the first attempt at botanical
arrangement by Ctesalpinus and the writings of Linnoeus, adding
that he aspired to the humble merit of exciting others to the
study of his favourite science.
In no respect were Cullen's remarkable practical tact and
philosophical sagacity brought more effectually into play than
in the reformation of the Materia Medica. Previous to
the time when Cullen's influence as a teacher of Materia Medica
94 WILLIAM CULLEN: A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
"became apparent, although many preparations belonging to mystical
medicine had been excluded from the London Pharmacopoeia, and
several from the Edinburgh, both works still retained much of
the character of Dr. Hornbook's pharmaceutical repertory.
" Calces o' fossils, earth, and trees ;
True Sal-marinum o' the seas ;
The Farina of beans and pease,
He has't in plenty ;
Aqua-fontis, what you please,
He can content ye.
Forbye some new, uncommon weapons,
TJrinus Spiritus of capons ;
Or Mite-horn shavings, filings, scrapings,
Distill'd per se ;
Sal-alkali o' Midge-tail-clippings,
And monie mae."
Thus, along with a redundancy of vegetable samples, the
pharmacopoeias of both countries contained among the animal
substances, the fat of the goose, duck and swan, cobweb, the entire
toad, the spawn of the frog, ants entire, and ants' eggs, the human
skull and mummy, snails, earthworms, millipeds, the excrement of
the dog, scorpion, viper, &c. Among the compounds were the
Mithridate or Confection of Damocrates, consisting of forty-seven
ingredients with a proportion of Canary wine, and the Theriac of
Andromachus, consisting of sixty-four ingredients with Canary
wine. In the fifth edition of the Edinburgh Pharmacopoeia
many of these things were excluded, and in the sixth, chiefly
through the influence of Cullen, the work was almost entirely
depurated. Of the preparations and animal substances named,
millipeds only were retained. The London College had been
the first to commence the reform of the Pharmacopoeia, but
the Edinburgh first achieved a complete reform. Cullen, also,
greatly curtailed the list of vegetable simples in the Pharma-
copoeia.
The reforms briefly glanced at, however, were the necessary
result of Cullen's essentially practical but highly philosophical
method of teaching Materia Medica and Therapeutics. The
former he reduced to a system which occupies a very important
position in the history of medical science, and the latter he
taught in its widest scope and truest form. The term thera-
peutics had previous to his time been almost solely confined to
the study of those general principles which should guide us in
the administration of remedies as means of curing diseases,
while the study of the means of preventing diseases had been
supposed to constitute another branch of medicine?Hygiene.
WILLIAM CULLEN: A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 95
Cullen, however, rightly held, that " Hygiene and Therapeutics
must form one and the same general doctrine."
As a clinical teacher Cullen was eminently practical, taking
advantage of every circumstance that could awaken the observa-
tion of the students, and drawing particular attention to diseases
of ordinary occurrence, which must form the groundwork of all
sound medical experience. He taught also from the commence-
ment of lecturing the great advantages of simplicity in prescribing,
a rare novelty in those days of bewildering compounds. He
showed how simplicity was necessary for the right appreciation
of the effects of such drugs as were administered, and to secure
their legitimate operation.
In everything that Cullen directed his attention to, he dis-
played the same untiring energy, activity of thought, and com-
prehensive method of dealing with, methodizing, and extending
existing information. He sought to clear away the redundancy
of theory which hampered the writings of the great authorities in
medicine and the collateral sciences, and to reduce these to a
system founded chiefly on observation and experience, and thus
place them on a firmer foundation for subsequent research and
advancement. This high and philosophical aim he achieved.
He never lost sight himself of the true character of his researches,
and he terms his most important attempts at generalization
simply "approximations to truth." No man, moreover, ever
exhibited a juster medium between philosophical speculation and
practical application. It is one of the necessary consequences
pf medical science that an immediate practical end must almost
invariably be kept in view. Physicians seek that they may
relieve, and they are always liable (to use the language of
Bacon) to?
" Turn with premature and hasty zeal to practice, not merely on
account of the advantage to be derived from it, but in order to seize
upon some security in a new undertaking of their not employing the
remainder of their labour unprofitably, and by making themselves
conspicuous, to acquire a greater name for the pursuit. Hence, like
Atalanta, they leave the course to pick up the golden apple, interrupt-
ing their speed, and giving up the victory."*
Cullen never lost sight of the great object of medical science,
but he so tempered his practice with speculation, and his specula-
tion with his practice, that each became the legitimate helper
of the other, and they advanced with equal steps.
It is instructive to note the varied manner in which Cullen
employed his talents, in addition to those labours upon which
his fame rests. He had an accurate and critical knowledge of
* Novum Organum, A ph. 70.
96 WILLIAM CULLEN: A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
botany; lie thought much and deeply upon agriculture, and of
the application of chemistry to it; and in December, 1749, we
find Lord Karnes writing to him, " My sedate purpose is, that
your name shall he carried down to posterity by a treatise on
agriculture better than the world ever yet saw." He wrote upon
"the mechanical principles on which ploughs have been con-
structed, to find out what is the importance and effect of each
part, and to examine what variation each or all of them require,
according to the difference of soil in which they are employed."
Alluding to this essay, Lord Kames remarked, in a letter to
Cullen, " a thought has struck me in the head within these few
days relative to your engine, the plough and an intelligent
farmer who submitted to Cullen a proposition to substitute
iron for wood in the construction of ploughs, observes that
Cullen was " the first person in Scotland who has attempted to
account for the structure of that machine upon mathematical
principles." Cullen also suggested certain important im-
provements in bleaching, and projected a process for the
purification of salt.
Among the most notable features of Cullen's mental habits
were his equanimity of disposition, and his rare power of winning
the affection of those with whom he was thrown most immediately
into contact. Notwithstanding the opposition with which his
views were at first received by his fellow professors in Edinburgh,
he never recriminated, however painful the assault upon him might
have been. The interest he took in his pupils was unwearied.
He delighted to encourage their efforts and remove their doubts,
and this begat a mutual confidence which was marked on the
professor's side by genuine kind-heartedness, and on the student's
by affectionate respect. The friendship which arose between
Cullen and his more emulous and distinguished students endured
until death, and the correspondence which passed between him
and them after they had been launched into active life, is most
pleasing, in the kindly and affectionate interest displayed on both
sides. " Dear Joe," and " Dear Willie," are the terms in which
he commonly addresses his celebrated pupils Joseph Black and
William Hunter, and in the same familiar phrase he wrote to other
pupils. In a letter to Dr. Black, Cullen writes:?
" I received your packet of chemistry, which rejoiced me extremely.
A new experiment gives me new life; but I wonder at the reserve and
ceremony you use with respect to me. Did I learn chemistry from
you, only to be a bar to your inquiries ? The subject is not so limited
as to be easily exhausted, and your experiments will only advance me
so much farther on."
On the other hand, when it became probable that the chair of
WILLIAM CULLEN: A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 97
Chemistry at Edinburgh would become vacant, Dr. Black at once
communicated the fact to Cullen, adding :?
" From some hints I have received, I have reason to suspect that I
am not excluded the possibility of an offer; but I assure you, doctor,
I am absolutely resolved to refuse it, if there is any hopes of its being
of any advantage to you."
In 1745, William Hunter writes:?
"Dear doctor,?I could not let slip the opportunity of thanking
you for your kind letter; and in answer, I wish I could say
anything that might convince you of my sense of your goodness
in everything, but particularly in this case. You have interested
yourself warmly in my brother's (James's) health; and in the
hurry of business and lecture-reading, have taken time to write to
me of him. Indeed, it was kind; I thank you in his name, and I
thank you for myself. You see I pretend to gratitude ; so love me,
God, as I am sincere. . . . Well, haw does the animal economy
appear to you, now that you have examined it, as one may say, with
precision ? I have good reason to put the question to you, because,
in my little attempts that way since I began to think for myself,
nature, where I am best disposed to mark her, beams so strong upon
me, that I am lost in wonder, and count it sacrilege to measure her
meanest feature by my largest conception. Ay, ay, the time will come
when our great philosophers will blush to find, that they have talked
with as little real knowledge, and as peremptorily of the animal
powers," as the country miller who balances the power of Europe."
Then we have Cullen writing to William Hunter :?
" I value your friendship in the highest degree, and owe so much
to it that I think you have the best title to advise me ?direct me with
regard to my sons. I sent them to London in high expectation of the
benefits to be received from your friendship and instruction, and I had
some confidence in their conduct, else I had not trusted them in London ;
but in the last article I have the highest satisfaction in finding that
they have got your approbation, who are so good a judge, who never
did a foolish thing yourself, and therefore may be a little rigorous with
respect to others."
We find Dr. Cullen writing to other pupils:?
" Dear Fordyce,?Your letter last night was very welcome. I sus-
pected that your laziness had banished you from me for ever. I won't
tell you with what regret I felt that; but the sight of your hand was
very agreeable. ... I shall be glad to see your specimens, and
more so to see yourself, when you have been exotic."
Again:?
"Dear Fourie [Balfour Russell],?I shall always be glad to have your
letters, when they inform me of your own success and happiness, though
they tell me of nothing else. ... I would fain play off Fordyce and
you against each other. Fordyce set out with as handsome a margin
NO. XVII.?NEW SERIES. H
98 WILLTAM CULLEN : A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
as you gave me, but he has very discreetly filled it afterwards. I
expect no margins from you hereafter, especially after so long a letter
as this is. I mean to show you that one may write a long letter to a
friend without saying anything. I may perhaps show you that 1 can
send a letter to another quarter of the globe with no more in it than
what I would say in yawning at my own fireside."
As with his pupils so was Cullen with his patients. Dugakl
Stewart, when a boy of fourteen or fifteen, was attended by Cullen
for a slight indisposition and was recommended by him to
relax his studies, and have recourse to some light reading, Don
Quixote being suggested :?
" In subsequent visits to this patient," Dr. John Thomson states,
" Cullen never failed to examine him in the progress he had made in
reading the humorous story of the great pattern of chivalry, and to
talk over with him every successive incident, scene, and character in
that history. In mentioning these particulars, Mr. Stewart remarked
that he could never look back on that intercourse without feeling
surprise at the minute accuracy with which Cullen remembered every
passage in the life of Don Quixote, and the lively manner in which
lie sympathized with him in the. pleasure he derived from the first
perusal of that entertaining romance."
Of Cullen's family habits of thought, a charming illustration is
preserved in a letter addressed to one of his sons, then leaving
home for the first time. As we read this delightful epistle the
inmost peculiarities of the man's thoughts appear to be opened
out before us.
" Edinburgh, 11 tli November, 1765.
"Dear Jamie,?I am afraid you do not consider the anxiety we
have about you, or you would have continued to give us a letter from
Glasgow ; but I hope you will mind better for the future to take every
opportunity of giving us accounts of you. We have received your
letter to-day, and Mr. Leitch and your brother Patrick came home
before dinner. Your letter is a little concise, and I beg you will be
always as full as you can, for we wish to know every particular that
happens to you. Keep memorandums of what you may write; so
that, when you sit down, your materials may be ready. It is common
in sea journals to set down occurrences, though not relating to the
reckoning. I wish you would mark as many as you can, if not in
your journal, at least in another book. One cannot begin too early to
make remarks on everything. It is a very improving exercise, and
through life, attention and observation are the foundation of success,
and distinguish the able and wise from the weak and foolish.
" I hope you have got everything necessary, and a proper chest to put
them in. I beg you will study to keep it always in good order, and
all your clothes in good condition ; and, particularly, I expect to observe
WILLIAM CULLEN: A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 99
that while you have perused your books you have also kept them
clean. As I hear that Mr. Kippen is not well, if he is not able to go
with you, it will pretty certainly take you into the store at Antigua,
which I shall think very lucky; but I tremble for your handwriting,
and I beg of you, in the most earnest manner, to take pains on that
article. If you have any regard to my satisfaction you will; and, for
your own sake, consider that nothing so much gives the appearance of
mean and low breed as bad writing. Take every opportunity, there-
fore, to practise with attention, and, if possible, never without it. As
you are not to go to Ireland, you may find the two dissertations an
agreeable present to some doctors in the West Indies. I find Mr.
Anderson refuses to take your money, but press him to it again, and
at least to keep it to lay out for you. If he declines it in every
shape, I desire you may leave it with Mr. Hamilton, as I have
much use for it. In the meantime, let me know what he lays out for
you. Dear Jamie, I hope to write to you, and, perhaps, to send you
letters for Virginia. I shall be glad to know what letters you get
from your uncle. I hope few advices are now necessary. Study your
trade eagerly, decline no labour, recommend yourself by briskness and
diligence, bear hardships with patience and resolution, be obliging to
everybody, whether above or below you, and hold up your head both
in a literal and figurative sense. I trust that honour, truth, and dis-
cretion, shall always guide you, and give the utmost comfort to, my
dear Jamie, your affectionate father,
" William Cullen."
It is requisite to note that Cullen's kind-heartedness rendered
him indifferent to pecuniary success, and when he died he left to
his family little else than his great fame.
Among the intimate acquaintances of Cullen were David
Hume, Adam Smith, Lord Karnes, and Eobertson the historian,
and there is little doubt that the writings and companionship of
these gifted men exercised no small influence upon Cullen's tone
of thought. Contemporary with him, in the medical profession,
were Huxham, George Cleghorn, Sir John Pringle, Donald
Monro, Francis Home, Brocklesby, the two Linds, and Sims?
all men who laboured to establish medicine upon observation and
experience alone, and whose writings contributed rich material
for the active, generalizing mind of Cullen. He had, as his
biographer remarks, " fallen on good daysbut these days were
necessary for the development of a Cullen. The most powerful
genius would abort unless the circumstances necessary to its
development were present. The great man may be said to
be as much the product of the epoch in which he lives as of his
own intellectual greatness. Both elements are necessary for the
full birth of mental grandeur. When Cullen began to study,
h 2
?TOO INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC IN
theoretical medicine had commenced to wane, and the sciences
of organization and medicine were fast becoming matters of true
observation and experiment. Many inquirers were in the field,
and facts and observations accumulated rapidly; but both medicine
and the collateral sciences lacked connexion and coherency.
Cullen's sagacity early saw this, and he set himself steadily to
work to remedy the evil in so far as medicine and the sciences
most immediately connected with it were concerned, and in this
endeavour he succeeded. He was eminently qualified for the
task by his untiring perseverance, accurate observation, cautious,
but sound judgment, and intimate practical and experimental
acquaintance with the subjects to which he chiefly devoted his
care. He linked together the floating facts of the different
sciences, and consolidated them into systems in which there was
only so much theory as to give a healthy vitality to them.
Thus he gave a vast impulse to, and built a sound foundation for,
the future study of medicine; and the subsequent history of the
science shows how deeply we are indebted to Cullen for its
vigorous growth since the period when he taught.
Cullen died on the fifth day of February, 1790, aged seventy:
nine years and eleven months. The story of his mental life is
one of rare interest. His early cultivation of habits of indepen-
dent thought, and the never-tiring assiduity he displayed through-
out life, show that he won his way to fame by the old, old path
of hard, relentless work. Hence the story is one that appeals
strongly to the true student. We have assayed to tell somewhat
of its character, but he who would rightly know it must turn to
the invaluable volumes from which we have derived our know-
ledge.
