The Parliamentary Inquiry Concerning Lunatics
==============================================

THE JOURNAL
OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND
MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
OCTOBER 1, 1860.
Art. I. ?

The Parliamentary inquiry touching the care and treatment of
lunatics, after having been protracted over three sessions, has
at length terminated. The Select Committee have reported, and
we proceed at once to an examination of that Report, simply premising that, in the session which has just terminated, additional
evidence was given by Mr. Bolden, Dr Hood, Mr. Perceval, and
the Earl of Shaftesbury. Mr. Joseph Elmer, attached to the
office of the Masters in Lunacy, was also examined. The lastnamed gentleman gave evidence chiefly on the expenses connected with lunacy inquisitions: Mr. Bolden detailed the particulars of a case of unjust confinement in a private lunatic
asylum. He also laid before the Committee certain estimates of
the probable expenses of establishments for private patients in
this country, framed upon the plan of the chartered asylums of
Scotland. Dr Hood offered sundry suggestions for the more
effective carrying out of the inspection and care of lunatics; Mr.
Perceval corrected and explained one or two points in the evidence he had previously tendered; and the Earl of Shaftesbury
stated the advantages attached to the present constitution and
method of working of the Lunacy Commission, pointed out the
serious disadvantages which he conceived would arise if any
radical changes were made in the formation of the Commission,
and indicated a mode in which its executive capacity might be
largely increased.
The Report commences by stating that the number of lunatics,
using the word in its statutory sense (that is to say, " every person being an idiot or lunatic, or of unsound mind, though that
NO. XX.?NEW SERIES. G G
438 PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS.
meaning will include many persons to whom the word is not
strictly applicable"), " is "very large, and it is to he feared that
the number is still on the increase." Whether this number is
increasing in a greater ratio than the increase of population, may,
it is remarked, be doubtful; " as it should not be forgotten that
old chronic cases, which were not formerly under supervision,
have now, with the increase and improvement of public asylums,
been since brought into them; and, in addition to this, the care
of the patient is so much more efficient than it was before, that
the annual mortality is considerably diminished, and the consequent longevity is considerably increased." (p. iii.) The Report
then proceeds:?
" Until the year 1844, there were no data upon which an accurate
opinion could be formed with reference to this important part of the
subject; but since that year cases have been better looked up, and
more closely attended to. Taking this as our starting-point, and comparing the number of patients on the 1st of January, 1844, with the
number of patients on the 1st of January, 1858 and 1859, we find the
following results:?
1844. 1858. 1839.
Private patients in asylums, hospitals, and
licensed houses   3,790
Pauper lunatics and idiots in asylums,
hospitals, and licensed houses . . . 7,482
Pauper lunatics, and idiots in workhouses
and with friends, &c. 9,339
Total 20,Gil 35,347 35,982
There was, therefore, on the 1st of January, 1858 and 1859, as compared with the 1st of January, 1844, an increase of about 15,000, out
of totals of 35,347 and 35,982 ; an increase apparently very great in
proportion to the increase which has taken place in the population
during the same period. But it should be borne in mind that in the
return for 1844 many patients living with their friends as paupers
were not included, there being no record of them at that period.
After making allowance for the operation of the causes above referred
to, it is to be feared that a large part of the increase must still be
attributed to other causes. Taking the figures as they stand, it is a
melancholy fact that out of every 600 people in England and Wales,
one at least is in such a state that, in many respects, he is incapable of
managing himself and his affairs. A vast proportion, no doubt, are
cases either of natural idiotcy or of mental imbecility arising from age,
epilepsy, fits, and other causes, where the maladies may be regarded as
chronic or incurable. With regard to them, little more can be done
by any laws however wise, or any regulations however prudent, than
to provide the patients with such comforts as their circumstances will
admit; but with regard to others, since 50 or GO, or even 70 per cent,
are capable of cure, if taken in time and carefully treated, it is cer4,612 4,762
17,572 18,022
13,163 13,208
PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS. 439
tainly a matter of primary importance that our legislative provisions
should be so framed as to promote the accomplishment of this desirable
object." (pp. iii. iv.)
The provisions of the Acts of Parliament now in force which
relate to lunatics in public asylums are next briefly recited, and
the Report then states:?
" It appears from the evidence that these asylums are, generally
speaking, so well looked after, and so carefully attended to, that,
as regards them, but little alteration is required in the law. In
some cases it may be a question whether they are not, in their structure, inconveniently large; whether the staff of attendants should not
be increased; whether higher remuneration in some instances should
not be given; and whether it might not be advisable to erect, in connexion with them, detached buildings, of a simple and inexpensive
character, for the reception of imbecile and chronic patients. But
these and the like matters require no alteration in the law, and may
well be left to the visiting justices to regulate and determine, acting
in communication with the Commissioners in Lunacy and the Secretary
of State." (p. iv.)
The state of lunatics confined in workhouses is next considered.
The number of these lunatics amounted, on the 1st of Januarv,
1857, to 0800; and on the 1st of January, 1859, to 7032.
The law relating to this class of lunatics, the Report states, " is
certainly in a very unsatisfactory state." The Report then proceeds :?
" By the Poor Law Amendment Act the detention in any workhouse of ' any dangerous lunatic, insane person, or idiot,' for a longer
period than fourteen days, is expressly prohibited; and the word
' dangerous' is read as applicable to each of the three classes of mentally disordered persons who are there mentioned. But with regard
to those who are not dangerous, the statutory provisions are ambiguous. On the one hand, it seems to have been contemplated by the
Legislature that all pauper lunatics should be sent to some asylum,
registered hospital, or licensed house, under an order by a justice or
justices; on the other hand, there are provisions in the same Act, and
also in another Act of Parliament, passed in the same session, which
seem to recognise, to a certain extent, the detention in workhouses of
paupers deemed by law to be insane. The consequence is, that large
numbers of pauper lunatics are kept in these houses without a certificate of their mental condition, and without an order from any magistrate regarding them as lunatics, although a large portion of such
persons, especially in the rural districts, may be correctly described as
harmless lunatics, who, if kept under a slight degree of supervision,
are capable of useful and regular occupation, or whose infirmity of
mind is consequent on epilepsy, or paralysis, or fatuity from old a^e.
It cannot be denied that, with regard to those who are really lunatics
there is a great absence of proper supervision, attendance, and medical
G G 2
440 PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS.
treatment. In some workhouses there are not even separate wards;
mechanical restraint is frequently applied, because the imperfect state
of the accommodation will not admit of a better mode of treatment;
in many cases the medical officers of a union cannot have the special
knowledge requisite for the management of the insane; and it may
generally be concluded, that the special ajjpliances of a union work-,
house are not by any means equivalent as to this class of inmates to
those of a lunatic asylum.
" The state of the law on this branch of the subject appears to require amendment. Your Committee are not prepared to recommend
that all these cases, without exception, should be removed to asylums;
but they are of opinion that no person should be detained in a workhouse respecting whose sanity a doubt exists, without a medical certificate, renewable quarterly, stating that the patient is a proper patient
to be kept in the workhouse; that there should, if possible, be distinct
wards for such patients, with distinct attendance; that the guardians
of the union should specially visit such patients once in each quarter,
and make a special entry on each such visit of their state and condition ;
that the Commissioners should also visit them at least once in each
year, and that the same power of removing any patient to an asylum
should be given to the Commissioners as that which the justices
now have." (p. v.)
The clauses of the Lunatic Asylums' Bill brought before the
House of Commons by Mr. Walpole, and referred to the Select
Committee on Lunatics in the first Session of 1859 are next
considered, although the Bill has not been re-introduced. The
object of the Bill was?
" To facilitate the union of certain boroughs to counties, where the
lunatics in such boroughs are now sent, for want of an asylum, to
great distances from their own immediate neighbourhood; to enable
the Secretary of State, where two or more counties have agreed to
unite, but cannot agree about the plans and estimates of the intended
asylum, to determine for them what plans and estimates shall be proceeded with and carried into execution; to authorize the committee
of visitors to hire or take on lease land or buildings, either for the
employment or occupation of the patients in the asylum, or for the
temporary accommodation of any pauper lunatics for whom the accommodation in the asylum is inadequate ; to authorize the committee of
visitors to pay or contribute such sum of money as the Commissioners
in Lunacy shall approve, for or towards the enlargement of any churchyard or consecrated public burial-ground, that the lunatics dying in
any asylum need not be buried within the precincts of that asylum, to
which in many cases great objections are entertained; to alter the
interpretation of the word county, so as not to include under that term
the county of a city or the county of a town; and to provide that a
pauper lunatic found in any borough which is exempt from contributing to the county asylum shall be chargeable to the borough, and
not to the county, when the settlement of-such pauper lunatic cannot
be ascertained." (pp. v. vi.)
PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS. 441
The Committee concur in the general expediency of these
alterations, and add :?
" It would further seem desirable to reduce the time at which committees of visitors may grant superannuation allowances to their
medical officers. Their duties are so peculiar, and such painful consequences are known to result from incessant intercourse with the
various forms of this distressing disease, when prolonged for many
years, that your Committee believe it would tend to greater efficiency
of service, if the period which stands at present at 20 years, were
reduced to .15. It would also be desirable that the name of some
relation of the patient should be inserted in the order of admission of
a pauper lunatic into an asylum, to whom, in the case of the death of
such patient while in the asylum, notice should be sent." (p. vi.)
The Acts of Parliament relating to lunatics in private asylums
are now considered and their provisions briefly recapitulated.
The Report then notices an opinion which had been submitted
to the Committee that nothing short of the entire abolition of
private asylums would be effectual in remedying their defects.
The Report next refers to the recommendation of other witnesses,
and particularly of Lord Shaftesbury, that "the magistrates should |
be empowered, if they think fit, to provide asylums by money f
raised on the security of the rates, for all classes of lunatics?
" The main reason for this suggestion is thus put by Lord Shaftesbury :?' When I look into the whole matter,' he says, 11 see that the
principle of profit vitiates the whole thing; it is at the bottom of all
those movements that we are obliged to counteract by complicated
legislation, and if we could but remove that principle of making a
profit, we should confer an inestimable blessing upon the middle
classes, getting rid of half the legislation, and securing an admirable,
sound, and efficient system of treatment of lunacy.' Again, in answer
to a question whether he would have those asylums in every part of
the kingdom, as there are public asylums for paupers, he adds, ' Yes;
these asylums would be quite free from all those vicious motives that
have been referred to in the licensed houses.' The examples which he
would principally take as his guide are the chartered asylums dependent on charitable endowment, or private benefactions, in Scotland, of
which there are seven, and the hospitals in England founded out of
private funds, of which there are eleven." (p. vii.)
Upon this question the Committee conclude?
" The establishment of asylums of this character deserves to beNj
encouraged, if it could be effected by private contributions. But 1
should a power be given to establish such asylums throughout the
kingdom as public institutions, by money to be raised on the security j
of a rate, the apprehension of a burden to be imposed on the ratepayers would, in the opinion of your Committee, render such an enactment inoperative; and they cannot recommend the establishment of
them upon a compulsory system." (p. vii.)
442 PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS.
'NJ
V-.,
c V Cc I
0 vv? J
[
\
!
The Committee assumed that " it -would not be possible to
abolish altogether the private asylums, or licensed houses/' and it
therefore became " all the more important to consider in "what
manner they can best be regulated." The suggestions submitted
to the Committee are considered under four different heads.
1st. The Suitableness of the House for the Purpose for ivhich
it is licensed.?The Beport states that it is to be feared that
several of the houses, both in the metropolis and the country, are
not well suited for the purpose; but " many which are unsuitable
have had licences for years past, which have given to the property
an additional value, and, therefore, it is generally difficult to
refuse a renewal of them." And this does not constitute the chief
obstacle in the way of improvement. " The great and leading ]
difficulty," the Beport continues, " is to find proper persons to \
undertake the charge of such an establishment. The fittest men
may not have the capital, or those who have the capital are not
the fittest men. The consequence is, that licences are given or
continued to some capitalist, upon the condition that he has under
him a medical superintendent; but as the superintendent has not
the same control as the proprietor of the house, there is a diminished, or at any rate a divided responsibility, which cannot be
otherwise than prejudicial to good management."
These defects are perfectly well known to the Commissioners
and the magistrates, and much care is being devoted to their
removal; but the Committee think that some amendment of the
law might be advantageously introduced. It is therefore suggested
that,?
" Except in cases to be specially allowed by the visitors or Commissioners, the proprietor, or, in the case of a joint ownership, one of the
proprietors, should, as regards future licences, be required by law to
reside on the spot. Nothing can lead to greater abuses than that
large proprietors should have three or four houses, and reside in none
of them. As a general rule, the proprietor, or one of the proprietors,
ought to reside; and where he is permitted to be non-resident, the
appointment of the medical superintendent should be subject to the approval of the Commissioners or visitors, as the case may be." (p. viii.)
2nd. The Circumstances under ivhich the Patient may be
placed under Restraint, and the Safeguards provided for the
Propriety of his Confinement.?This portion of the Beport is too
important to be curtailed.
" This is by far the most difficult part of the subject. It has been
suggested that in all cases the alleged lunatic, before he is confined,
should, as a matter of right, be entitled to have his case tried and
decided by some magistrate ; or, as it has been proposed in a more
mitigated form, that the medical certificates of the alleged insanity
should be inspected and verified before a magistrate \ and that if the
PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS. 413
magistrate was not satisfied with them, he should have the power of
inquiring into the truth of the statement made, and of the necessity of, . .
the intended confinement. The exact nature of the former proposition,
and the principal reasons upon which it is founded, are explained at length
in the Second Report, in answer to question 179. The latter proposition would tend to assimilate the law of England to the law at present
existing in Scotland. There, the certificates, with a statement regarding the case, signed by a relation of the party desiring the confinement,
are sent to the sheriff of the county (the sheriff in Scotland being a
judicial officer), who has to satisfy himself, either upon the mere examination of the parties, or, if he thinks proper, by a personal examination of the alleged lunatic, or by calling other evidence, that the
alleged lunatic is a proper person to be detained and taken care of.
The reasons assigned in favour of this proposition are thus stated by
the witness in reply to the question,' What evils would the course you
recommend obviate ?' The answer is,' I think it would give greater
security to the public, instead of having an examination after the confinement in an asylum, when the mischief has been done. If you once
place a person in an asylum, there is a certain stigma which attaches
to him, and which he never gets rid of, and upon persons of weak nerves
it has a most prejudicial effect.'
" The two suggestions thus offered to your Committee involve a most
important question. But it appears to your Committee, that if either
of them were introduced and strictly acted upon, they would be likely
to produce still greater evils than those which they profess to remedy.
According to the evidence taken before your Committee, it is fully
admitted that in a very large majority of cases there is prima facie
evidence to justify the confinement. Indeed, it may be said that the
instances are extremely rare in which, under the present law, the confinement is or has been unwarranted. If that be so, the evil of acting
on the present law without inquiry before a magistrate is more imaginary than real. But the evils arising from a change in that law by
insisting on inquiry, when the parties desired it, would often lead to
an unnecessary publicity, which it is for the interest of the patient, as
well as his family, if possible, to avoid. Insanity under any shape is
so fearful a malady, that the desire to withdraw it from the observation /
of the world is both natural and commendable. The reverse of this c&m 6 ?>
would in all instances be painful, and in many it would be cruel. A
man in business may become affected with temporary insanity, brought
on by over-exertion, mental anxiety, or physical ailment; but if he is
early and properly treated, his recovery may be as quick as his seizure
was sudden. What could be more injurious than a public inquiry in
such cases as these ? Where the insanity was undisputed, the inquiry
would lead to no useful result, though the knowledge of the malady
might be seriously prejudicial to the future prospects of the patient
and. his family. But when it was disputed, it is unnecessary to dwell
on the various mischiefs which would instantly result from it; such,
for instance, as the agitations caused to the patient's mind just at the
moment when it was trembling on the balance; the injurious comments
which might sometimes be made on his character and conduct; the
444 PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS.
unnecessary exposure of private matters, which need not be brought,
and which ought not to be brought before the public gaze, if, at least, it
be possible to avoid it; the stigma or prejudice which might permanently attach to him and his children in the event of recovery; and frequently, it may be added, the grievous expense which such inquiries
' would entail, as they did in the case of Chancery lunatics, where inquisitions were required, until recently, to be held before a jury. Nor
should it be forgotten that the delay caused by reference to the magistrate, with a possible inquiry, to be instituted by him into the case,
might prevent or retard the immediate treatment which is so requisite
for the patient, and thereby tend to aggravate the malady. It ought
also to be borne in mind that the sheriff in Scotland is a judicial officer
and professionally conversant with legal matters, while a magistrate in
England may have little experience in those subjects which, according
to this plan, he might be called upon to determine. For these reasons
your Committee are disinclined to adopt these suggestions. No doubt
the conclusion thus arrived at introduces the further question, what
then are the proper safeguards ? For if there be even one person improperly confined, it is right to provide the amplest protection which
the law can afford in order to prevent so deplorable a result.
" For providing this protection several things are necessary. In the
first place, it is important that the medical certificate should be clear
in its statement, and accurately framed. The whole justification for
>>v the patient's confinement depends on this document. The form of the
certificate required by law appears to be sufficient; but your Committee
are of opinion that some additional security should be taken for ensuring
its accuracy. It is sometimes imperfectly filled up, and the patient is
then placed under restraint on a document which does not legally
justify his detention. Mr. Bolden's suggestion, that these certificates
should be verified before a magistrate, so far only as to enable him to
determine whether the Act had been complied with, would probably
tend to greater caution in this behalf. It would operate as a check on
too hasty a conclusion, and obviate the necessity of further examination, without impeding a proper confinement for the purposes of cure,
, , and without entailing that painful publicity which on so many accounts
it is desirable to avoid. This suggestion, when thus considered, deserves
to be attended to. In the second place, your Committee recommend
that the certificate authorizing the detention should be limited, in the
first instance, to three months, and no more. It is now granted for
an indefinite period ; but if it were limited to three months in the first
instance, ' the effect would be,' as Lord Shaftesbury observes, ' to compel a revision of the case by the family or friends; the relations would
be obliged to look again into the matter, as they would know, in all
probability, if they did not do so, the patient would be returned upon
their hands.' In the third place, the order for receiving the patient
? . into the asylum with which the medical certificates are accompanied,
should state the time when the person signing it had last seen the
patient; and such order should not be effective unless the applicant
had himself seen the patient within three months of his signing the
order. A case has been brought to the notice of your Committee,
PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS. 445
where the party applying had not seen the patient for two years, and
another where he had not seen him for six times that period. In the
fourth place, a copy of the order and of the medical certificates upon
which the patient is confined should be sent to the Commissioners
within twenty-four hours, instead of within seven days, as at present,
in order that their attention may be immediately called to any irregularity in these documents; and in the fifth place, the patient should,
as soon as possible, be visited by the Commissioners, or by some
persons acting directly under their authority; so that the patient
should have the fullest opportunity of stating his complaints, if he has
any to make, and that if he should appear to be improperly confined,
immediate means should be taken for his release. A provision of this
kind has been sometimes objected to by the proprietors of asylums, t'cu*J~c.
upon the ground that it implies suspicion and undue distrust. But
the confinement of a person is too serious a matter to allow any feeling
of that kind to interfere with the protection which is due to the
patient. Moreover; in those asylums which are well-conducted the
proprietors have nothing whatever to fear, and asylums which are illconducted ought to be controlled. Undoubtedly it is true that, as
above shown, the cases in which persons have been improperly confined
are extremely rare; but one has happened within the last twelve
months. In this case it turned out, when the facts were heard, that
the supposed delusion was not a delusion, and the patient was released
as soon as visited by the Commissioners. But before that happened,
the confinement had lasted for six weeks." (pp. viii.?x.)
3rd. The Care and Treatment of the Patient while he remains
in the Asylum.?The Committee think that a recommendation of
the Commissioners in Lunacy, to the effect that it should be . /
w" made compulsory upon the friends of all private patients, whether <-*- '<? >; >'
in mixed, private, and pauper asylums, registered hospitals, or ^ ~~
licensed houses, or under separate care as single patients, to visit
them, or delegate some one to visit them periodically, and ascertain
by personal inspection the accommodation and comforts provided r
for them," well deserves consideration, " though there may be
some practical difficulty in giving full effect to it." (p. x.)
It is suggested also that " the prima facie right both of receiving
visits and also of corresponding should be secured to the patients,
and should never be refused by the authorities, except on specified
grounds; and in that case patients or friends should be at liberty .?
to appeal to the visitors or Commissioners, as the case may be, / ? "
against such refusal." It is further suggested that power should
be given to the Commissioners and visitors " of ordering the
temporary discharge, upon trial, of a patient in a private asylum"
?a power which the visitors already possess in the case of patients
in county asylums. It is added, however, that " a power of this
kind, if it be conferred, should of course be exercised with extreme
caution." (p. xi.)
?fcvw*. d* Lu p-Cvl-U.Jr ?/
A ? / .jUUz l&cll &*? Ouk*X&kI \
to.
446 PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS.
4th. The Restoration of the Patient to Liberty as soon as his
Case ivill icith safety admit of it.?The Eeport states that " it
would he an improvement in the law, and an additional protection
and security to the patient, if the notice of recovery which is sent
to the Commissioners or visitors after a fourteen days' interval,
were required to be sent simultaneously with the notice of recovery
which is sent to the relations. Such a requirement would secure
attention, prevent delay, and enable the Commissioners at once
to act in case of neglect." (p. xi.)
The subject of " Patients in Single Houses" is next entered
upon, and the Committee consider that " it is very desirable
that some provision should be made for the superintendence of
) this class of cases; and there is no better mode of enforcing such
? ? .. ? ?
a provision than by making it penal for any medical man to receive
- ( any such patient without apprising the Commissioners of it.
This would place such patients under authority and supervision." (p. xi.)
In respect of Chancery Lunatics, the Report, after reciting the
advantages derived from the Lunacy Regulation Act of 1853,
states that there is one point which is still capable of further
improvement. " By the law as it now stands, the Master has the
power of summoning a jury if he think that the circumstances
require it; but, before he does so, he must go through the whole
case. It is clearly advisable that the power of the Master should
in this respect be extended; for the preliminary investigation, to
a great extent,is useless, and occasions delay and expense." (p. xiii.)
Again, one of the improvements advantageously introduced by
the Regulation Act of 1853, was the doing away with the necessity
of a special order of reference to the Master in each stage of the
case. The Report states that?
" In consequence of this alteration in the law, and the general orders
in lunacy issued in pursuance of it, the saving of expenses has been
very considerable. In many respects there is reason to believe that
this saving may be carried still further; and if the power of making
general orders for that purpose is not sufficient, there can be no reason
why it should not be enlarged. The cost even of an unopposed application to the Court is about 201.: it would be much less if an original
jurisdiction in other cases, besides those which now exist, were given
to the Masters. Mr. Barlow recommends, that with regard to leases
of the lunatics' property, as well as with regard to the sums allowed
for the maintenance of the lunatic, and the mode in which those sums
are applied, original jurisdiction might be given to the Master, without
the necessity of going to the Court. Mr. Elmer concurs in these recommendations, and he points out other cases in which a similar course
might be adopted; such, for instance, as the transfer into Court of
money belonging to the lunatic's estate. Mr. Elmer also concurs in
the following suggestions, which have been submitted to the Committee
PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS. 447
by Mr. Enfield, and they appear to the Committee to be worthy of
adoption?viz. 1. To assimilate the powers of the Masters in Lunacy
to those of the chief clerks in Chancery. 2. To give the Masters the
opportunity of oral communication with the superior judges when any
explanation is required, or any pending inquiries, in the same wa}r in
which explanations take place between the chief clerk and the ViceChancellor. 3. To devolve on the Master the duties of seeing that
committees of the person are only allowed so much each year as they
actually expend in the maintenance of the lunatics, giving the Masters
liberty to allow salaries to committees when they see reason; and, 4.
To make periodical returns to the Lord Chancellor of the condition of
every case under the charge of the Lord Chancellor as regards committees, their accounts, and their sureties." (p. xiii.)
Further, the Committee suggest that the duty of visiting
Chancery lunatics should be transferred to the Commissioners
in Lunacy, " so that in all cases there should be one supervision
and . one mode of treatment, with all the appliances which the best
and most recent experience could afford, applicable to all the
lunatics in the kingdom." (p. xiii.)
The evils which appertain to the present mode of dealing with
Criminal Lunatics, the Committee conceive will be removed when
the State Asylum, now in course of erection at Broadmoor, is
opened for the reception of this class of patients. It is recommended, however, that the Commissioners of Lunacy should be
required to visit the State Asylum; the Report adding that?
" The extended supervision will be a new guarantee for its good
management, while it will assist the Secretary of State to determine in
what way the cases shall be dealt with, according as circumstances
may justify a partial or total restoration to liberty. On a subject so
delicate and difficult as this, a large and continuous discretionary
power must be somewhere reposed, and there can hardly be a doubt
that the Secretary of State for the Home Department is the proper
person in whom such power should be vested. It would not be advisable to limit his power by provisions unduly strict and specific, since
this class of cases, more than all others, requires to be dealt with in
the most exceptional manner, according to the circumstances which at
the time are or may be applicable to each of them." (p. xv.)
The Composition ancl Power of the Lunacy Commission are
next considered. The Committee think that, if their recommendations are carried into effect, some alteration in the law as regards
the Commission would be required. The Report states that?
" If the visitation of the Chancery lunatics and single patients, and
an additional visitation of workhouses and private asylums is required
of the Commissioners, increased facilities will be necessary for the discharge of this class of duties. This object might to a certain extent
be obtained by enabling a single Commissioner, whether paid or unpaid,
to perform the additional duties required, even if it should be thought
448 PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS.
essential that each.of the existing statutory visits should be made bytwo paid Commissioners. Your Committee cannot but feel some doubt
whether it will be in the power of the Board, as at present constituted,
efficiently to discharge the increased duties to be entrusted to it. But
as they collect from the evidence of the Chairman that the Commissioners themselves are of opinion that they could do so without
any permanent addition either to their number or their staff, your
Committee have abstained from recommending, without proof of its
necessity, that such addition should be made, and also from considering,
as in that case it would have been right to do, in what manner any
such addition could best be provided." (p. xv.)
It is also recommended " that all the Acts of Parliament relating to this subject should be consolidated in three statutes ; one
with reference to public asylums, another with reference to private
asylums, and another with reference to Chancery lunatics; and
that the amendment suggested in the Report should be incorporated in the consolidated statute." (p. 15.)
Finally, the Committee direct particular attention to several
minor alterations, which, although not specifically noticed by
them, have been suggested in the evidence and papers laid before
the Committee by Messrs. Bolden,* Campbell,t Parnell,{ and
Enfield.?
Such, then, is an abstract of the Select Committee's Report,
and we propose now briefly to consider the recommendations it
embodies, regarding these chiefly from a point of view suggested
at the very outset of the Report. " With regard to [more acute
cases of lunacy] " the Committee state, " since 50, or GO, or even 70
per cent, are capable of cure, if taken in time, and carefully treated,
it is certainly a matter of primary importance that our legislative
provisions should be so framed as to promote the accomplishment
of this desirable object." (p. iv.) To what extent lias this initial
proposition influenced the deliberations and conclusions of the
Committee ?
I.?It is tolerably evident that a knowledge of the status of
lunacy in the kingdom would have facilitated the labours of the
Committee in coming to any decisions upon the requirements of
lunatics. If the number of lunatics still at large among the
population, and their civil and social condition, were accurately
or approximatively known, it is to be supposed that the great problem of further provision for our insane, and of the legislative
interference which might be requisite for promoting or carrying
out that provision, could be approached with some prospect of
solution. Conversely, in the absence of such information as that
suggested, it may be assumed, without much fear of contradiction,
* First Report, Queries 3077?3200. + Second Report, Appendix No. 1.
I Second Report, Appendix No. 3. ? Second Report, Appendix Nos. 3, 4, 5.
PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS. 449
that the most conscientiously devised measures for the relief of
lunacy must be empirical.
Now, the figures made use of by the Committee to show the
status of lunacy in the kingdom, simply make manifest the accumulation of lunatics in our asylums and the number of pauper
lunatics. That is, these figures show solely the amount of lunacy
thrown up to the surface of society, but give no information whatever of the amount at large, or of the sources from which the
mass of lunatics now subsisting on public charity come. Nay,
more, even the statistics laid before and made use of by the Committee, although exhibiting a serious increase of lunatics under
charge from year to year, are so imperfectly prepared, that it is
impossible to determine from them the relation of the increase to
the population at large ; that is, whether that increase be real or
apparent. The Committee think that the great increase of known
lunacy from year to year since 1844, is chiefly due to the fact,
that the tendency of legislation and philanthropy since that period
has been to bring hitherto neglected cases to light. This may t t _ J ,
probably be the case, but the question is one which can be, and
surely ought to be, for the future, determined by a rightly ordered
system of statistics.
Further, the history of our public asylums and their present
condition?that is, in so far as they are principally refuges for
chronic lunatics?would seem to show that the substratum of
neglected cases of lunacy in the kingdom is far from being exhausted ; another consideration marking the extreme importance
of ascertaining the number and condition of what may be termed
our floating population of lunatics.
It will hardly be denied that the deficiencies in our knowledge \
which we have just indicated, place an almost insuperable bar to / , .
our dealing effectively with nascent and early lunacy among the f v t A
mass of the population, and restrict our curative efforts within very \
narrow limits. It is, therefore, with the most painful surprise that J
we find the Committee making use of the highly imperfect statis- ) /
tics laid before them without comment. We had hoped, so patent \
was the insufficiency of those" statistics for all practical, curative, > J cu..
and preventive purposes, that the Committee would have strongly
urged upon the Commissioners of Lunacy and the Government
the importance of a complete revision, or rather reform, of the
statistics of lunacy. We had hoped, also, that the Committee
would have seen the propriety of recommending that the status
of lunacy should be made a special subject of investigation in
the census of 1861; and we believe that a lamentable error has
been committed by the omission of such a recommendation, which
will be severely felt before the census of 1871. We are aware that
many question whether a census-investigation of lunacy in this
Y-<CU^t I
450 PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS.
country would have led to any trustworthy results. We see no just
reason to doubt that it would have been less successful in England
in 1861 than such an investigation was in Ireland in 1851, and that
it is expected to be again in that country in the approaching census.
The census of 1861 offered an early and fitting means of determining approximatively the amount of lunacy, and the civil condition of lunatics in the kingdom. It would have given the very
elements, the want of which, more than those of any other elements,
most impedes our dealing satisfactorily with the practical question,
of future provision for our lunatics?to wit, the amount and condition of lunatics at large among the population. Yet this
question was immediately brought home to the consideration of
the Committee (although, sooth to say, passed over unheeded) by
the details laid before them, which showed that the present and prospective asylum accommodation among us was barely sufficient to
meet the imperative wants of our lunatics, leaving entirely out of
the question the seven thousand and odd lunatics provided for in
workhouses.
The neglect of this question by the Committee will rivet for
another period that unfortunate, yet, under present circumstances,
almost necessary system which seems to govern the erection of
our public asylums?a system which makes them little better
than reservoirs for the reception of our surplus lunacy; a system
which reduces their curative influence to a minimum; a system
which would be paralleled by an attempt to stop the flow of a river,
by damming it up where it enters the sea. If we would hope to influence markedly the development of lunacy by curative measures,
we shall have to penetrate first towards the more remote sources
of the disease among the mass of the people. Those sources
are still hidden in darkness; but as we feel our way towards them,
we may rest assured that our opportunities for nipping lunacy in
the bud will increase in proportion as we advance, while at the
liameTtime we shall lay securely under foot the foundations of a
sound system of prevention. The first step in such an investigation must be an attempt to ascertain, either by means of a
census inquiry or by some other means, the general status of
lunacy in the kingdom. This being ascertained, the ground would
be clearly mapped out for those further researches, which would
be requisite to probe the questions bearing upon the evolution of
lunacy among the people to the core.
It is too commonly imagined that an inquiry into the status of
lunacy would lead to little else than the results which immediately
come from it, and that the practical value of these would not be
commensurate with the expense and trouble of the inquiry. This
is an error. The ultimate results of the inquiry would be of
greater value than the immediate; for they would form the basis
PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS. 451
for the further and thorough investigation of the conditions fostering lunacy, and, consequently, pave a secure way to the practical dealing with those conditions.
II. Keeping to the text adopted from the Report, it is some- v
what puzzling to read that the Committee, " from the evidence" j
tendered to it, has concluded that our public asylums " are, gene- ! *
rally speaking, so well looked after and so carefully attended to, I .v
that, as regards them, hut little alteration is required in the law."
If this exceedingly favourable opinion refers simply to the routine f
management of the asylums, we could concur in it without hesitation ; but if it is meant in any degree to imply that they are to
be regarded, in their present state, as models of institutions for the j
curative treatment of insanity, the conclusion cannot but be
regarded as running somewhat counter to the evidence.
It was shown that the tendency of local governing bodies to
erect huge buildings, and crowd them with patients, as in the case
of Oolney Hatch and Hanwell, notwithstanding that all experience had proved that such structures were ill-adapted to the
curative treatment of the insane, could not be controlled by the
Commissioners in Lunacy, or even the Secretary of State, short
of forbidding the construction altogether, if the local governing
powers were pleased to carry out their own fancies. It was shown
that of 1000 patients in the Hanwell Asylum, not more than 50
could be spoken of as " curableand the Chairman of the Committee of Visitors to the Colney Hatch Asylum stated that, " as
at Hanwell, the proportion at Colney Hatch supposed to be susceptible of cure is very much the sameadding, " it must be
remembered that we are an asylum rather than an hospital. We
are an hospital only in occasional instances, an asylum always."
The evidence also went to show that the condition of these two
asylums represented, more or less, the condition of almost every
public asylum in the country. It was shown, moreover, that the
medical and general staff of the majority of public asylums was
insufficient for that effective medical and general care of the
patients which was essential to their effective curative treatment.
In fact, the evidence clearly indicated that, as hospitals, our
public asylums hold a position lamentably low, compared" with
the means at their command.
There was no lack of information in the evidence of the causes
of this unfortunate state of our great asylums. These might be
chiefly traced to erroneous (as we think) notions of economy on
the part of the governing bodies, and to the still too prevalent
notion among these bodies that an asylum is not necessarily a
medical institution. This latter idea is no doubt correct of the
original constitution of the majority of our public asylums, but
experience has taught us that so long as asylums are regarded
452 PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS.
primarily as refuges, and only secondarily as hospitals, for the
care of the insane, so long the popular aversion to these " lunatic
prisons" will be kept up. There can he little doubt that it rests
mainly with the governing bodies of public asylums to give to
them an entirely medical, and in so far house-of-recovery aspect,
' : and that they have the power to do this. It is certain that an
asylum will never and can never become an hospital for the
cure of lunacy, and will never be regarded by the public at
large as such, until it becomes a strictly medical institution.
Few things in the whole course of the official evidence given
before the Committee, will exert a more harmful effect than the
inconsiderate expressions of opinion tending to depreciate the
position of the medical man in relation to lunacy. Such a notion,
authoritatively stated, cannot but serve to confirm local governing
bodies in their comparative indifference to the curative treatment
of the patients in public asylums ; and as a consequence will tend
in no small degree to perpetuate the idea, which offers so
great an impediment to the early reception of patients from
among the poor?to wit, that an asylum is a house of detention,
not of cure.
Be this as it may, however, the expression of opinion by the
Committee, so highly favourable to the present state of our public
asylums, and insufficiently guarded by the remarks which follow,
can hardly fail to protract a state of things which, according to
the evidence before the Committee, was most unfavourable, and
in some respects altogether repellant, of the early treatment of
cases of lunacy.
It may be that the deficiencies in our public asylums which we
have hinted at were not of a nature to be removed by legal enactments. Upon this point we shall offer no opinion; but, after the
Committee had asserted the "primary importance" of the earlv
treatment of insanity, it was but just to the House of Commons
and the public that the inaptitude of our public asylums to afford
that early treatment, and the causes of that inaptitude, should have
been fully set forth in the Report.
III. The suggestions. of the Committee respecting lunatics
detained in workhouses are very important, and will doubtless be
carried into effect; but in so far as that detention may interfere
with the early treatment of lunatics, it is to be feared that the
suggestions would only yield very partial relief, until the deficiencies in our public asylums, already noted, are in a great degree
done away with.
The suggestion that the time at which committees of visitors
may grant superannuation allowances to their medical officers
should be reduced from twenty to fifteen years, is a just acknowledgment of the arduous duties of those men, and we trust will
PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS. 453
pass into law. We hope also that the strongly-expressed opinions
of the Commissioners in Lunacy, examined before the Committee, on the insufficiency of the medical officers' salaries, will
not fall to the ground. The important services rendered by the
medical superintendents of asylums, often under circumstances of
110 ordinary difficulty, and the heavy responsibility resting upon
them, are as yet but ill-appreciated by the public.
4. The opinion expressed by the Committee on the so-called
middle-class asylums, so far as that opinion would imply the desirability of founding asylums which would meet the wants of a
class of cases inadequately provided for by existing asylums, is
a just one. But the quotation of Lord Shaftesbury's abstract
reasoning in favour of the establishment of such asylums, to wit,
that they are free from all those evils which the "principle of profit"
has introduced into, and which, he conceives, utterly vitiates the
management of private asylums, will be apt to lead to the conclusion
that the Committee approved of that reasoning. If this were the
case, then it would seem that the evidence tendered before the
Committee on the working of the chartered asylums of Scotland
(the type of middle-class asylum which Lord Shaftesbury would
introduce into England), by one of the Scotch Commissioners in
Lunacy, must have been to no small extent, if not entirely, unheeded by the Committee.
Dr Coxe's evidence was sufficient to show that Lord Shaftesbury's statements concerning the value of the system of chartered
asylums, and its freedom from the evils which he asserted were
inseparably attached to the system of private asylums in England,
were, to say the least, exaggerated. The opinions of the Scotch
Commissioners in Lunacy as recorded in their last (second) Annual
Keport, is conclusive on this point. The question is altogether so
important, that we shall not hesitate to quote here the opinions referred to, notwithstanding that we have already quoted them in
a previous number of the Journal, when reviewing the Keport
named. The Scotch Lunacy Commissioners state that:?
* " During the past year the condition of the public asylums has, on
the whole, continued to improve, although, in several respects, it falls
considerably below the standard of English county asylums. But, in
making this comparison, we must direct attention to the fact, that in
one essential respect the Scotch asylums do not occupy nearly so
favourable a position as those of England. In the latter country, the
necessary funds are raised by assessment; and an asylum, calculated (st*- 7
to afford accommodation for all the patients of the county, and supplied with all the necessary appliances, is at once provided. Should
this accommodation be afterwards found insufficient, a further assessment is made and additional buildings are erected. In Scotland, on
the other hand, the directors of the public asylums possess no compulNO. XX.?NEW SERIES. H H
454 PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS.
sory powers of raising funds. The houses have been built with money
derived from legacies, charitable donations, and subscriptions; and
their extension chiefly provided for by the payments made for patients.
The cost of the original building, and its subsequent extension, have
thus both been defrayed from uncertain sources; and a considerable
portion of the payments for patients has been diverted from the more
legitimate object of providing for the proper treatment and comfort of
those on whose account they were made, into furnishing accommodation for others. In this way, a large proportion of the public asylum
accommodation in Scotland has been provided from moneys levied
directly on the friends of the insane, by making the payments on their
account considerably exceed the expenditure, instead of by the fairer
course of assessing the community. This procedure is well illustrated
by the history of the Dundee Asylum. A sum, amounting to
770GZ. 10s. 8d., having been raised by charitable contributions, the
asylum was erected at a cost of 8493?. 9s. G^d. Accordingly, when
opened for the reception of patients in 1820, a debt had been contracted of 78Gl. 18s. 10\d. In 1859 the sum expended on land and
buildings had increased to 35,262?. 3s. 2d., of which sum 5640?. Is. 4^d.
had been obtained through further charitable contributions, and
4144?. 8s. 9d. had been borrowed. It thus appears that during the
39 years which have elapsed since the opening of the asylum, the
patients have contributed 17,771?. 2s. 4?c?. beyond the cost of their
maintenance ; and this sum has been spent, not for the special benefit
of these patients, but in providing accommodation for the district. In
other words, a public want has been supplied from the private funds of
those who, perhaps, of all the community were least able to afford the
sacrifice." (p. lii.)
Of the celebrated Crichton Institution, at Dumfries, it is
said :?
" The plan of the building of the Crichton Institution is such that
many of the galleries must necessarily have a dark and gloomy appearance ; nevertheless, they are capable of being rendered much more
cheerful than they are. There is especially room for improvement of
the furniture, in which there is a pervading barrenness, both in quantity and quality, throughout the establishment. It is greatly objected
to private asylums that the principle of profit is allowed to interfere
with the comforts of the patients; but in the present case, it appears
that the necessity of providing funds for the extension of the pauper
departments of the asylum is permitted to swallow up an undue share
of the payments made for private patients. The apartments of the
highest class of patients, though comfortably furnished in essential
respects, are scarcely fitted in accordance with the previous habits of
the patients, or their position in society; but it is in the lower galleries
that .the want of articles necessary even for comfort is most apparent,
the flagged day-rooms there having neither matting nor carpeting.
The lowest rate at which patients are now admitted is 50?. a-year."
(p. lviii.)
PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS. 455
That which is true of the Cricliton Institution is also true, to
a greater or less extent, of the other chartered asylums of Scotland.
Here then we see (1) that the accommodation provided for the
patients in the best Scotch chartered asylums barely equals that
provided in the inferior English private asylums, while (2) it is
authoritatively stated that a "considerable portion of the payments
for patients has been diverted from the more legitimate object of
providing for the proper treatment and comfort of those on whose
account they were made, into furnishing accommodation for
others." Thus it would be easy to show, if we were to adopt
Lord Shaftesbury's style of argument, that the "principle of
economy" vitiates the whole system of our public asylums, Scotch
and English, whether chartered or not; and it would be no difficult task to parade reasons in abundance, seemingly utterly condemnatory of the pecuniary principles governing the working of
public asylums, and from the evils arising from the " principle of
economy" erect a portentous argument tending to prove that
nothing short of the entire abolition of public asylums would
destroy those evils. But we are wearied with the reiteration in a
grave inquiry of the wretched sophism of the " principle of profit." ~V'
Each class of asylums (both Scotch and English) has its special
advantages, each its peculiar evils. To foster the one and ameliorate or remove the other is the teaching of ordinary prudence ;
but to attempt to effect this by elevating inordinately, and at the
expense of sober fact, the advantages of the one at the expense of
the other, must prove as futile in the end, and as injurious in the
process, as the efforts of that ingenious individual who sought to
lengthen his cloth by adding to the one end that which he had
cut off the other.
To the suggestions offered by the Committee for the improvement of the law regulating private asylums, no serious objection
will probably be offered. These suggestions do not partake of
that vexatious and intermeddling character which too frequently
characterized the opinions advanced by several of the "witnesses,
while at the same time they would, if carried into effect, ensure
increased care in the confinement of lunatics, and consequently
give greater confidence in this respect to the public. The suggestion that " the patient should as soon as possible be visited
by the Commissioners, or by some persons acting under their
authority," would alone, perhaps, lead to some difficulty in being
carried out, and it is not to be forgotten that this suggestion was
originally offered by the Commissioners in Lunacy " only as an
expedient, with a view of satisfying public feeling, and not with
any hope that it would be really effective."* The Committee
? Report 1, Qy. 81.
H H 2
456 PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS.
rightly state that cases of improper confinement are extremely
rare, and it is to he regretted that the solitary case referred to by
them was not more fully investigated, so that the possibility of
misapprehension might have been put out of the question. We
cannot overlook the fact that Mr. Perceval directed the attention
of the Committee to a supposed case of unjust confinement, and
that on a further examination of the case by the Committee, it
av&s found that that gentleman was labouring under an egregious
misconception.* It would have been well to have removed the
possibility of doubt from the case recorded by Mr. Bolden.
5. The suggestions respecting patients in single houses,
Chancery lunatics, and the Commission, need no comment other
than a general approval; those respecting criminal lunatics have
already been carried into effect by an Act passed in the session
just terminated, and of which an abstract is given on another
page.
If now, in concluding these observations, we ask, still keeping
chiefly to our text, to what extent the protracted inquiry, conducted by the Select Committee, is likely to promote the earlier
and more efficient treatment of lunatics, we are compelled to
answer, to little if any. Throughout the whole of the inquiry
the chief question has been the protection of the lunatic from unjust restraint, not from the sad disease from which he suffers.
The lunatic has been persistently regarded as an unfortunate
being, constantly subject to unjustifiable control; but only incidentally looked upon as an individual suffering from a curable
disorder. If the latter has not been entirely overlooked, it has
C \ tjyl & *) only been influential so far as to prevent the Committee concurring in suggestions which would add other difficulties to
those already existing in the way of the earlier treatment of
lunatics. The growing importance of the early and earlier
treatment of lunacy was made most clearly manifest in the
course of the inquiry, as is very obvious from the text with
which we have headed our comments ; yet the question of the "possibility of facilitating this early treatment without at the same
" time weakening the legal protection extended to the unfortunate
was never touched upon. Had it been so, the utter insufficiency of the data before the Committee would at once have be=
come apparent, and the necessity for a complete inquiry into the
status and fostering causes of lunacy, previous to further legislation upon the subject, would have been too evident to have been
set aside. The hints derivable from the inquiry instituted by
the Commissioners in Lunacy, into the condition of lunatics in
* Report 3.
PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY CONCERNING LUNATICS. 457
workhouses, should, however, at least have been sufficient to have
directed the attention of the Committee to the necessity of more
accurate information as to the fostering causes of lunacy among
the poorer classes of the population. That inquiry showed a
state of things tending to the perpetuation of lunacy among the
poor such as had not previously been dreamt of, and which can at
once be met by legislation.
We do not for a moment underrate the importance of protecting
the lunatic as much as may be practicable from unjust confinement or improper treatment, and so far as the present inquiry will
help to secure that result, without casting additional impediments
in the way of his medical treatment, we accept the issue as of importance. At the same time we accord no small praise to the
cautious manner with which the Committee have dealt with the
evidence submitted to them; but we protest against the mode in
which, throughout the inquiry, the medical care of the lunatic has
been regarded as almost entirely subsidiary to his legal. Had
the evidence even shown that the popular belief in the too
frequently unjust detention and improper treatment of the insane
had been to some extent correct?a belief which, by the way, gave
rise to the inquiry, but which the evidence clearly showed to be
almost entirely without foundation, in so far as asylums were
concerned?this depreciation of the relation of medicine to
lunacy would have been an unjustifiable wrong to the lunatic.
How much greater then is the injury to the insane when the depreciation is persisted in, after the circumstances which were supposed
to justify it, are proved,upon the evidence of those who have chiefly
supported and fostered it, to be without any just foundation ? If
the care and treatment of lunacy are to become dilettanti affairs,
well and good ; but if they are to be looked upon as involving the ,
prevention and cure of lunacy, and that for these purposes a ? ?
knowledge of lunacy in all its bearings is required, then so long
as legislators and philanthropists will deal solely with those questions bearing upon the subject which are obtruded to the surface,
so long will inquiries, such as the Parliamentary one just ended,
prove abortive in all that more immediately concerns the interest
of the nascent or actual lunatic?his Cure.
