Bain's Psychology
==================

Art. VI.?
.*
"Without committing ourselves to an unqualified endorsement of
all Mr. Bain's detailed opinions as to the phenomena and laws of
mental action, we feel no hesitation in expressing our conviction,
that no single contribution has ever been made in our country
to the science of mind, that has done so much to render it an
accurate science as these two volumes are likely to do. This
arises in part from the method adopted, and in part from the full
and exhaustive manner in which this method is worked out. Mr.
Bain has entirely forsaken the time-honoured a 'priori plan of
investigation, which is in fact no plan at all, hut chiefly a series
of assumptions, and circular reasoning upon these; and has
treated mental phenomena as objects of true inductive analysis;
taking them singly and in combination as indicating so much
value in the general result; and thereby laying a stable foundation for a system of rational descriptive psychology. In accomplishing this, Mr. Bain evinces profound and extensive acquaintance with all the sciences which bear directly upon mental
developments, especially with physiology in most of its departments ; he has also the boldness to accept as legitimate objects
for reasoning the abnormal as well as the normal phases of
thought, action, and feeling. We may, perhaps, question whether some of our mental states are not still too complex and too
imperfectly known to admit of ultimate analysis, so that the elements can be distinctly traced and classified; and whether in
attempting this, Mr. Bain has not overstrained some of his theo* The Senses and the Intellect. By Alexander Bain, A.M. London. 1855
The Emotions and the Will. By Alexander Bain, A.M., Examiner in Lome a rl
Moral Philosophy in the University of London. London. 1859, 11
NO. XVIII.?NEW SERIES.
206 bain's psychology.
ries, particularly, for instance, when treating of Belief, Freewill, Emotion, &c.; this we may question or suspect, hut
granting all this or more, few will deny after carefully reading
these interesting and elaborate volumes, that the author has
rendered a service to our science which may now he partially
recognised, hut which can only be fully appreciated perhaps after
the labours of many others have built an enduring system upon
his foundation.
Having premised thus far upon the general character of the
work, we believe that instead of further defending our author's
method and indicating his precise place amongst the schoolmen
(a work for which we imagine he would be little recognisant), it
will be more acceptable to our readers to place before them a
concise analysis of the plan, with a somewhat more detailed
account of such parts of the theory (and these are many and
important) as are entirely new.
Mr. Bain recognises in the outset three attributes or capacities
of mind:?
1. It has Feeling, in which is included what is commonly called
Sensation and Emotion.
2. It can Act, according to Feeling.
3. It can Think.
On this classification we may remark that Feeling, Emotion,
and Consciousness are terms used " to express one and the same
attribute of. mind."* In the second attribute so simply stated,
we trace one of the author's most defined views, that voluntary
action results exclusively from feeling ; a principle which afterwards materially influences his views upon volition; the will
appearing but as the result of the balance of motives.
An important consideration is broadly stated immediately after
this classification :?
" Consciousness is inseparable from the first of these capacities, but
not, as it appears to me, from the second or the third. True, our actions
and thoughts are usually conscious, that is, as known to us by an inward perception; but the consciousness of an act is manifestly not the
act, and although the assertion is less obvious, I believe that the consciousness of a thought is distinct from the thought. To flee on the
appearance of danger is one thing, and to be conscious that we
apprehend danger is another."f
We believe that all this is true, but we should go further if
thus far. For by whatever process of reasoning Thought can be
represented as unconscious, by the same can Emotion be so viewed.
* See p. 1, Introduction, vol. i. In all these references the treatise on the
Senses and the Intellect is considered as the first volume, and that on the Emotions
and the Will as the second.
i* Loc. cit.
BAiN'S PSYCHOLOGY. 20?
And if Action may be unconscious, and at the same time the
result of Feeling, as by the terms of the second definition it is
supposed to be, the motor cause we should infer should be (possibly at least) as unconscious as the resultant act. But in the
present stage of the investigation it would be premature to enter
more fully into this question.
There is nothing requiring specific notice in the preliminary
general notions given of Feeling or Action ; those concerning
Thought are worthy of quotation :?
" The first fact implied in it (i.e., Thought or Intelligence) is discrimination, with sense of agreement or difference, as when of two things
taken into the mouth the animal prefers one to the other. . . . To
go back upon a former experience as preferable to the present is to act
upon an idea, a thought; whenever this is clearly manifested we see
an intelligent being.
" Another fact of intelligence, also exhibited by the lower orders
of creatures, is the power of associating ends with means or instruments, so as to dictate intermediate actions
" These two facts, discriminating with preference, and the performance of intermediate actions to attain an end, are the most universal aspects of intelligence, inasmuch as they pervade the whole of
the animal creation."*
Perhaps this is an assumption rather too general and hasty.
It can scarcely be doubted that there are large tribes of creatures
clearly recognisable as of animal nature, in which we certainly
have no evidence of discrimination in the sense here implied,
though that it may be there is not impossible. In many of the
same creatures there is the same lack of any proof that ends are
intelligently associated with means. The author continues
thus :?
" In the higher regions of mind, the attribute of thinking implies the
storing up, reviving, and combining anew all the impressions constituting what we call knowledge, and principally derived from the outer
world acting on the senses. It is this wider range of intellectual
operations displayed by the human mind, that gives scope for exposition in a work like the present.
" Although in the animal constitution Thought is coupled and conjoined with Feeling and Volition, it does not necessarily follow that
Intelligence is a necessary part of either the one or the other. I have
a difficulty in supposing Volition to operate in the entire absence of
an intellectual nature, nevertheless 1 cannot help looking upon the
intellect as a distinct endowment, following laws of its own, being
sometimes well developed and sometimes feeble, without regard to the
force or degree of the two other attributes." +
In proceeding to consider the phenomena of mind, Mr. Bain
enters briefly upon the proofs (sufficiently familiar to physiolo* Vol. i. Introduction, p. 6. f Ibid.
p 2
208 bain's psychology.
gists) that the brain and nervous centres are the organs to which
its manifestations are due, or with which they are connected. A
concise account follows of the nervous centres and the organs of
sense and locomotion. Throughout this work, mind is treated of
as closely connected, inseparably connected, with the actions of
a material organism; not, so far as we can trace, from any leaning towards what is generally called materialism, but simply for
convenience, inasmuch as all our experience of mind is derived
through and from the observation of material changes by means
of our material organs; and in a system so purely inductive and
descriptive as the present it is absolutely necessary to state and
recognise that, so far as we can know, where mind acts, there
matter is in change; and where these changes are to be observed,
it must be through material organs of sense. We believe that
the question of the materiality or immateriality of mind is not
once alluded to, nor indeed the nature of mind at all; it is with
phenomena only that this work deals.
One of the views most distinctive of, and most extensively
affecting, the entire theory set forth in these volumes, is connected with " Spontaneous Activity." So far from holding the
popularly received doctrine that sensation originates motion, Mr.
Bain upholds " that movement precedes sensation, and is at the
outset independent of any stimulus from without; and that action
is a more intimate and inseparable property of our constitution
than any of our sensations, and in fact enters as a component
part into every one of the senses, giving them the character of
compounds, while itself is a simple and elementary property." *
This doctrine is inextricably interwoven with the entire theory of
volition; in the mode in which it is brought forward it has the
aspect of novelty; the acquisition of voluntary acts is placed by
it upon an entirely new basis; on these grounds we shall enter
at more detail into our author's line of argument.
The first step is to prove the " existence of a class of movements and actions anterior to, and independent of, the sensations
of the senses." These movements arise, according to this view,
from the central stimulus of the nervous system, and are "the
spontaneous discharge of the active energy of the nerve centres."f
The proofs adduced are as follow :?
"1. The tonicity of muscles; not amounting to motion, but the
tension implying a lower degree of similar activity.
" 2. The permanent closure of the sphincter muscles, not accounted
for either by impressions from within or without the body, or by the
muscles' own contractility, inasmuch as the destruction of certain
nerve centres relaxes these muscles.
" 3, The action of the involuntary muscles."
* Yol. i. p. 67. f Yol. i. p. 83.
bain's psychology. 209
On which argument, however, the author judiciously refrains
from laying much stress.
"4. In awakening from sleep, movement precedes sensation. If
light were essential to the movements concerned in vision, it would be
impossible to open the eyes. The act of awakening from sleep can
hardly be considered in any other view than as the reviving of the
activity by a rush of nervous power to the muscles, followed by the
exposure of the senses to the influences of the outer world. I know
of no circumstance that would go to show that sensation is the antecedent fact, in the case when the individual wakes of his own accord.
The first symptom of awakening that presents itself is a general commotion of the frame, a number of spontaneous movements?the stretching of the limbs, the opening of the eyes, the expansion of the features
??to all which succeeds the revival of the sensibility to outward things.
Mysterious as the nature of sleep is in the present state of our knowledge, we are not precluded from remarking so notable a circumstance
as the priority of action to sensibility, at the moment of wakening.
" But if this be a fact, we seem to prove beyond a doubt that the
renewed action must originate with the nerve centres themselves. The
first gestures must be stimulated from within, by a power lodged in
the grey masses of the brain; afterwards they are linked with the
gestures and movements suggested by sense, and revived by intelligence and will. . . . We are at liberty to suppose that the nourished
condition of the nerve centres, consequent on the night's repose, is the
cause of that burst of spontaneous exertion which marks the movement
of awakening. The antecedent of the activity in this case is therefore more physical than mental, and this must be the case with spontaneous energy in general."*
Before passing on to another order of proofs adduced by the
author, we would make one or two remarks on those already
given. We are inclined to believe in the spontaneous activity
here indicated, inasmuch as we can see no reason why nutrition
and rest should not induce a state of polarity in the nervous
centres, which finds its restoration to equilibrium by this sort of
discharge ; we can, on the contrary, see many cogent reasons why
it should be so. But the fact must not be overlooked that these
arguments do not prove the case,?that they are indeed perfectly
explicable on the converse hypothesis. We need not enter into
the physiological refutation of the first three sections; the fourth
claims a few remarks. We doubt extremely whether, save in very
exceptional instances, motion does precede sensation in the act of
awaking. (1) We are all conscious, very frequently, of a more
or less prolonged interval between our first waking idea (i. e.,
sensation), and our first motion or action ; when existence appears to be nothing but a pure sensation. (2) The active phenomena of awakening, as above described, agree accurately with
* Vol. i. pp. 75-6.
210 bain's psychology.
those almost invariably observed when tlie waking state is
brought about by an external stimulus, or influence upon the
senses. (3) We awaken in a precisely similar manner, when
we do so in obedience to some idea (sensation) conveyed in a
dream. (4) Not unfrequently, when we awake suddenly with
a start, and motion appears to be the first link of the waking
chain, we remember, some time afterwards, that we were dreaming, and received a sudden shock, ideally, in the dream which
caused the start. (5) The opening of the eyes, previous to the
stimulus of light, can count for nothing as a proof, because it
would occur equally in the dark in obedience to any sudden call,
or impulse, as part of the co-ordinate movements. (G) It is
quite impossible to prove that an organic sensation does not preexist in all cases of awakening, even supposing that no dream, or
conscious interval or idea should be present. Thus far, therefore,
although inclined to agree with the theory, we are in doubt as to
the cogency of the arguments adduced in proof. We will now,
however, examine those derived from other considerations.
5. The early movements of infancy are supposed by our author
to be in great part due to the spontaneous activity of the nervous
centres. Some part of these movements may be attributable to
the stimulus of sensation, to the sights, sounds, and movements
of outward things;?some part again to emotion or sensation
generated within the body, or to states of consciousness growing
out of the brain and the bodily processes generally, " as when
internal pain gives rise to paroxysms, or high health to the lively
movements of mere animal spirits but as these appear to be
actions and gesticulations which show no connexion with sight
or sound, or other influence of the external world, and also that
have no particular motional character either of pleasure or pain,
it appears that " we can ascribe them to nothing but the mere
abundance and exuberance of self-acting muscular and cerebral
energy, which will rise and fall with the vigour and nourishment
of the general system."*
The activity of young animals in general, and especially of
such animals as are remarkable for their active endowments, as
insects, seems to us to be the strongest argument brought forward
to prove the spontaneity of muscular action :<?
" When the kitten plays with a worsted ball, we always attribute
the overflowing fulness of moving energy to the creature's own inward
stimulus, to which the ball merely serves for a pretext. So an active
young hound, refreshed by sleep or rested by confinement, pants for
being let loose, not because of anything that attracts his view, or
kindles up his ear, but because a rush of activity courses through his
members, rendering him uneasy till the confined energy has found vent* Vol. i. p. 77. '
bain's psychology. 211
a chase or a run. We are at no loss to distinguish this kind of activity from that awakened by sensation or emotion, and the distinction
is accordingly recognised in the modes of interpreting the movements
and feelings of animals. When a rider speaks of his horse as ' fresh,'
he implies that the natural activity is undischarged, and pressing for
Vent; the excitement caused by mixing in a chase or in a battle, is a
totally different thing from the spontaneous vehemence of a full-fed
and under-worked animal."*
In like manner it would appear as though the activity of early
human life ought to be attributed in great measure, neither to
sensation nor emotion, but to " freshness"?to a current of undischarged activity. High health, natural vigour, and spontaneous outpouring appear frequently to be the only obvious antecedents of ebullient activity. " The very necessity of bodily
exercise felt by every one, and most of all by the young, is a
proof of the existence of a fund of energy that comes round with
the day, and presses to be discharged."
The remaining arguments for muscular spontaneity are more
complex, and pro tanto more open to objection. They are
founded upon extreme activity as dependent upon excitement,?
upon the fact that sensibility and activity are not proportionate
one to the other (an argument open to much discussion) ; and
upon the consideration that without this spontaneity, volition, or
" activity guided to ends," would be impossible. We shall see
shortly how this last position is developed; and that we may do
this and keep up the connexion, we will pass over without
comment the other arguments.
In the chapter on the "Instinctive Germ of Volition" (p. 28fl)
we find it stated that, " this fact of spontaneous activity I look
upon as an essential prelude to voluntary power, making, indeed,
one of the terms or elements of volition; in other words, volition
is a compound, made up of this and something else." What is it
then, that is superadded to spontaneous motion of limbs, body,
voice, tongue, eyes, &c., to produce volition ?
" If we look at this kind of (spontaneous) impulse closely, we shall
see wherein its defect or insufficiency lies, namely, in the random
nature of it; being dependent on the condition of the various nervous
centres, the discharge is regulated by physical circumstances, and not
by the ends, purposes, or uses of the animal."t
Mr. Bain's theory of the growth of volition being quite new,
we shall give it in his own words, although the quotation is somewhat lengthy. " I will endeavour to indicate what seems to me
to be the circumstance that leads to this remarkable union between
the two great isolated facts of our nature; namely, on the one
hand, feelings inciting to movement in general, but to no action
Yol. i. p. 77. t Vol. i- P- 291.
212 BAIN'S PSYCHOLOGY.
in particular, and, on the other hand, the spontaneous movements
already spoken of." Our readers will do well to note the next
sentence and the italics which are our own, as directing attention
to Mr. Bain's special views as to the purely accidental origin of
each particular act of volition :?
"If at the moment of some acute pain, there should accidentally
occur a spontaneous movement, and if that movement sensibly
alleviates the pain, then it is that the volitional impulse belonging to
the feeling will show itself. The movement accidentally begun through
some other influence, will be sustained through this influence of the
painful emotion. In the original situation of things, the acute feeling
is unable of itself to bring on the precise movement that would modify
the suffering; there is no primordial link between a state of suffering
and a train of alleviating movements. But should the proper movement be once actually begun, and cause a felt diminution of the acute
agony, the spur that belongs to states of pain would suffice to sustain
this movement. ... If the state of pain cannot awaken a dormant
action, a present feeling can at least maintain a present action. This,
so far as I can make out, is the original position of things in the matter
of volition An example will perhaps place this speculation in
a clearer light. An infant lying in bed has the painful sensation of
chilliness. This feeling produces the usual emotional display, namely,
movements, and perhaps cries and tears. Besides these emotional
elements, there is a latent spur of volition, but with nothing to lay
hold of as yet, owing to the disconnected condition of the mental
arrangements at our birth. The child's spontaneity, however, may be
awake, and the pained condition will act so as to irritate the spontaneous centres, and make their central stimulus flow more copiously.
In the course of a variety of spontaneous movements of arms, legs,
and body, there occurs an action that brings the child in contact with
the nurse lying beside it; instantly warmth is felt, and this alleviation
of the painful feeling becomes immediately the stimulus to sustain the
movement going on at that moment. That movement, when discovered, is kept up in preference to the others occurring in the course
of the random spontaneity
" By a process of cohesion or acquisition, which I shall afterwards
dwell upon, the movement and the feeling become so linked together,
that the feeling can at after times awaken the movement out of dormancy ; this is the state of matters in the maturity of volition. The
infant of twelve months' old can hitch nearer the side of the nurse,
although no spontaneous movements to that effect happen at the
moment; past repetition has established a connexion that did not
exist at the beginning, whereby the feeling and action have become
linked together as cause and effect. A full-grown volition is now
manifested, instead of that vague incitement that could do nothing
until the right movement had sprung up in the course of a series of
spontaneous discharges of the central sources of power."*
* Vol. i. pp. 294-6.
bain's psychology. 213
The child that begins to suck when the nipple is placed
between its lips, does so by virtue of a reflex action; but Mr.
Bain considers that its continuing to do so, so long as the sensation of hunger is felt, and its ceasing when that sensation ceases,
are truly volitional acts. The theory is thus summed up :?
" 1. There is a power of spontaneous movement in the various
active organs anterior to, and independent of, the feelings that
such movement may give birth to; and without this, no action
for an end can ever be commenced.
2. There exists consciousness, feeling, sensation, or emotion,
produced from movements, from stimulants of the senses and
sensitive parts, or from other causes. The physical accompaniment of this is a diffused excitement of the bodily organs constituting the outburst or expression of it, as the start from a blow.
3. There is a property of consciousness?superadded to, and by
no means involved in, this diffused energy of expression?whereby
a feeling can influence any present active exertion of the body,
so as either to continue or abate that exertion. This is the property that links feeling to movement, thereby giving birth to
volition.
The feelings that possess this power?including nearly all the
pains and many states of pleasure?I have hitherto described as
volitional feelings ; those that are deficient in this stimulus, being
principally of the pleasurable class, are the pure, unvolitional, or
serene emotions."
It is a singularly novel idea, that to accident we should be indebted for all our voluntary powers. In saying this, it is with
no intention of placing the theory in an absurd light ; there is
very much in it deserving of the most careful consideration ; there
is much which, if true, will throw a very different light upon many
questions connected with psychology. For although we have
hitherto noticed only the most elementary efforts of volition, Mr.
Bain afterwards shows clearly that all our voluntary acts, even to
the minutest detail, must necessarily have the same accidental
origin. There are certain objections which strike us at the outset, which we may as well state briefly, before following our author
in his further account of volition.
Unless there be some very definite proof of an accidental origin
of what we have been accustomed to consider instances of special
design, we should be slow to receive such an hypothesis. Very
lately an ingenious work* has been published, attempting to account for all the varieties of animal and vegetable life on the
principle of accidental variations of individuals, the selection of
useful varieties, or such as give their possessor an advantage
over others in the struggle for existence, and the propaga* Darwin on the Origin of Species by means of Natural Selection,
214 bain's psychology.
tion of such variations, and their accumulation, in successive
generations. On examination there appears to be a total lack
of any proof or even evidence of the probability of such a view;
the theory treats of events as they might have been, not as they
are. This theory of Mr. Bain's has reminded us strongly of the
one just mentioned, in so far as he attributes all our actions to
chance originally, those being selected for continuance which are
of service, or pleasant, those being rejected which are useless, or
unpleasing. In our author's theory there certainly is not an
entire want of evidence, nor of probability in some aspects; and
yet we do not feel that it fulfils the requirements of the phenomena.
In the first place, taking the earliest acts of life, we cannot say
with certainty that whilst beginning to walk is a reflex act, its
continuance or cessation depends upon volition. On the contrary, we should be inclined to consider both as automatic, for
reasons that will readily suggest themselves to the physiologist.
Secondly, we have no evidence that a child, having performed
numberless spontaneous, unconnected, and incoherent acts, does
really recognise that any one is beneficial, and actually selects
it for continuance, systematically rejecting the others. Perhaps
what direct evidence we can gather would tend rather to controvert this idea. The child continues to kick even after it feels the
required warmth; it continues to cry although this does not alleviate the pain. It never seems in the earliest days to select anything ; the most that we can say is, that at one period or other
we do observe actions appearing like means to ends, and that
before this we have observed actions not having this character.
Whether the one class results from the other, is as yet a question
of pure theory. Certainly when we do see volition at all marked,
it is with some obviousness of purpose. When a child first
stretches out its hand towards the light, or to seize any bright
object, we can scarcely conceive by what purely accidental manoeuvres it can have arrived at that process. According to the
theory, this should be a very late process; every muscle and
every combination of muscles should have previously been over
and over again thrown into action under similar circumstances,
and the results marked and analysed, before the child could ascertain that it could grasp an object by reaching out the arm and
hand. Except by the continuance of an act once accidentally
begun, it can by the terms of this theory accomplish nothing, and
can by no means know that the arm will have any more prehensile faculty than the muscles of the back. How, then, is it to
arrive at any voluntary power, without going through the millions of combinations of which the numerous muscles of the body
will admit? Our-author would answer that all its acts are exbain's psychology. 215
perimental, and that some time or other they succeed; it may be
so, hut the proof is wanting.
Another objection that we have is founded upon the idea that
were the origin of voluntary actions so accidental as is here represented, seeing that the elements of action are so numerous and
complex, we ought to find greater variety and uncertainty in the
results than we do; for almost all children arrive shortly at nearly
the same results. The full discussion of this subject, however,
would involve us in too lengthy an argument for our present
purpose.
The last objection that we shall at present bring forward is
founded upon the early acts of young animals. When the young
duck seeks the water and swims upon it, surely this is not the
result of an almost interminable series of vague strivings and
incoherent actions. When the calf rises and sucks the teat of
its mother, it is done with a precision that is only modified by
the weakness of its muscular system. . The same may be said of
all the earliest actions of animal life. If it be answered that
these are instinctive acts, we should reply that the earliest acts
of human life are certainly founded upon instinct as clearly and
distinctly as those of other animals, although they are later in
their development.
We may now follow our author in his further development of
the origin and growth of volition. The energy of volition appears to be determined in great measure by that of those spontaneous movements from which it originates, and to this many elements contribute. The first is the natural vigour of the constitution. "Youth and health, the plentiful nourishment and
absence of drain, the damming up of the accumulated charge
by temporary restraint?are predisposing causes of a great and
sudden outburst, during which the individual's active capacity is
at the highest pitch The boy let out from school,
incontinently leaps over ditches, breaks down barriers, and displaces heavy bodies, and should these operations be wanted at the
moment, no special or extraordinary stimulus would be needed to
bring the requisite power into play."* Other influences may be
briefly summed up?excitement, stimulus of pain or pleasure,
emotions of fear, anger, resentment, &c.
Some interesting remarks succeed concerning the linking together of feeling and action?a great mystery in the mental constitution. Mr. Bain considers it an ultimate fact in our nature, an
original property of our feelings, to prompt the active system one
way or another,?the property of a painful consciousness being
to stimulate action, to clutch hold of and retain any movement
that alleviates the pain, whilst that of a pleasant consciousness is
* - Vol. ,ii. p. 335;
216 bain's psychology.
to stimulate the continuance of an act inducing it. All this
must however occur after many vain and futile attempts, and hy
the merest accident. "The first steps of our volitional education
are a jumble of spluttering, stumbling, and all but despairing
hopelessness. Instead of a clear and distinct curriculum, we
have to wait upon the accidents, and improve them when they
come."* Mr. Bain on one occasion (p. 352, vol. ii.) adduces an
elementary proof of these positions, which we think admits of
more than doubt. He says, " The spontaneous action that
brings a limb into a painful contact, as when the child kicks its
foot against a pin in its dress, is undoubtedly from the earliest
moment of mental life arrested. Without this I see no possible
commencement of voluntary power." Much observation of the
manner in which children comport themselves under painful impressions would lead us to a view directly opposite to this ; we
believe that it is the result of long and much later experience
that leads a child to cease a painful act, or to continue a pleasing
one.
How far Mr. Bain carries his theory may be seen by the following extracts (See vol. ii. p. 3'56, et sequent.) :?
" I will not vouch for the truth of an assertion frequently made,
that some animals, as the duckling, know water by sight before
drinking it. This much is certain, that a thirsty creature having once
got water into its mouth, feels a very great change of sensation, and
this change for the better operates indirectly in sustaining the act,
whatever it is, that administers the relief. ....
" Still it would be a very long period before a creature would, in
ordinary circumstances, come upon a pool of water, make experiments
upon its properties, and get upon the right movement for imbibing it;
if this were requisite for supporting life on the first day, few land
animals could live. The satisfying of the thirst at the outset is due
to the mother's milk, (but where is the milk of the duck ?) or the
moisture of the food ; and by-and-by in the course of its rambles and
pokings, the young animal encounters a stream, and applies its mouth
to the surface, (why not its tail p since by the hypothesis all must be
accidental or spontaneous;) putting out the tongue, and executing
some of those movements of tongue and jaw already associated with
the contact of objects of food. The refreshing sensation that follows
maintains to the point of satiety the action begun ; and an effective
lesson is gone through, in uniting by an enduring association the two
elements thus brought into conjunction. After a very few such occasions, the contact of the cool liquid with the parched mouth brings at
once into play the movements of imbibition, for which we may be assured there was no original provision, independent of successful trials
confirmed by the adhesive power of the mind,"
It would require very little demonstration to prove that this
* Vol. ii. p. 343.
bain's psychology. 217
gradual construction of the voluntary powers is in no respect
accordant with the phenomena of early instincts. But we would
only notice one point with reference to imbibition. There are a
certain and considerable number of muscles involved in this act,
from those enabling the animal to stoop (say) to the water, to
the last propulsive act of the pharynx. Now as each act of each
muscle must originally be accidental and tentative, and as it is
absolutely necessary for the perfection of the complete act that
all these muscles must contract in definite order and rhythm, we
would propose it as a problem in the doctrine of chances, to
determine how many millions of chances there are against any
one animal ever learning to drink at all; and what a bare possibility that it might be acquired at last.
Mr. Bain, however, believes that all voluntary acts, instinctive
or otherwise, are the result of experience. Animals crouch
together because they find that it promotes warmth (see Vol. II.
p. 358). They lie close one to another, and creep into holes and
corners, that they may stave off the cold, or sustain the pleasure
of the heat; these being " portions of the acquired experience of
the animal tribes." After dwelling at some length upon the
influence of the various appetites over the development of volition, the author announces the following rather startling view as
to the appetite of sex :?
" The remaining appetite, sex, would constitute an opposite instance,
if studied in the animal tribes. The means of gratifying this appetite
are not instinctively Jcnown, so far as we are able to judge; and there'
fore a process of groping must precede the mature faculty. The
attempt not being entered upon until the animal is in every other
respect master of its movements, the difficulty is lessened to a very
great degree, but for which one does not see how such an act could
ever be hit upon by the generality of creatures. The remarkable
intensity of the resulting feeling easily explains the persistence, when
once initiation has taken place."*
No experience, so far as we have seen, tends in the slightest
degree to confirm such a view as the one held by Mr. Bain. We
believe in conclusion that his account of the origin, nature, and
development of volition is not theoretically coherent, nor is it
consistent with observed facts.
We have dwelt at length upon volition, because it presents the
greatest novelty of idea, and the greatest fertility of resource in
its support. The treatises on the Sensations, Emotions, and the
Intellect, contain matter of the highest excellence and interest;
with less that is strictly original or new; less matter for dispute;
but much to excite admiration from the clear and philosophical
treatment awarded to each subject in turn?from the depth and
* Vol. ii. pp. 371-2.
2J8 . NERVOUSNESS.
breadth of thought manifested throughout?and from the extent
of scientific illustration brought to bear upon many of the most
important and difficult problems of our nature. If Mr. Bain has
not given to the world a perfect system of descriptive and analytic
psychology, he has at least done that which will enable less
original minds to build upon his foundation an enduring edifice ;
he has boldly struck out a new path in mental science, and has
rendered more service to the cause than many centuries of merely
speculative metaphysicians.
