The State Of Lunacy In England
================================

Art. VI.?
The Fourteenth Report of the Commissioners in Lunacy, although
not lacking in interest, does not, from the multiplicity of its details, readily admit of a satisfactory analysis. The Commissioners
first describe the additions made in 1859 to the amount of public
accommodation in asylums for pauper lunatics, and the chief improvements effected therein. The new asylum for the united
counties of Beds, Herts, Hants, and the borough of Bedford, it
is stated, would be opened in the course of the year; and it is to
be presumed that the asylum is now in use. The asylum is
placed upon the most elevated portion of an estate, consisting of
2G0 acres; and from the building, which is a cheerful-looking
and handsome structure of white brick relieved with red, extensive views are obtained in every direction. The general plan is
spoken of as good, and the arrangement of the various wards
\
526 THE STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
convenient. The asylum is built for 500 patients, at an estimated cost of G5,0007.
Certain additions which have been mode to the Chester Asylum
during the past year receive special attention from the Commissioners. They express the opinion that the plans adopted (copies
of which, together with a detailed description, &c., are given in
the Appendix to the Eeport) will " afford valuable assistance, in
the way of suggestion, to committees of visitors and their architects, upon whom the duty may hereafter devolve, or be now
under consideration, of providing additional accommodation in
asylums for the pauper lunatics of counties and boroughs."
The alterations and additions proposed or suggested in other
of the older asylums are also reported.
An account is, moreover, given of the new asylum for the
county of Northumberland, opened for the reception of patients
in March, 1859. The following are a few of the particulars :?
" The asylum is designed to accommodate 210 patients, exclusive of
twenty-two beds in the infirmaries, and is erected upon an elevated
site, commanding an extensive view, situate at Cottingwood, about
three-quarters of a mile distant from the town of Morpeth. The site
is reduced to a perfectly level surface, and the subsoil, which is chiefly
gravel, sand, and clay, is thoroughly drained by rubble and tile drains.
The entire estate contains ninety-nine acres of land.
" The building is of brick, with stone dressings; the foundations are
of rubble, masonry and concrete ; the external walls are built with a
two-inch void, to prevent the transmission of warmth and damp;
pressed bricks are used, which give sufficiently smooth surfaces to the
walls, as to require no plastering to the interior of the wards.
" The staircases in the wards are all constructed of stone in short
flights, and Fox and Barrett's patent fire-proof principle, combined
with brick arching, is adopted throughout the ground-floor story in
all the wards. The floors are all boarded, and the ground-floor is protected from cold and damp by pugging placed beneath the floorboards.
" The window-sashes of the single sleeping-rooms and associated
dormitories on the ground-floor are of cast iron, made to slide upon
brass sheaves, leaving unglazed spaces of one pane in breath when
open ; those of the associated dormitories on the first floor are of
wood, with iron sash-bars moulded to match ; the whole of the windows are made to open to a safe point only, and are secured by key
latches
" The whole of the wards are warmed by open fires only. The
ventilation is effected by two foul-air shafts in the towers, placed at
the convergence of the three wards on each side of the building, with
which the single sleeping-rooms, associated dormitories, and all other
rooms and water-closets, communicate by large trunks in the roofs,
flues formed in the walls, and apertures near the ceilings ; all the flues
and trunks are regulated by dampers or valves, the warm fresh air is
THE STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
527
admitted to the rooms, &c., near the floor; the shafts are provided
with boilers and hot-water cisterns which serve to supply the baths,
slop-rooms, &c., with hot water, as well as to promote the extraction
of the foul air
" The asylum consists of a main building, two stories in height,
and two other wards of one story high detached from, but communicating with the main building by covered passages ; the work-shops,
laundry, offices, &c., are contained in two separate blocks. The
medical superintendent's residence, surgery, and chapel are situated at
the centre of the main building on its south front; and on the north
side of the centre, the principal road of approach being on that side,
are the residence and office of the clerk and steward, the matron, servants' rooms, general stores, and offices, and the general kitchen, which
communicates with the several wards separately by covered ways; and
at each extremity of the main building are the infirmaries.
" The wards in the main building extend east and west from the
centre, and are occupied by the male and female patients respectively;
each side-is divided into three wards for different classes of patients.
" The ground floors of the wards contain ambulatories, single sleeping rooms, associated dormitories, attendants' rooms, day or dining
rooms, &c. The first floors, which are occupied only at night, contain
associated dormitories (facing the south), attendants' rooms, lavatories, &c.
" Each side of the building is provided with bath-rooms, containing
warm and shower baths, which are conveniently situated to and common to the several wards." (p. 5.)
The Sussex Asylum, after considerable delay, occasioned by
unexpected engineering difficulties encountered in procuring
water, was opened in July, 1859. A description of this asylum
is not given, but it is stated that the land belonging to it is about
120 acres in extent, twelve acres being under cultivation as
kitchen-garden. The estimated number of patients for whom
accommodation is provided is 425?viz., 212 males, and 213
females.
The vexed question of an asylum for the city of London would
appear to be at length satisfactorily settled. The Commissioners
state that they are glad to report that there is every prospect of
an asylum being erected, without further delay, near Dartford,
for 300 patients.
Two lunatic hospitals were opened in the course of 1859?one
at Gloucester, and the other at Nottingham.
The Gloucester hospital (Barnwood House, formerly a gentleman's residence, now considerably altered and enlarged to meet
the requirements of a hospital) affords accommodation for about 35
patients of each sex. The land attached to the house amounts to
48 acres, and is well covered with timber, a considerable portion
adjoining the buildings being laid out as gardens and shrubberies.
528
THE STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
The arrangements are very satisfactory, and on the property there
are several cottages, the largest of which will be appropriated to
the use of one or two ladies.
The Nottingham Hospital is an entirely new structure, built
and furnished at a cost of about 18,500Z. The site is elevated,
and distant about two miles from the city, and about 17 acres of
land are attached to the building. The following extracts from
the architect's description will be found of interest:?
" The building consists of a centre block, containing the residence of
the officials in the front and the recreation-room and kitchens at the
back, with the wings for the patients towards the east and west, the
whole presenting a frontage to the south of 270 feet. The galleries,
which run east and west, open to the private rooms on the north, and
the associated rooms on the south. The latter being arranged into
four blocks, projecting at intervals from the galleries, are enabled to
have windows on two or more sides of the rooms, while sufficient
space is left for windows in the south wall of the galleries.
" The large associated day-rooms and dormitories are built with detached chimney stacks running up in the centre of the rooms, forming
blocks of about six feet by live feet, but pierced in the centre with
arched openings, ten feet high and three feet wide. In each of the
large day-rooms the lower part of this aperture is filled by two open
fire-grates placed back to back, the open space between them forming
a warm-air chamber, the whole being covered down with an iron slab,
faced with ornamental tiles, and at a height of three feet from the
floor. Ranging with the smoke-flues on either side the fire-grates are
flues for fresh and foul air, communicating with inlet and outlet apertures, and by means of these and the warm-air chamber before named,
an effective system of ventilation is established in both day-rooms and
dormitories, and a stream of warm air is supplied to the latter. The
outer half-brick walls of these flues are built with Rufford's white
glazed bricks, and present a clean, bright surface.
" The patients being enabled, as it were, to form a double circle
round the fire, and to see each other through the arched opening above
the fire-grates, it renders this arrangement of the places more conducive to the cheerfulness of the apartment, and in regard to heat, it certainly is more economical than if they were placed, as they otherwise
must be, against the outer wall." (p. 16.)
This combined system of warming and ventilation is applied,
though in a different, manner, to the rest of the building. The
amount of accommodation for patients is not stated.
The Commissioners illustrate the progress of improvement in
the management of lunatic hospitals and licensed houses by a
detailed account of the changes made from time to time during
the past ten years, in the management and care of patients in St.
Luke s Hospital and Hoxton House. The particulars form an
THE STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 529
interesting contribution to tlie history of the amelioration of the
condition of the insane in this country.
The Commissioners announce that, as respects the metropolitan district, they have practically come to the resolution " not
to add to the number of licensed houses, unless for special reasons
applicable to the particular case." For example : " In the event
of a medical man or other person of high character and qualifications, and possessing adequate pecuniary resources, applying for
a licence to receive private patients in a suitable house, we should
be disposed to make an exception, but should in that case generally, if not invariably, limit the licence to patients of one sex."
The Commissioners further write :?
" The licensed houses within our immediate jurisdiction, judging
from the actual numbers of patients resident therein, appear fully to
meet, not merely the requirements of the special locality (which would
be comparatively unimportant, inasmuch as private patients are, for
tlie most part, sent to asylums not in the neighbourhood of their
homes), but in general the wants of the community. We have also to
observe, that, in consequence of the now rapid withdrawal of the
pauper patients from the five large metropolitan houses at present
licensed to receive that class of the insane, extensive provision will
shortly be made for the accommodation of patients of the middle and
poorer classes, for whom it is hoped that ultimately adequate means of
care and treatment will be afforded in public hospitals." (p. 19.)
The reception of pauper patients into private asylums is discouraged by the Commissioners as much as possible; and from
the recent opening of several new county asylums, and the enlargement of others, they have been enabled to prohibit generally the
reception, in the metropolitan houses, of pauper patients from
distant localities ; moreover, they have " lately made the licences
of these houses subject to the condition that, unless upon special
grounds, and with our written permission, no pauper patients
shall be admitted, excepting from the counties of Middlesex and
Surrey, or from places within seven miles of London."
The Commissioners next glance at the evils connected with the
transfer of licences, and then proceed to a detailed report of the
condition of the different private asylums in the Metropolitan
district These will be read with no small interest by those who
have been affected by the recent popular, and indeed official,
outcry against private asylums. Of the five large metropolitan
licensed houses in which pauper lunatics are received, the Commissioners sum up their account by stating, " that as respects
treatment and general comfort, they are now approximating to a
very satisfactory condition." Of the houses for the reception of
private patients only, the accounts are so entirely inconsistent,
perhaps with one doubtful exception, with the sweeping official
530 THE STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
assertions made derogatory of private asylums before the Select
Committee of the House of Commons in 1858, that we can only
marvel. However, we shall merely refer to the report of the
Commissioners, and add, that notwithstanding the carefully recounted items of suggested further improvements in the arrangements of several of the houses, the accounts of the Commissioners
entirely hear out the favourable opinions we have been accustomed to express of the general character and management of
our private asylums.
The recalcitrant licensed houses in the country, seven in number, are next noted, and the state of the lunatic hospital, Fort
Pitt, Chatham, passed under review; and the instances in
which insane soldiers have been set at large in the streets, in
order to "raise the question as to the legal liability of the parish
authorities to take charge of lunatic soldiers who might be now
free in the parish in which Fort Pitt is situated," are animadverted
upon. The question at issue is not yet definitively settled.
The condition of single private patients is largely entered
upon by the Commissioners, and several painful illustrations are
given to show the necessity which exists for a more effective supervision of these cases. The Commissioners report that?
" The general result of our experience of the system of treating the
insane as single patients, strongly convinces us of the necessity for
exercising, in all cases, the most careful supervision over them, both
legislative and otherwise. Although in some instances there may be
urgent reasons for giving this mode of treatment a trial, more especially
in cases likely to be of short duration, it should ever be remembered
that these are the cases in which medical and moral treatment are of
the utmost importance, and that, if improvement does not take place
within a limited period, much mischief may result from persevering in
it. As a general rule, indeed, patients of this class are usually under
much less advantageous circumstances, so far as the chances of recovery
are concerned, than if placed in a well-conducted Asylum." (p. 69.)
The allowances of these patients are discussed, and the necessity of the Commissioners " ascertaining the amount of property
to which insane patients are entitled, and the proper application
of it to their use," is insisted upon.
The state of Single Pauper Patients is also discussed, and the
Commissioners suggest:?
" 1. That the Relieving Officer should be directed to regard such
cases, not merely as paupers needing parochial relief, but as patients
requiring medical treatment; that he should be instructed to give
immediate notice of every new case to the Medical Officers; and that he
should be made sensible of the necessity of affording a sufficient liberal
allowance to all the insane and idiotic detained in the district, to whom
also he should pay frequent visits and ascertain the nature of the accomTHE STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
531
modation and treatment, and whether the money granted is duly
applied.
" 2. That the Medical Officer should he desired when making his
visits to give a larger amount of consideration to the wants of his
charge, and not to rest satisfied with a mere examination into the
personal condition of the patient when visited ; that his inquiries should
extend to the kind of accommodation provided, especially the sleeping
room and bedding, the supervision and treatment, restraint, diet, and
clothing, and whether the payment made by the relieving officer is
sufficient.
" That his quarterly list should not contain merely an account of the
patients visited at the end of the quarter, but should embrace all seen
during the past three months.
"That he should more strictly comply with the statutory injunction
in attesting that a patient is ' properly taken care of, and may properly
remain out of an asylum.'
" 3. That the clerk to the Board of Guardians be called upon to
perform the duties required of him with punctuality and accuracy,
both as respects the annual and quarterly returns." (p. 88.)
It is further suggested that "every Visitor of an Asylum,
resident in an Union, and consequently an ex-officio Guardian,
may, as such, be a most useful agent towards amending the condition of Pauper Patients boarded or sent to a Workhouse." His
visits to the County Asylum would give him an amount of experience which might be most beneficially applied in the improvement of the state of pauper lunatics, and, the Commissioners say,
'?'it seems to us that if any means could be adopted of introducing into each Union a member of the Committee of Visitors
of the County Asylum, many advantages would arise out of
the combination thus formed. To effect this object it would
simply be necessary to add a certain number of names to the
list of each Committee of Visitors. In many counties the addition would be of small amount; for instance, in Bucks seven,
Cambridge nine, Derby nine, Chester ten, Dorset twelve."
The advantages which the Commissioners conceive would arise
from this arrangement are thus stated :?
" Such an arrangement would, we think, be followed by the best
results, especially if in addition to it the Medical Officer of the district
Avere entrusted with a larger amount of authority. It is not difficult
to conceive that if a resident Magistrate were, as a member of the
Committee of Visitors, to act in concert with the Medical Officer of the
district, much substantial benefit and protection would be extended to
this class of patients. The home treatment would be improved;
removal whenever necessary would be more readily effected ; and the
information contained in the order and certificates would be more
accurate; the highly objectionable practice of taking a patient for examination to a police court would be discontinued; and it is probable
532
THE STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
also that the obstacle raised to the transmission of a patient to an
asylum owing to the payment of fees exacted by clerks to magistrates
for drawing up the orders for admission, would be abolished." (p. 89.)
The particulars connected with the discharge from private asylums of the two lunatic murderers, James Moore and Dr Pownall, are recorded, and in both instances the conduct of the
medical superintendents of the asylums, in permitting these
patients to go at large, is strongly condemned by the Commissioners.
Finally, the site and arrangements of the State Asylum for
criminal lunatics, now in course of erection, are briefly described.
This asylum is situated at Broadmoor, on Bagshot Heath,
distant, about thirty-three miles from London. The land for the
use of the asylum comprises about 290 acres, and is of undulating character, falling1 towards the south, and varying in elevation from 100 to 200 feet above the level of the sea. " The
estate is bounded by plantations, principally of Scotch fir, and
from the buildings fine and extensive views are commanded."
The supply of water is abundant, and the natural facilities for
land and house drainage good.
"The Asylum consists of a main building, and four separate
blocks towards the north-east, north-west, south-east, and southwest, respectively, for Male Patients ; and a detached building
to the east for Females. The buildings are of three stories, and
the style and elevations of a simple and pleasing character. The
residence of the Medical Superintendent is conveniently situate
midway between the Male and Female divisions."
It has been deemed sufficient for the present to provide accommodation for 400 males and 100 females. The buildings will
readily admit of extension.
It is proposed that?
" The two wings of the main building should be appropriated
each to 100 Male Patients of the ordinary class. Those of the
better class as respects station of life and conduct will occupy
the South-Western Block, the North-Western being assigned to
working patients. The South-Eastern Block is intended to be
used as the Male Infirmary, and the North-Eastern will be appropriated to the worst and most refractory cases of Male Patients.
Each of the four Blocks is calculated to accommodate 50 patients. The Female Building for 100 patients will, as to kitchen,
offices, and otherwise, be a separate Establishment. The Chapel
for the Patients of both sexes is in the centre of the main building. The second-floors, throughout, are appropriated to sleeping
accommodation."
On the 1st of January, 18C0, the number of criminal lunatics
amounted, according to the text of the report and a special table
SUMMARY.
Number of Patients, 1st Jan., 1859.
Private.
Pauper.
M. P.
Total. M. i F.
Total.
Admissions
during the Year
1859.
M. F. Total,
Discharges during the Year 1859.
Total Number.
M. P. Total.I M. P. Total,
Number
Recovered.
Deaths during the year 1859.
Total Number.
P. Total,
From Suicide.
Act
committed in
Asylum
M. F. Tot,
County and Borough Asylums,
Hospitals
Metropolitan Licensed Houses,
Provincial Licensed Houses ...
122 105
1003 773
663 6241
837, 704
227 17129:8489;
1776 108
1287 465
1541 469
2625 2206
4831 8171
15618
216
1264
924
15845
1992
2551
2465
307431541 6228
9851
18022
22853
4523
413 843
586 1105
423 928
4576 9104
1419]
328
6051
451
1510]
377
821
404]
2929
705
1426
855
2803
3112
5915
2120
394
354
365
956
95
145
109
756
50
141
73
1712
145
286
182
1476 1757
3233
1305 1020
2325
17
PATIENTS REMAINING, 1st JANUARY, 1860.
Private
M.
Total.
Pauper.
M.
Total.
Number deemed
Curable.
F.
Total,
Found Lunatic by
Inquisition.
M.
Total
Criminals.
Total
Chargeable to
Counties or Boroughs
M.
County and Borough Asylums,
Hospitals
Metropolitan Licensed Houses,
Provincial Licensed Houses ...
121
703
874
106
754
639
732
227
1752
1342
1606
2696 ! 2231
4927
7829
120
194
377
9376
113
408
373
17205
233
602
750
17432
1985
1944
2356
133
91
174
8520
10270
18790
23717
1265
187
162
187
1952
320
253
361
3
14
58
41
13
36
127
117
263
119
20
174
2886
177
576
360
134
23
220
728
17
161
737
Included in Total Lunatics.
NO. XX.?NEW SERIES. N N
534 MODERN DEVELOPMENTS OF THE MARVELLOUS.
in the appendix, to 731?viz., 571 males and 100 females. Acaccording to the statistical summary the number was 787?viz.,
576 males and 101 females, They were thus distributed :?
The appendix contains the statistical tables showing the movement and cost of patients in asylums, and sundry papers relative
to licences and changes of proprietorship, the Chester Asylum,
St. Luke's Hospital, Single Pauper Patients, and Criminal
Lunatics.
In the statistical tables the two columns under which were
entered deaths from " accidents or violence"' have been omitted,
" as all cases terminating fatally from accidents of every description entered under these heads, and unaccompanied by the necessary particulars in explanation, were calculated to produce erroneous impressions."
On the preceding page we give the statistical summary for
1859 of the movement of patients in asylums.
Male. Female. Total.
Asylums, County and Borough, including
269 96 365
Northampton Hospital
Northern Hospital
Metropolitan Licensed Houses
Fisherton House
Other Provincial Licensed Houses .
113 15 128
20 3 23
154 4 158
20 4 24
