Braidism
=========

Aet. V.?
A hope lias long been indulged by enthusiastic experimenters,
that artificially induced somnambulism might be applied to some
good purpose in the treatment of disease. When, in this country,
Mr. Braid, by his ingenious researches, first threw a clear light
upon the etiology of artificial somnambulism, he did not overlook
the possible therapeutic value of the experimental method which
lie had adopted in his analysis of the facts of so-called " animal
magnetism,"?a method which led to the discovery of that series
of somnambulic phenomena which were designated by him, and
which have since been understood by the term, hypnotism. He
carefully put hypnotism to the test as a therapeutic and anaesthetic
agent, but the results of his experiments, although of unusual
interest, were such as to lead both himself and those who were
familiar with them to the conclusion, that the use of hypnotism
in the practice of physic could only be very restricted. While,
therefore, Mr. Braid's researches yielded, 011 the one hand, a solid
and most important addition to our physiological knowledge, on
the other, they appeared to mark out so clearly the degree of utility
and comparatively slight value of artificial somnambulism as a
remedial or anaesthetic agent, that recourse has very rarely been
* Cours Theorique et Pratique de Braidisme, ou Ilypnotisme Nerveux, considere
dans ses rapports avec la Psychologie, la Physiologie, et la Pathologie, et dans ses
Applications a la Medecine, a la Chirurgie, a la Physiologie Experiment ale, a la
Medecine Legale, et VEducation. Par le Dr. J. P. Philips. Paris : Bailliere, 1860.
, Recherches sur V Hypnotisme, ou Sommeil Nerveux, comprenant une Serie d'Ex-
periences Institutes a la Maison Municipale de Sante. Par MM. les Docteurs
Demarquay et Giraud-Teulon. Paris : Bailliere, 1860.
BRAIDISM.
517
had to it by the English physician, and the whole question of
its therapeutic value has fallen into abeyance.
In France, notwithstanding that the remedial properties of
artificial somnambulism induced by mesmerism had oftentimes
been discussed, the healing virtues of somnambulism brought
about by hypnotism appears to have attracted little notice ; in-
deed, the whole question of hypnotism does not seem to have
excited much attention there until the termination of last year,
when the subject, in its bearing upon aneesthesia, was brought
before the Academy of Sciences, by MM. Velpeau and Broca,
apropos of an experiment (the opening of an anal abscess during
hypnotic insensibility in a female aged forty years), performed by
Drs. Broca and Follin, at the hospital at Necker. Drs. Demarquay
and Giraud-Teulon appear next to have taken up the question in
the Gazette Medicale de Paris (December, 1859, and January,
1860), and about the same time Dr. Azam, the assistant-physician
at the lunatic asylum of Bordeaux, sought to verify Mr. Braid's
researches, and made known the results of his inquiry in the
Archives Generales de Medecine (January, 1800).
A few days after the communication of Drs. Broca and Follin's
case to the Academy, Dr. Guerineau, of Poictiers, transmitted to
the same learned body an account of an amputation of the thigh,
which he had performed while the patient was in the hypnotic
state. " After the operation, which endured a minute and a-half,"
writes M. Guerineau, " I addressed the patient, and asked him
how he felt. He replied that he ivas in paradise, and seizing
hold of my hand, carried it to his lips to kiss it. He said,
also to a student, ' I felt (although without pain) what was
done, because the thigh was cut off at the moment when you
asked me if I suffered any pain.' "*
The question of hypnotism had now been fairly broached in
France, and the circumstances seemed favourable for the further
study of the biological and medical questions linked to artificial
somnambulism. So thought Dr. Philips, an old and enthusiastic
worker in the mesmeric and hypnotic field. He was fully
acquainted with the importance and significance of Mr. Braid's
researches, and regarding them as the clue to a vast, uncultivated
field of observation, had long worked to gain for them at least
the same degree of attention in France that they had received in
England, but in vain. It was in an interval of this labour,
partly caused by failing health, that the first communication on
hypnotism was made to the Academy; but Dr. Philips shall tell
his own story.
" Sundry circumstances, among others, defective health, had pre-
* Oaz. des Hopitaux, Dec. 29, 1859. Quoted by Dr. Philips.
NO. XX.?NEW SERIES. M M
518
BRA1DISM.
vented me pursuing this work. But a few words uttered before the
Institute of France by a celebrated surgeon have realized in a few
days that which the long and laborious efforts of an obscure man had
failed to accomplish. I had undertaken to interest the medical world
in questions which up to that time it had looked upon with prejudice
and repugnance ; the illustrious introducer of hypnotism to the Academy-
had conquered by his patronage the attention and interest of the entire
world. A longing to place my experience at the service of the eminent
men who had taken the cause in hand to which for so many years I
had devoted myself, at once took me from my asylum in the fields.
But a painful surprise awaited me at Paris ; I was there given to
understand that the. champions of hypnotism had scarcely appeared
when they wheeled about, and retired precipitately to their tents."
(p. x.)
Such indeed was the case. " Cooled," say Drs. Demarquay
and Giraud-Teulon, "by an exaggerated deception which might
have been easily avoided, and regretting their prompt enthusiasm,
the promoters of hypnotism hastened to bury an idol that they
liad eagerly sought to elevate upon an altar."
Notwithstanding, however, this serious defection, the question
was not destined to rest here and prove entirely abortive. The
impulse generated within the walls of the Academy had gone
forth, and of the more immediate extra-academical results the
works of Dr. Philips and Drs. Demarquay and Giraud-Teulon
are examples.
Nothing could well be conceived to differ more the one from
the other, short of entire dissidence, than the writings of these
gentlemen. Dr. Philips, full of enthusiasm, stands on tip-toe
upon the results of Mr. Braid's experiments, which he conceives
to have been amply verified by his own researches and those of
others, and he endeavours to peer far beyond the bounds of a
distant horizon: Drs. Demarquay and Giraud-Teulon, full of
scepticism, seek to restrict the horizon within the ken of an ex-
tremely myopic vision. Neither a too great enthusiasm nor a
too great scepticism can, however, destroy the peculiar interest
which belongs to hypnotism, and we shall endeavour to cull the
chief facts, asserted or testified to, recounted by our authors.
Once and for all, we shall not suffer ourselves to be tempted by
them into the pleasant and illimitable field of theory or hypo-
thesis. If Dr. Philips thinks that hypnotism is yet but in a
rudimentary state, and that when perfected it is destined to effect
eminent good in surgery, therapeutics, physiology, psychology,
education, and morals, nay, even may prove the key to unlock
the mysteries of the soul, the law which governs the moral and
physical worlds, and make apparent the intermediate agent by
means of which the two poles of life are linked together, we shall
not quarrel with these truly " gigantic hopes." If it be Dr. Pliilips's
BRAIDISM.
519
intention to attempt to justify these hopes, we would hut throw
out the caution that the loftier the aim the greater the necessity
for securing firmly under foot every, even the slightest step,
towards its attainment. We must even put aside Dr. Pliilips's
theoretical exposition of the phenomena of hypnotism, notwith-
standing its ingenuity, and this from no disrespect to him, but
from a feeling (it may be a perverse one; certainly it is an obsti-
nate one) that hypnotism requires cultivating experimentally
much more than speculatively.
If we disregard the theoretical waifs of Drs. Demarquay and
Giraud-Teulon, it is because they are utterly disproportionate
in magnitude with the experimental observations upon which they
are based?these observations, while of interest in themselves,
having no value as tests of experiments performed under entirely
different conditions.
Dr. Philips objects to the term hypnotism. This, like the
term animal magnetism applied to the great collateral method of
inducing artificial somnambulism, he considers to be inexact.
The last designation implies a disputed theory; the first conveys
the erroneous idea that " the essential and constant character of
the phenomena it represents is sleep." He would substitute,
therefore, the word Braidism for hypnotism, as (which is, indeed,
now chiefly done in this country) Mesmerism for animal mag-
netism, " according to a rule already consecrated in the classical
words galvanism, voltaism, faradism."
Notwithstanding the somewhat uneuphonious character of the
word Braidism, its adoption would certainly possess the advan-
tage set forth by Dr. Philips, and is not inconsistent with the
canons of nomenclature and terminology. Moreover, we are in-
clined to have recourse to it as a tribute to the memory of Mr.
Braid, whose loss* we have so recently had to regret. A suffi-
ciency of euphony may even be secured for English ears, if the
word be written with a diaeresis, thus, Braidism, and pronounced
accordingly. This is the course that we shall adopt in the subse-
quent portion of this article.
The chief phenomena of Braidism are summed up by Dr.
* Philips in the following categories :?
1. Resolution of the voluntary muscles extended throughout
the whole system, or localized in an isolated portion ; catalepsy,
tetanic contractions, clonic contractions and uncontrollable co-
ordinated movements, and considerable augmentation of the mus-
cular power.
2. ITyper-excitation or annihilation of the general sensibility.
Both the hypereesthesia and anaesthesia may extend over the whole
* Died on the 25th March last.
M M 2
520
BRAIDISM.
body, or may be circumscribed, as may be required, to a more or
less restricted portion; for example, a single member, an arm, a
thigh, or even to a single phalanx of the fingers. Exaltation, sup-
pression, and perturbation of the special sensibility ; illusions of
the senses, the impressions received from exterior agents giving
place to a sensation foreign to their properties. Thus water may
be mistaken for wine, and an object of the same temperature as
the air, placed in contact with the skin, may produce the sensa-
tion of red-hot iron. Finally, objective perceptions appear to
take place in the sensorium, without participation of the external
organs of sensation.
3. The energy of the intellectual and moral faculties are stimu-
lated or enfeebled, and their habitual activity increased in an inde-
terminate degree. The taste for music, for example, the sentiment
of time and tune, acquire an exquisite delicacy in the least
musical organization ; the most feeble memory becomes endowed
all at once with an almost infallible strength, or else it is com-
pletely disordered, or it suffers from a special or partial lesion,
certain names, certain letters, or certain dates being forgotten.
Habitudes of thought may also become changed in a greater or
less degree, from which it follows that their relative action is sus-
ceptible of change, and that consequently the type of character
can undergo a veritable transformation. Thus the choleric may
become placid, the humble arrogant, and the timid and pusillani-
mous proud and courageous.
4. The involuntary muscles are affected in a manner analogous
to the voluntary ; the circulation may be hurried or impeded ; the
activity of the secretory functions increased or diminished; in a
word, all the operations of vegetative life may be more or less
modified.
The Brai'dic state may be induced, almost indifferently, by anv
means calculated to obtain fixity of attention on the part of the
subject. Mr. Braid made use either of a brilliant object, held a
short distance in front of the patient's eyes, or a prominent object
fixed upon the forehead, or he directed the subject's attention to
some point in the room, or he made use of the ordinary mesmeric
method. Now, according to Dr. Philips, the Brai'dic operation
has two distinct stages. In the first, the object is to " develop a
preparatory modification of vitality, a modification which is often
latent, and of which the effect is to fit the organization to undergo
the determining and specific action which constitutes the second
stage. This preliminary modification he designates the hypotaxic
state {etat hypotaxique), and the act of producing it he terms
hypotaxis (hypotaxie,?virora^ig preparation, to undergo). In
the second stage of Brai'disation, the special functional modifica-
tions are sought to be developed. " The impression employed for
BRAIDISM.
this end is a mental impression, that is to say, a suggested idea.
And as this idea becomes thus the determining agent of the
functional modifications to he provoked, the general application
of the proceedings which constitute the second period of the
Braidic operation ought to bear the name icleoplastic (ideoplastie).
Dr. Philips estimates that about one out of every thirty-five or
forty individuals met with will be found predisposed to succumb
to Bra'idisation. The persons who are thus liable are generally of
a nervous temperament; but instances are met with of individuals
who appear to have enjoyed habitually good health, and never to
have suffered from any nervous disorder. Outside this category
of persons who are highly susceptible, the aptitude to submit to
the action of Braidisrn varies considerably in degree. This apti-
tude, moreover, is liable to vary in the same individual at different
times ; and even those who have exhibited the least disposition to
yield to the operation have acquired the aptitude after a course
of daily Braidisations.
The bilio-nervous temperament, Dr. Philips thinks, seems to
predispose more than any other to Brai'dism. But the conclu-
sion may be illusory, for he remarks that, if the majority of the
individuals found liable to the hypotaxic state manifest signs of
a bilio-nervous temperament, persons of this temperament take
the most interest in his demonstrations, show the greatest desire
to submit themselves to experiment, and form invariably the
greater portion of his experimental personnel.
The conditions of character would appear, however, according
to the same authority, to be clearer and more determined than
those of temperament.
" The predominance of elevated mental emotions above the grosser or
personal instincts, a serious humour, and especially a disposition to con-
fidence and faith, are favourable moral conditions; egotistic penchants,
an exaggerated tendency to scepticism and criticism, and lightness of
spirit, constitute refractory dispositions.
" He who, either from the mobility of an over-excited imagination, or
from the invincible energy of his reflexion, or from debility of his intel-
lectual faculties, or from want of a sufficient command over the ope-
rations of his mind, is incapable of fixing his thought for a given time
upon an object, and holding it concentrated on a simple and limited
circle of ideas, is eminently unfitted for the hypotaxic state. In virtue
of the law of contact of extremes, idiots and the most robust and active
understandings are found united in this category of incompatibility.
" We have again and again observed that persons habitually impres-
sionable, and even those who were so in the highest degree, ceased to
be so when they were dominated by a vivid prepossession." (p. 42.)
From ten to twenty-five or thirty years is the somewhat wido
period, according to Dr. Philips, when the aptitude to the hypotaxic
state attains its apogee; but as to the liability of sex, his obser-
522
BKAIDISM.
vations do not permit him to pronounce positively, he having
chiefly experimented on males. A full stomach has a fatal influence
upon the induction of the hypotaxic state.
One of the least satisfactory portions of Dr. Pliilips's work is
that devoted to the illustration of the presumed therapeutical
value of Bra'idism. To make this manifest, he has recourse chiefly
to the recorded experience of other writers. This is most scanty at
the best, and we should have been better pleased to have seen a
careful account of Dr. Pliilips's own observations on the thera-
peutic virtues of the hypotaxic state. The want is all the more
apparent considering that his treatise arose out of a discussion
in which the medical rather than the physiological properties of
hypnotism were in question. If it were not for this defect, and
for the dubious theoretical matter it contains, Dr. Pliilips's work
would have proved a most welcome addition to medico-psycho-
logical literature ; but as it is, the book must be characterized as
a useful and interesting manual of hypnotism or Bra'idism.
Drs. Demarquay and Giraud-Teulon put hypnotism to the test
upon eighteen subjects, in the Maison Municipale de Sante.
Fifteen of the subjects were women, and three men; and eleven
of the former were invalids. Of these, eight were suffering from
serious affections of the reproductive organs (affections graves de
l'appareil genital). The males, the four healthy females, and one
of the patients suffering from uterine cancer, were not affected in
the least degree by the hypnotic process adopted ; the remaining
subjects were affected in different degrees. The number of ex-
periments made amounted to forty ; the method in which they
were made was as follows :?
In the earlier experiments the mirror of an ophthalmoscope, and
in the latter ones a small bright metal sphere, was placed in such a
position as to induce slight straining and convergence of the
eyes when they were both fixed upon the object. Further,
looking upon Mr. Braid's observations as a " somewhat crude
melange of the psychical and purely physiological element," Drs.
Demarquay and Giraud-Teulon sought to set aside even the
suspicion of a foreign psychical or moral influence disturbing
their experiments, hence, "placing their subjects in exclusive
relation with the sphere or the mirror, the object of their regard,
shunning to attract their attention, leaving them, for the most
part, in ignorance of the end essayed, we," they assert, " freed
ourselves from all action which was not exclusively physiological
and anti-biological" (p. 15); that is to say, these gentlemen
reduced the psychical element of the experiment to the lowest
degree possible. Indeed, they conceived that they had so com-
pletely effected this, that they came to the ultimate conclusion
that the key to all verified hypnotic phenomena, and sequentially
BRAIDISM.
523
to the most marvellous of tlie superstitions of the Middle
Ages was, the fixity of regard bestowed by the subjects of
experiment upon the small bright object set before them. " Fixity
of regard!" write these experimentalists, in their section con-
cerning "Hypnotism dans les Temps Historiques; demonomania,
possessions diabolique," &c., " that is the secret common to all
these processes, differing solely in its value and efficacy, developing
more or less rapidly the anticipated effects (effects attendu), accord-
ing to the time employed and the subjects submitted to experiment.
Possession, demonomania, magnetism, cataleptic ecstasy, somnam-
bulism, hypnotism, are one and the same state, manifesting more or
less religious enthusiasm (l'exaltation mentale religieuse) with the
seriesof special disorders which may follow these monomanias. Such
is the scientific tableau traced by modern experiment upon the can-
vas bequeathed by history" (p. 44). Such is the magnificent culmi-
nation of the train of argument which Drs. Demarquay and Giraud-
Teulon develope out of their experiments, and yet they hold up Mr.
Braid to animadversion for having mixed up the psychical element
with his experiments, assert this to have been an unpardonable
error against the rules of physiological experiment, and reject as
improbable and wanting in verification the whole of what may be
termed the higher phenomena of hypnotism educed by him !
Now, let us endeavour to ascertain the actual value of Drs.
Demarquay and Giraud-Teulon's opinion upon a question of ex-
perimental physiology. Their sensitive subjects were all invalids,
aud with one exception suffering from serious diseases; Mr.
Braid's were healthy individuals, chiefly selected at random from
mixed audiences, or picked up incidentally. Dr. Philips's
description of the temperament and character of his subjects will
apply also to Mr. Braid's subjects. Drs. Demarquay and Giraud-
Teulon eschewed all psychical influence ; Mr. Braid attributed the
results of hypnotism chiefly to psychical influence, and it was this
opinion, accurately reasoned upon, that led liim to institute those
experiments by which he was enabled to develope and show the
nature of the extraordinary phenomena depending upon exaltation
of the smell and of the muscular sense, and upon suggestions
derived from the last-named sense and from auditive impressions.
The same reasoning also gave him the clue to the so-called
odylic phenomena, and led him at once to demonstrate experi-
mentally their true character. In short, it was by his skill in
plaving upon the mind of his subjects that Mr. Braid induced the
higher phenomena of artificial somnambulism, and those equally
interesting phenomena which may be evoked in certain indi-
viduals not hypnotized, and which led Baron Beichenbach astrav.
Thus it is apparent that neither in the class of subjects sub-
mitted to observation, nor in the method of conducting the obser-
524
BRAIDISM.
vations were the experiments of Drs. Demarquay and Giraud-
Teulon and those of Mr. Braid at all similar ; therefore, in endea-
vouring to test the value of Mr. Braid's experiments by their own,
Drs. Demarquay and Giraud-Teulon have sinned against the merest
rudiments of experimental observation ; and their conclusions
are of no value whatever in their bearing upon Mr. Braid's
experiments, except in so far as the experiments of the former
gentleman approximate in character to those of the latter gentle-
man, in which case the results tally to a nicety.
The observations of Drs. Demarquay and Giraud-Teulon betray
a very imperfect acquaintance with Mr. Braid's writings, and it is
to this alone that we can attribute the singular errors committed
by these gentlemen in their criticisms upon the last-named gentle-
man's experiments. Moreover, Drs. Demarquay and Giraud-
Teulon seem to be ignorant of the fact, that the chief of Mr.
Braid's experiments had been verified by no less distinguished a
physiologist than Dr. Carpenter.
It might at least have been expected that Drs. Demarquay
and Giraud-Teulon would have tested the value of their own
theory, that to "fixity of regard" solely was to be attributed the
hypnotic phenomena they observed. Had they instructed their
subjects to fix their eyes upon the glittering object placed in the
required position, and contrived to direct their attention without
disturbing the visual organs, we fancy they would quickly have
found that a fixity of attention as well as a fixity of regard upon
the object was required to mature the experiment; that, in short,
a psychical element was always present in the experiment, and
was essential to its success.
Be this as it may, however, the positive results which Drs.
Demarquay and Giraud-Teulon derived from their experiments
are not without interest. These were, (1) an oscillatory state of
the pupils during the production of hypnotism, although this was
not constantly observed; (2) anaesthesia, occasionally marked,
most frequently feeble, often absent; (3) lowering of the pulse,
but less regularly than diminution of the respiratory rhythm ;
(4) general hyperesthesia in one instance.
Of the anaesthetic influence of the hypnotic state upon patients
actually suffering pain, Drs. Demarquay and Giraud-Teulon
write :?
" Nearly all the patients in whom we have succeeded in inducing
the nervous sleep suffered from grave affections of the genital
apparatus : we do not say all. Now in all these cases it is a fact which
has been reproduced whenever hypnotism has been determined, that
very acute uterine pains, which tormented these unfortunates day and
night, and of which they complained bitterly before the nervous sleep,
were checked and suspended during this particular state of their nervous
THE STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
525
system, and long afterwards; twenty hours of perfect comfort being
the mean duration of the solacement; and it was so real, so incontes-
table, so patent, that the patients demanded to be hypnotized imme-
diately upon being visited. One young demoiselle who suffered cruelly
from neuralgic pains in the pelvis (the consequence of a violent contusion
with fracture) and which had not been relieved either by opium, or by
chloroform used throughout an entire night, was calmed as by enchant-
ment, and for a period of twenty hours, by hypnotism; and this two
days in succession.
" These facts were reproduced with sufficient constancy to fix the
attention and merit notice. They may give rise to new indications for
the employment of this singular process, and open out a new path for the
treatment of neuralgic affections. It is to be understood, however, as far
as we are concerned, that this aptitude is limited to the special circum-
stances in which we have observed it, that is to say, neuralgic affections
bound to certain special states of the organism allied to hysteria."
(p. 20.)
These results, it will be seen, add nothing to what had already
been made manifest by Mr. Braid, and the recent interest exhibited
for hypnotism in France has not yielded hitherto one new fact,
physiological or therapeutical, in hypnotic science. Mr. Braid's
researches opened out a wide and highly interesting field of
experimental research, which doubtless admits of further and
very profitable cultivation. In the meantime, the question raised
by Dr. Phillips awaits decision, whether in future the term
Braidism shall be substituted for Hypnotism ?
