Dr B. A. Morel on Mental Disorders
====================================

Art. VIII.?
Dr B. A. Morel, who is perhaps best known to our readers by
his Traite cles Degenerescences Physiques, Intellectuelles et
Morales cle Vespece humaine, has very recently given to the
world a treatise on mental maladies. Any work emanating from
so highly competent a source would command attention, but this
work merits particular notice for two reasons ; first, because the
author has specially destined it for the use of physicians not
alienists ; and second, because it is based upon a new classification of mental disorders.
The present woi'k may be fittingly termed a complement to the
treatise on degenerations already referred to. In that work, Dr.
Morel endeavoured to show that, the psychical and moral as well
as the physical deterioration observed in degenerated conditions
of the human race, had fixed and definite characters in immediate
relation with the causes which gave rise to these conditions. In
the work before us he seeks to establish an intimate and constant
relation between the form of mental alienation and the cause in
which it originates, a natural extension of the idea just mentioned,
and he proposes a classification based upon the etiology of mental
disorders.
* Traile des Maladies Mentales. Par le Dr B. A. Morel, M&iecin-en-Chef
de 1'Asile des Aldines de Saixite-Yon (Seine Infdrieure). Paris. 1860.
234 MOREL ON MENTAL DISORDERS.
We purpose to lay before our readers some account of the
nature and mode of formation of this classification, and an estimate of the effect it will probably exercise on the study of mental
disorders, if it be accepted by the profession.
In the first place it is needful clearly to distinguish between the
necessary and conditional causes of insanity. Thus, for example,
meringitis, phthisis, pneumonia, typhoid fever, hypertrophy of the
heart, &c., moral impressions, such as fear, love, exaltation of
religious sentiment, all the passions, in short, can occasion
insanity, but not necessarily so. All who are exposed to these
causes do not become insane, or not even threatened with
insanity. It is only on condition of a predisposition which
determines the action of a particular cause in a special direction,
that any of the so-called determining or occasional causes give
rise to insanity. The causes called specific, for example, alcohol,
opium, &c., and certain idiopathic cerebral affections, alone have
the power of producing necessarily permanent disturbance of the
intellectual faculties under certain given circumstances.
Now it is requisite that divers elements, which participate equally
of the physical and the moral nature of man, be called into action
under the influence of the predisposition, and should concur with
the occasional cause in order that a new morbid type or a particular form of alienation be formed, which shall stamp all the
insane which are attached to this form with a common character.
When, therefore, Dr Morel lays down the law that an intimate
and necessary relation exists between the form of alienation and
the nature of the cause whieh gives rise to it, he is not to be
understood as implying that this relation is established under the
influence of the least cause, which in inducing the elements of
delirium, may ultimately lead to alienation. He holds that the
cause cannot be separated either from the individual predisposition, or from the functional disorder, or from the lesion that the
cause determines in the organism. Three elements are indeed
necessary for the realization of a particular form of insanity, to
wit, the 'predisposition, the occasional cause, and the functional
disorder or lesion.
The further development of Dr Morel's theory of causation
will scarcely bear abstraction, therefore we give it in full:?
" If the predisposition does not exist, the occasional cause may certainly induce a disturbance of the intellectual functions, a general or
systematic delirium, durable or transitory, an alienation in short, but
rarely will this delirium have the character which is observed in particular or essential forms of insanity. Moreover, the prognosis will be
all the more favourable because no predisposition exists, and because
the state of the patient presents generally conditions of acuteness.
" If the cause communicates to the organism but a passing impresMOREL ON MENTAL DISORDERS. 23-5
sion, the delirium which may be occasioned by it will be transitory and
fugacious. It is only on condition of originating a durable disorder in
the organism, of determining a special lesion of the nervous centres,
that the delirium, at first transitory and ephemeral, advances presently
to proportions which give it an entirely different character, and which
constitute a special form of insanity.
" It is then permanent or durable, general or systematic. It is developed according to laws fixed and invariable ; it derives the elements of
its activity, of its mode of production, both in the nature of the cause,
and in the spontaneity of the intelligence, and in the gravity and progress of the functional disorder or of the organic lesion; it begets
insensate determinations, acts of a fatal and irresistible character.
It is in short the index of insanity, so called, of that state which, in a
psychological point of view, is not only the expression of the general
sufferings of the organism, but of this or that suffering in relation with
the nature of the cause and that of the lesion. It is in this point of
view only that I am able to say that intimate and necessary relations
are established between the nature of the cause and this or that form
of alienation.
" If it were otherwise, and the forms of insanity were developed in
an invariable manner under the influence of the least determining or
occasional cause, these forms would be innumerable, and every attempt
at classification would become impossible in presence of the multitude of causes which would have the fatal privilege of creating forms
of alienation in relation with the specific nature of their action.
" It remains then but to designate the form of insanity by the name
of the determining or occasional cause, and we shall immediately see
how many errors of diagnosis and prognosis would be occasioned.
Does not experience prove to us daily that we are almost invariably
induced to attribute to the determining cause the part of final cause,
and to neglect thus the real point of departure of the evil; in other
words, the real point of departure of that cause which gives to insanity
its particular form, which does not permit us to confound one variety
of alienation with another, and the insane appertaining to one class
with the insane belonging to another ?
" It is then indispensable that the cause which conducts to insanity,
to that exceptional state which makes man different from himself, it is
indispensable, I say, that this cause should derive the elements of its
activity in an order of facts or of phenomena which are engendered and
which dominate in such a fashion, that if nothing is opposed to this
generation and to this reciprocal dependency, there will result from it
determined, fixed, and invariable effects, which must necessarily produce not only insanity with all its consequences, but such a variety of
insanity rather than such another?(pp. 250-2.)
The facts upon which this theory is founded are duly recapitulated by Dr Morel, and upon the principles contained in it he
has framed a classification of mental maladies, in which these
affections are no longer characterized by the greater or less decree
of exaltation which accompanies the delirium, as is observed in
236 MOREL ON MENTAL DISORDERS.
the states usually named mania, melancholia, monomania, stupidity. These phenomena are but symptoms which may be found
in every variety of insanity :?
" My object," writes Dr Morel, " is to seek in each form the characters which distinguish it from any other form, in such a manner,
that the fundamental aspects once being given, we shall be able
to recognise to what nosological variety in alienation belongs the
individual who betrays either delirium of ideas or acts, or diverse lesions
or disorders of the nervous functions."?(p. 258.)
Upon the etiological basis set forth, Dr Morel divides mental
disorders into six principal groups, each of which has several
subdivisions. The following is a summary of this classification .?
1st Group.?Hereditary alienations.?This group is subdivided into four classes.
(a) The Jii'st class includes those in whom the nervous temperament is a congenital fact, in virtue of hereditary transmissions
excessively varied. These individuals are more apt than others
to be attacked with insanity.
(b) The second class contains those in whom hereditary transmission is revealed by psychical and physical phenomena, whicli
approximate the insane of this category to a type that may be
recognised by the following characters:?
" In the course of their existence, insanity is manifested among
them much more by delirium of acts than words. They are distinguished by their eccentricities, by incoherence, singularity, and often
even by the profound immorality of their actions. Certain remarkable
intellectual qualities do not exonerate them from the impossibility of
directing simultaneously their faculties towards a wise and useful end.
Their creations are rare and commonly their inventions do not fructify.
They are partial geniuses, and notwithstanding certain brilliant manifestations, they are struck with intellectual and sometimes even physical sterility.
" In this class are placed a multitude of individuals who indulge
in chimerical projects, reformers of the human species, Utopianists of
every kind, inventors whose discoveries are impossibilities, or who
pursue the verification of insoluble problems (monomanias of certain
authors).
" The dangerous acts which they commit in the paroxysms of their
insanity,their instinctively bad tendencies,necessitate often the interventionof authority,and their sequestration. Their accessionsof maniaare of
short duration, and in the remissions they manifest to observation the
essential characters of their disease : systematic delirium, with haughty
tendencies, without general paralysis. They astonish those who notice
them but superficially by the apparent lucidity of their reason (;mania raissonnante of authors, moral insanity of the English.")?(p. 259.)
MOREL ON MENTAL DISORDERS. 237
(c) The third class forms a transition series between the individuals of the second and fourth classes.
In this, the third class, the signs of hereditary taint show
themselves at a very early period, even at the most tender ages,
by intellectual inertia, and excessive depravity of the moral disposition :?
" Their innate tendencies to evil have caused them to be characterized
as instinctive maniacs. Incendiarism, robbery, vagabondage, precocious propensities for debauchery of all sorts, form the sad balancesheet of their moral existence, and these unfortunates, who most
commonly have not been fecundated either in respect to physical or
moral well being in humanity, and who are in consequence the most
direct representatives of hereditary transmissions of an evil nature,
people in the greatest proportion our prisons and penitentiary institutions from their earliest childhood."?(p. 2(30.)
(d) The fourth class includes innocents, imbeciles, idiots.
2nd Group.?Mental alienations from intoxication.? The intimate relation which exists between the form of insanity and the
nature of the cause is, perhaps, more clearly seen in the alienations produced by intoxicating substances than in any other
varieties. As in the instance of the inordinate use of alcoholic
liquors, certain toxic agents exercise a determinate effect upon
the system, each giving rise to peculiar psychical disturbances.
Whether man seeks to procure factitious sensations with alcohol,
opium, or other inebriating substances; whether he he the victim
of working in lead, mercury, phosphorus, or other metals ; or he
suffer from the use of diseased nutriment, as spurred rye ; or from
the air he respires being polluted, as in marshy districts; or
from the geological character of the soil, as in cretinism, we may
look upon him as exposed to the influence of an intoxicating
cause, and anticipate that the lesions of the nervous system will
be in relation with the nature of the cause.
It may be said that these agents may cause rapid death preceded by more or less furious delirium, escaping from all classification in reference to insanity. This is true, but it is only in
the chronic state that we shall have to study the different deliriums produced by these substances. The term chronic alcoholism, employed now to specify poisoning by alcohol, indicates in
what manner this question ought to he posited.
Dr Morel divides into three classes the morbid varieties included in the group of alienations caused by intoxication.
(a) The first class contains the varieties produced by narcotic
substances employed to procure factitious sensations, and by the
deadly influence of certain forms of industry. This class includes the effects of alcohol, opium, and other narcotics; also the
morbid effects of working in lead, mercury, phosphorus, &c.
NO. XVIII.?NEW SERIES. R
238 MOREL ON MENTAL DISORDERS.
. (b) The second class includes the effects of an insufficient or
deteriorated nutriment, as, for example, the nervous epidemic
ergotism.
, (c) The third class includes the consequences of paludal influences and of the geological constitution of the soil.
3rd Group.?Alienations determined by the transformations of
certain neuroses.
. The alienation which is immediately developed from certain
nevropatliies, always reflects the fundamental character of the
neurosis which has given rise to it. Dr Morel divides the
alienations of this group into three classes.
(a) First class. ? Hysterical alienation.?In this form of
alienation the phenomena characteristic of the hysterical temperament and state disappear, and are succeeded by certain symptoms every way special and peculiar. The greatest exaltation
will succeed the most profound prostration. Hallucinations and
bizarre sensations, extravagant delirium, rapid transitions from
one nervous state to another, extraordinary remissions with apparent return to reason, and in some instances penchants to suicide,
incendiarism, and to all kinds of acts of an evil nature ; lastly,
deplorable terminations in which human nature exhibits itself
under the most degrading aspect,?these form the chief characters
of hysterical insanity. Ecstasy, catalepsy, anesthesia, in short,
the phenomena that usually accompany hysteria are rarely observed. Hysterical insanity is, indeed, a transformed neurosis in
the strictest sense of the term.
(b) Second class.?Epileptic alienation.
(c) Third class.?Hypochondriacal alienation.
This class is subdivided into three varieties.
(1) Simple hypochondriasis.
(2) Hypochondriasis characterized by delire des persecutions.
(3) Hypochondriasis distinguished by a general sentiment of
well-being and delusions of grandeur, which supervene upon the
habitual depression, exaggerated fears, and ideas of persecution
observed in the.second variety.
? 4th Group.?Idiopathic alienations,?the brain being directly compromised by affections which are peculiar to it, as
periodic congestions, hemorrhages, meningitis, cerebral softening,
cerebral atrophy, traumatic lesions, blows, falls, &c. This group
is divided into two chief classes.
(a) First class, distinguished by a progressive enfeeblement or
abolition of the intellectual faculties, a sequel of chronic maladies
of the brain or its envelopes.
- (b) Second class, constituted by general paralysis, or paralytic
insanity with predominance of systematic, expansive delirium.
" The determining causes of this affection are, as M. Parchappe has
MOREL ON MENTAL DISORDERS. 239
justly observed, of the number of those which provoke a strong and
prolonged hyper-excitation of the brain: sensual excesses, and especially the abuse of alcoholic drinks, of good cheer, of venereal pleasures, and intellectual excesses, represented particularly by prolonged
ivatchings and pre-occupations with business, enterprises, ivories, &c. . .
But in order to form a just idea of this malady, so characteristic on
account of the nature of the ambitious delirium, it is most necessary,
after having studied the intimate relations which exist between the
form of the insanity and the nature of the cause, to interpose the element of the cerebral lesion. In paralytic insanity, the lesion, which
is nothing less than inflammatory softening of the cortical couch of
the two cerebral hemispheres, stamps the malady with a character
which is peculiar to it, and which certainly distinguishes it as one of
the most marked morbid species met with in the nosological arrangement of mental maladies."?(p. 268.)
5th Group.?Sympathetic alienations, in which the morbid
state of the brain is determined sympathetically by mischief existing in other parts of the frame?the brain being affected by
consensus, as the older authors were accustomed to say. In this
group Dr Morel includes erotomania and nymphomania.
Gth Group.?Dementia.?Dr Morel believes that it will be
useful to preserve this designation, because it has been adopted by
the legislature, although in a sense differing from that accepted in
medicine. Dementia is not, properly speaking, a primitive form,
it is rather a terminal one. But as it happens that the numerous
lunatics who have become demented, from whatever cause this
may have arisen, form a numerous family, of which all the members have common characters, and are recognised by certain internal and external signs, Dr Morel considers that the order and
method which he seeks to introduce in mental maladies will not
suffer from a classification which makes dementia one of the important varieties of insanity.
In concluding the explanation of the motives which have induced him to adopt the foregoing classification, Dr Morel adds :?
" I shall be reproached without doubt for having blotted out two
essential forms generally adopted, mania and melancholia. But I have
already observed that mania (exaltation) and melancholia (depression)
are symptoms which are met with in all the varieties of insanity, and
which, consequently, do not constitute essential forms. In other respects I do not question the value of these designations which, indeed,
ought to be preserved. The words maniacal excitement, melancholic
depression, mania or melancholy, return frequently under my pen
when it is necessary for me to describe the different phases of this or
that variety of insanity which enters into the classification that I have
adopted; but, 1 again add, these symptoms are only transitory phenomena which most commonly alternate with one another. Moreover
whenever I use the words mania and melancholia, it should be well
R 2
240 MOREL ON MENTAL DISORDERS.:
understood that I refer but to certain phases of mental maladies or
predominant symptoms of exaltation and depression, not intending to
indicate particular forms of insanity. I describe but one of the
symptoms of a determined form of mental alienation.
." I shall not enter into other considerations in order to justify the
classification which I have adopted. Here, as in all the sciences of
observation, the results must suffice to justify the method. If then
the classification of mental maladies, in their relations with the nature
of the cause, leads us to comprehend better the progress of these insidious maladies, and to give to our prognosis and treatment a more solid
basis, I shall have attained the difficult aim which I have assayed.
"It is necessary to remember, however, that in my opinion, the
action of the cause, in the generation of special forms of mental maladies, cannot be separated either from the individual predisposition, or
the functional disorder which the cause creates, nor lastly, from the
organic lesion, which sometimes is a primitive, sometimes a consecutive
phenomenon."?(pp. 271, 272.)
In terminating this notice of Dr Morel's classification, the
most important and novel portion of his work, it is proper to
remark that our analysis will hardly suffice to convey a correct
notion of its true nature and significance, Unless the reader have
a previous acquaintance with our author's researches on Degenerations, the results of which, it may be added, are fully set forth
in the present work.
And now, if we gauge the value of this classification by the
measure which the author himself suggests, and which is supplied
in his Treatise, we think that we are justified in the following
conclusions :?
(1) That the classification is a far more healthy and useful one
than that in ordinary use. It indoctrinates us from the first into
the whole of those slighter forms of mental perturbation, which
constitute the very substratum, so to speak, of fully-formed insanity, but which have hitherto been treated only incidentals,
or in a disconnected manner, in treatises on mental disorder's.
It links straitly and systematically the special study of insanity
proper to those great social questions of psychical and physical
deterioration which meet us at every turn of life, and makes the
study of the one the necessary complement of the other, or rather
the study of the latter the necessary foundation for a right knowledge of the former. It substitutes for a classification based
upon symptoms, and which chiefly consists of arbitrary typical
forms, and is consequently artificial and provisional, one based
upon the intimate relation between symptoms and causes, and
hence natural.
(2) That etiology being made the essential principle of the
classification, this gives us greater precision as wrell in our prognosis as our treatment of mental disorders, and more especially it
enables us rightly to apprehend those vast questions involved in
ON EPILEPSY. '241
the general hygiene of mental disorders, and does not permit us,
as we are too apt to do, to overlook these in the purely medical
treatment of the disease.
It is probable that Dr Morel's classification may be somewhat
modified in form, or that it may be added to in process of time,
but if adopted, the benefits arising from it, to which we have referred, would be direct and immediate.
We shall confine ourselves to this portion of Dr Morel's work.
If his name be not sufficiently well known among our readers, and
form of itself a satisfactory guarantee for the manner in which
the details of the book are worked out, we may assure them that
these are in every respect admirable. The treatise is one, indeed,
which, as a text-book for the student and the general practitioner,
is unrivalled.
