Foreign Psychological Literature
===================================

Our retrospect of Foreign Psychological Literature will embrace the
following subjects:?
1. On the Discovery of General Paralysis.
2. On a form of Hypochondriacal Delirium succeeding Dyspepsia.
3. On Sitomania.
4. On the Criminal Responsibility of Hysterical Individuals.
5. On the Mental State in Chorea.
6. On consecutive Cerebral Ramollissement.
7. On Interdiction.
1. On the Discovery of General Paralysis, and on the Doctrines emitted
ly the first writers upon the Disorder. By M. Baillargeb.
Two orders of facts were successively brought to light before
general paralysis was really established.
Esquirol pointed out the frequency of paralytic symptoms amongst
the insane. He studied the character of this paralysis, its march and
influence on the prognosis. But these symptoms, to which Georget,
and, above all, M. Delaye, subsequently paid special attention are, if we
adopt Bayle's doctrine, but a part of the disease.
In order to complete its discovery, it was necessary to recognise its
initial period, and to show that lesion of the intellect forms as essen-
tial a characteristic as paralysis itself. The disease consists in two
elements. Esquirol saw but one; Bayle discovered the other.
Doubtless the second task was much easier than the first, since atten-
tion was thenceforth directed to lunatics presenting symptoms of
paralysis ; but still, the general paralysis of Esquirol, of Georget, and
of M. Delaye, was not the disease which the name now imports, with
its double lesion of the intellect and movements having each its proper
characters. The merit therefore returns to Bayle of having thus
262 FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE.
established it in adding two new elements, congestion and grandiose
delirium (delire des grandeurs).
No one contests this merit with Bayle ; it is not so with Esquirol.
Reference has been made to a passage in a work of Dr. Haslam's, and
this work is anterior to the first labours of the French physician.
Without, however, wishing at all to diminish the credit due to Haslam,
I think the objection is not entitled to all the weight which has been
attributed to it.
It should be remembered, in fact, that many passages quite as pre-
cise have been passed over for ages without remark, and that the one
now in question would probably never have been known if the works
published in France had not, thirty years after, led to a close research
after everything in other books relating to the new disease.
This is not all that is to be said in favour of Esquirol. He not only
described the principal symptoms of general paralysis in 1814 and in
1816; but he treated each year in his lectures of paralysis of the
insane. This may be gathered from M. Delaye's essay.
But again, at this period Esquirol had learnt to recognise the first
signs of the disease, and consequently to predict its development, and
the new facts thus passed into practice.
" General paralysis," says M. Calmeil, " is widely prevalent amongst the
insane, and it is one of the most fatal complications of vesanise. All phy-
sicians who make mental disorders their special study have clearly defined opi-
nions on this subject, and each time they are consulted on behalf of a lunatic,
they carefully examine whether the pronunciation is free from impediment or
accompanied with stammering. They rarely hesitate to pronounce the malady
incurable when they are able to verify the existence of paralysis, however
slight may be its symptoms."
M. Calmeil wrote this in 1826, and added, "M. Esquirol was the
first to direct attention to this point, and he has caused due weight to
be attached to the gravity of the prognostic."
"M. Esquirol," says M. Calmeil in another place, "has seen profes-
sional brethren of great ability maintain that the tongue was not
paralysed when even the pronunciation was so embarrassed that a
practised ear could not be mistaken."
Esquirol described in writing the symptoms of paralysis in 1814
and 1816, as Haslam had done before; but that is not his chief merit.
He has besides both in his lectures and his practice constantly called
attention to this complication, the first and slightest manifestations of
which he completely apprehended. To overlook it was thenceforth
impossible.
" Whenever any discovery in science, great or small, is unrolled, it is
rare that we do not find in preceding authors its hidden germs. Far
from derogating from the merit of the inventor, this circumstance is a
proof of the reality of the facts which he has first brought to light.
Haslam has mentioned the pretentious pride of paralytics, but it was
nevertheless Bayle who discovered the relation between ambitious de-
lirium and paralysis, and it was he who gained for it a place in science
which no one at the present day contests.
Esquirol discovered general paralysis, because in reality it was he.
FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE. 263
who fixed attention upon the gravity of the prognostic presented in
the case of the insane by the first signs of stammering, and because he
insisted upon this fact every day both in his lectures and his practice,
and taught those about him to verify its importance. Hrd he done
but this, without having written anything in 1814 and 1816 on gene-
ral paralysis, it would still have been to him that we must have ac-
corded the honour of being the first to establish this order of facts.
In my opinion, then, the names of Esquirol and Bayle should be
united, and it is to these two authors jointly that we should attribute
the merit of having written this great chapter in the history of
mental diseases.
To resume : two very different doctrines have been enunciated by the
first authors who wrote upon the subject of general paralysis.
The first is that of Esquirol, of Georget, and of M. l)elaye; the second
is that of Bayle. In the first it is admitted?
1. That there is room in the nosological system for a new species of
paralysis?Chronic muscular paralysis (Georget), Imperfect general
paralysis (Delaye).
2. That this paralysis, like all others, is characterized by but one
order of pathognomonic symptoms, the symptoms of paralysis.
3. That this new species of paralysis has this peculiarity, that it is
observed almost exclusively as a complication of insanity.
- 4. That the insane paralytic should always be considered as the sub-
ject of two distinct diseases, insanity and general paralysis,
5. That this general paralysis intervenes indifferently in all forms of
insanity.
From Bayle's doctrine, on the contrary, we arrive at the following
conclusions :?
1. That we must inscribe in the nosological system a new species or
form of insanity?ambitious insanity with paralysis or chronic menin-
gitis.
2. That this new species of madness is characterized by two orders
of pathognomonic symptoms :?1. Ambitious delirium under the form
of monomania and of mania, and delirium with signs of dementia,
2. A general and progressive paralysis.
3. That insanity and general paralysis observed in the same patient
are not two distinct disorders like insanity and scurvy, but two orders
of symptoms of one single morbid entity.
4. That general paralysis cannot be considered as a complication of
insanity.
5. That the symptoms of general paralysis are not observed in all
forms of insanity indifferently, but only in cases of insanity charac-
terized by the predominance of ideas of grandeur and power.
6. Finally, to Esquirol and Bayle belongs the honour of having
realized by the discovery of general paralysis the greatest progress that
can be pointed out in the history of mental disorders.?(Annale$
Medico-Psychologizes, Jan. Ijoc.)
261 FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE.
2. On a form of Hypochondriacal Delirium occurring consecutive to
Dyspepsia, and characterized by refusal of Food. By Dr. L. Y.
Makce.
Amongst the numerous and varied forms of dyspepsia there are some
which should especially attract the attention of psycopathists, on
account of the peculiar mental condition thereby determined.
We see, for instance, young girls, who at the period of puberty and
after a precocious physical development, become subject to inappetency
carried to the utmost limits. Whatever the duration of their absti-
nence they experience a distaste for food, which the most pressing want
is unable to overcome; with others the appetite is not wanting, but the
digestion is painful, accompanied with flatulence, lowness of spirits, and
discomfort. These two varieties of dyspepsia, which are very common,
when they occur in young subjects predisposed to insanity from here-
ditary antecedents, and rendered still more impressionable by that pro-
found nervous disturbance which accompanies the establishment of the
menstrual functions, may, by a process of ideas easy to follow, deter-
mine a state of partial delirium. Deeply impressed, whether by the
absence of appetite or by the uneasiness caused by digestion, these
patients arrive at a delirious conviction that they cannot or ought not
to eat. In one word, the gastric nervous disorder becomes cerebro-
nervous.
It is easy to foresee the consequences of this new morbid condition.
All attempts made to constrain these patients to adopt a sufficient
regimen, are opposed with infinite stratagems and unconquerable resist-
ance. The stomach digests perfectly what is committed to it, but in
the end it comes to content itself with the feeblest doses of nourish-
ment, until one is surprised that life should survive so long with such
slender means of reparation. I have observed several cases (and in
these the suspicion of fraud must be altogether discarded) where the
patient has lived six months, a year, and even more, upon a few spoon-
fuls of soup or a few mouthfuls of sweetmeat or pastry daily : in one
case observed, the amount of liquid and solid food taken, which was
exactly weighed, did not exceed fifty grammes a day. It is true that
then attenuation proceeded to the last degree; all trace of adipose
tissue had disappeared, and the patients were reduced to skeletons ; the
teeth blackened, the mouth became dry and the tongue red and
furrowed; the constipation was such that it was difficult to provoke
the expulsion once a fortnight or once a month of matter hard and
ovular; the urinary excretion was almost nil, and the abdominal coat
was so contracted as to touch the vertebral column ; the skin became
dry and wrinkled, the pulse filiform and insensible, and all the symptoms
preceding death from inanition were strikingly displayed; the weak-
ness soon became so great that the patients could scarcely walk a few
steps without being seized with fainting. The nervous predisposition-
increases with the debility of the organism; the affective sentiments
undergo alteration, and all the intellectual energy centres round the
functions of the stomach; incapable of the slightest exertion or of sus-
FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE. 265
taining the least conversation beyond their delirious ideas, these un-
happy patients only regain some amount of energy in order to resist
attempts at alimentation, and very often the physician beats a retreat
before their desperate resistance.
Some of these sufferers, at the end of months or years, and after
numerous oscillations in their condition, literally die of hunger. In
one case of this description, in which a post-mortem examination was
made under my eyes, the stomach was perfectly uninjured ; the mucous
membrane was healthy, without injection or softening; the capacity
of the stomach was perfectly normal.
It must not be forgotten, therefore, that by reason of the anatomical
integrity of the digestive organs, medical intervention may be most
advantageous even when the patients appear devoted to incurability
and death. I have seen three young girls thus cured, who were re-
duced to a most alarming and almost desperate state; it remains then
to inquire what are the indications we have to follow, and in what way
should medical action be directed.
In reference to the greater number of these cases which have come
under my notice, I would venture to say that the first physicians who
attended the patients misunderstood the true signification of this ob-
stinate refusal of food : far from seeing in it a delirious idea of a hypo-
chondriacal nature, they occupied themselves solely with the state of
the stomach, and prescribed, as a matter of course, bitters, tonics,
iron, exercise, hydro-therapeutics, with a view to stimulate the activity
of the digestive functions. However apparently excellent these thera-
peutic measures may be, they always proved insufficient when the
malady was in an advanced stage. It is then no longer the stomach
that demands attention, for the stomach is well able to digest, and
suffers only from want of food; it is the delirious idea which consti-
tutes, henceforth, the point of departure, and in which lies the essence
of the malady; the patients are no longer dyspeptics?they are insane.
This hypochondriacal delirium, then, cannot be advantageously en-
countered so long as the subjects remain in the midst of their own
family and their habitual circle: the obstinate resistance which they
offer, the sufferings of the stomach, which they enumerate with inces-
sant lamentation, produce too vivid emotion to admit of the physician
acting with full liberty and obtaining the necessary moral ascendancy.
It is therefore indispensable to change the habitation and surrounding
circumstances, and to entrust the patients to the care of strangers.
If the refusal of food continues notwithstanding these efforts, it be-
comes necessary to employ intimidation, and even force. If by this
last method a satisfactory result be not obtained, I would not hesitate
to recommend the use of the oesophagus sound. But it is necessary to
proceed progressively and by degrees. Each day and at each repast
the nourishment, be it liquid or solid, should be gradually increased,
and it would be even well to weigh the food, in order to proceed with
greater sureness and confidence without relinquishing a single step.
Adjunct means should not be neglected, and bitters, as well as steel
medicine, combined with sufficient alimentation, may render good ser-
vice. As to exercise and gymnastics, which are commonly recom-
'266 FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE.
mended, they have the inconvenience of occasioning a great expendi-
ture of strength, which the daily alimentation is unable to withstand;
these should therefore be reserved until convalescence is well established,
and should be used with great caution.
When, by the aid of these precautions, the amount of nourishment
has been raised to proper proportions, the patients will be seen to un-
dergo a great change, their strength and condition to return, and their
intellectual state to be modified in a most striking manner. It will
be prudent, however, for a long time to exercise rigorous watchfulness,
and to combat energetically the least retrograde tendency, should such
appear. Relapses are in these cases easy; and besides, this form of
hypochondria is the index of a nervous predisposition which cannot be
noticed without a feeling of uneasiness as to the intellectual future of
the subject.
Without wishing to generalize too much on the influence ultimately
exercised by the intellectual condition with reference to insufficient
alimentation, I think that this is an element which it is well to bear
in mind when dealing with many nervous disorders: the majority of
hysterical and nervous sufferers make themselves remarkable for the
slenderness of their diet, by their liking for indigestible food, and their
?antipathy for bread, meat, and strengthening dishes. These disposi-
tions are met without any stomachic-nervous disorder, properly so
called, for a sustained effort of the will suffices to lead the alimentation
back to regular conditions: let this point of practice, then, be insisted
on, for the sickly predominance of the nervous system is kept up by
the impoverishment of the blood which results from imperfect nutri-
tion ; and so long as the patients will not apply their will to nourish
themselves in a suitable manner, it will be impossible to reckon upon
a solid cure and safety against all danger of relapse.?(Annates Me-
dico-Psychologigues, Jan. 1860.)
3. On Sitomania. By Dr. William J. Chipley.
Dr. Ciiiplet applies the term sitomania to those forms of insanity
which are accompanied by an obstinate rejection of food. He uses the
term as a matter of convenience, and not as implying the existence of
a distinct form of mania. In certain cases the term sitopholia would
be most correct, as expressive of the intense dread of food experienced.
Sitomaniacs are classed by Dr. Chipley in two groups: the first,
including those cases who refuse food, actuated as they believe by a
divine command or other supernatural direction, or by the impression
that it is dangerous to eat, or that it is morally wrong, or that the
food offered is poisoned, or that the stomach and bowels are closed up
or are wanting ; the second, including those cases in which the aversion
to food is manifestly associated with chylopoetic derangement. In
the first class the cases depend upon some peculiar condition of the
brain or state of the mind, the digestive organs remaining apparently
intact; in the second class the cases depend upon manifest disorder
of the digestive organs.
He does not mean to assert that every case can be readily and
FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE. 267
certainly placed in one or the other of these two classes. This divi-
sion shares the fate of all other efforts at classifying diseases. It is ne-
cessarily imperfect. We meet with cases where the refusal of food is
mainly owing to the existence of some illusion or hallucination, but
is strengthened by some digestive derangement which lessens the ap-
petite, and in so far weakens the natural inclination for food. On the
other hand, hallucinations are not unfrequently attendants 011 secret
lesions of digestion, and they are apt to enforce an abstinence naturally
resulting from an entire absence of appetite. The division is practically
important, because the proper treatment of the two classes of patients
is radically different. It would be folly to force food on one whose
stomach is manifestly incapable of elaborating it, and with whom the
assimilative functions are perfectly torpid; and it would be an ex-ror
of equal magnitude to dose one with physic whose digestive apparatus
was in a state of integrity, and who endures the torments of hunger
because he has heard a voice commanding him to seek martyrdom. I11
?the one case we should increase existing evils, and augment in no small
degree the sufferings of the patient; in the other we should but add
physical obstacle to the mental difficulty already in our way.
Dr. Chipley continues :?
" Having regard for my own observation, I have no hesitation in stating that
by far the most fruitful cause of sitomania is some morbid condition of the
brain giving rise to hallucination, and this is in accordance with the observa-
tions of most of the writers whose works I have consulted on this subject.
Among the most common delusions is the fear of poison. There is no evidence
of physical derangement. The tongue, the pulse, the skin, all may indicate a
healthy condition of the digestive apparatus, and hunger may be intense, but
the belief that his destruction is sought by poison is so profound, that the pa-
tient will endure its torment rather than take the food offered to him. His
conversation may be rational, he may enter into the discussion of various topics
with animation and with every appearance of perfect judgment, and nothing
may seem capable of throwing him off his balance until food is presented, when
he will suddenly break off the conversation, and either seek to retreat from the
food or exhibit the depth of his suspicions by a minute examination of the
?articles offered to him, subjecting them to the test of the senses in the most
careful manner. Breaking the bread, he will scrutinize the fractured portions,
or smell it, or touch it to the tongue, confidently expecting to detect proofs of
the truth of his suspicions. In certain instances there is some perversion of
taste, and in this case the altered flavour of the food is, to the deluded victim,
the highest evidence of the foul wrong that is sought to be inflicted upon him.
But whether this perversion of taste exists or not, on closing his examination
the patient turns away, often resolving to die of hunger rather than of poison.
Sitophobia from an apprehension of poison has been more or less apparent in
almost all the cases of obstinate rejection of food which have fallen under my
observation.
"A certain number fancy that God has commanded them to fast, sometimes
for a definite, at others for an indefinite period of time. These are among the
most difficult cases to vanquish, and almost always demand a resort to force.
As they firmly believe they are obeying the commands of God, they exhibit all
the devoted resolution of the martyr; and many of them would submit to be
thrust into a fiery furnace rather than appear to be so impious as to seek to
countervail the will of Heaven. Keligious fanatics are not unfrequently im-
pressed with the notion that it is their duty to imitate the self-denial of our
Saviour, and are thus led to attempt a fast of forty days. One who dreads
268 FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE.
poison may be frightened into compliance, or he may elect to swallow the food
offered rather than have the same, or perhaps more deadly mixtures forced
upon him ; but the fanatic relies upon the support and succour of Deity in the
one case, and consoles himself in the other by the reflection that he is not re-
sponsible for what he has no power to avoid.
? " In other cases the victim imagines that he is commanded to do penance, as
in the case mentioned by Morison, of a married man, who becoming connected
with a dissolute woman felt the immorality of the act so deeply that he was
rendered insane. He obstinately refused food, alleging that God. forbade him
to eat.
" There are others who allege that they have communication with spirits,
good or evil, and that they are enjoined by them not to partake of food. A
case of this kind occurred to me. The patient had been greatly excited on the
subject of spirit-rapping, and became insane. He obstinately refused food be-
cause, he said, the spirits told him that he would thus purify the body, exalt
his spiritual nature, and render himself more worthy of free and unrestricted
intercourse with the virtuous dead.
" Some patients have obstinately refused to partake of food under the influ-
ence of a vague notion that to eat would dishonour themselves, or in some mys-
terious manner compromise their friends. In these cases the patients will
rarely give, or attempt to give a reason for the fear by which they are agitated.
They say they know that such is the case, although they may not be able to
explain it; and if food is pressed upon them they become greatly agitated, and
offer a resistance which might be expected if you were really seeking to dis-
honour them or to injure some of their best friends. 1 have a person now
under treatment who for some time before he was brought to the hospital ob-
stinately refused all sustenance, because of a conviction that his family were
destined to starvation, and that it would be wrong for him to indulge in a
gratification that was soon to be denied to his wife and children. He had been
unfortunate in some speculation, and had also lost money by endorsing for a
friend, though his fortune was but little impaired. Yet he could see no ter-
mination to his misfortunes but extreme poverty and the absolute starvation of
his family. When at home, seated at table, bountifully supplied with all that
could be desired, he would admit that want was not yet upon them, but it
would soon overtake those he so devotedly loved, and it was his duty to be the
first sufferer, and by abstinence to leave the more for his wife and child, and
thus postpone for them the evil day. The gentleman admitted that his appe-
tite for food was good, that he craved it, and would relish it if what he con-
ceived to be a correct principle did not forbid indulgence. Such feelings have
not unfrequently led to terrible tragedies ; and the safety of the patient and his
family alike demanded immediate seclusion, which I did not hesitate to advise.
" Two years ago a patient was confided to my care who had not partaken of
food for more than a week, because, as he alleged, his throat was completely
closed, and it was impossible to swallow the least morsel. This was the only
evidence of insanity ; otherwise he conversed with reason, was sensible of and
lamented his unfortunate condition; but no persuasion of his family and friends
could induce him to make the effort that would have demonstrated the falsity
of his opinion, if it did not dissipate his hallucination. When he came into my
hands I lost no time, but, having ascertained by a careful exploration that no
obstacle to deglutition existed, and that there was nothing in the condition of
the digestive organs to forbid food, I took prompt measures to convince him
that the channel was not wholly closed. But he yielded this delusion only for
another. He declared that he was only mistaken as to the point of obstruc-
tion?that it would be worse than folly to eat when the lower bowel was
completely closed, and nothing could pass from him. A dose of oil, indicated
by the condition of the bowels, drove him from this last refuge. Lingering
FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE. 269
faintly, and becoming more or less apparent at times, the delusion ultimately
disappeared, and the patient returned to his family in good health.
" Others have supposed that life had ended with them, and reasoning cor.
rectly from false premises, they refused to eat, as dead people have never been
known to indulge in that sort of luxury. Others have rejected all sustenance,
because they laboured under the delusion that immortality had been conferred
upon them, and that consequently they had no need for the gross food on which
poor mortals subsist. Some are deterred from eating by illusions of the
senses. Their food seems to bristle with pins or needles, or they fancy that
it is mere filth that is tendered them for food, or it may be that they are con-
vinced that an effort is made to induce them to partake of human flesh or of
the flesh of their own children. In all these cases the sense of sight is per-
verted, and the brain is not in a condition to correct the false sensation.
"In many cases food is deliberately and pertinaciously refused with.a view
to terminate life, together with all the real or fancied ills to which the poor
victim is subjected. It is fortunate, however, that this resolution is much more
frequently adopted than persevered in; yet some of the most troublesome and
protracted cases are of this description. Nothing can be more astonishing than
the strength of will and self-control exhibited by some who have thus sought
to destroy themselves. The most wonderful feature is that one, who has de-
termined to quit a life of misery voluntarily, should select the most painful and
protracted of all modes of committing suicide. Take, for example, certain
cases where the subjects have persevered to the consummation of their pur-
poses, and, during the terrible and protracted agony, have coolly noted their
sensations from day to day, until the failing strength could no longer wield the
Een. I need not say how difficult is the task of bending this iron will, or of
ringing such an one to the abandonment of a purpose so firmly fixed. Yet this
has been accomplished, as I shall have occasion to say presently, by very simple
means.
" There is another description of cases met with by the general practitioner,
but which do not ordinarily fall under the observation of the members of our
speciality until they have so far progressed as to have ceased to be wholly men-
tal?the digestive organs having become involved, and appearing then to be
principally at fault. I allude to those cases in which a morbid desire for no-
toriety leads to protracted abstinence from food, in spite of the pangs of hunger,
until finally all sustenance is refused. I have never witnessed a case of this
kind except in females predisposed to hysteria. These cases are remarkable
because they are almost peculiar to well-educated, sensible people, belonging
to the higher walks of society, and on any other subject would scorn to de-
ceive or prevaricate, and who, in the language of Dr. Seymour, have nothing
' to gain by pity, except that commiseration, attention, and astonishment,
which excite and occupy the mind.' This is another phase of _ that terrible
malady, hysteria, which so often incites its high-born and accomplished victims
to most curious attempts at imposition on those around them. But this desire
to excite the astonishment of the world by abstinence from food is not more
wonderful than the numerous instances on record where sand and pebbles have
been introduced into the urethra and passed with the urine as products of the
bladder; or the cases of inordinate vomiting sustained for long periods of
time by swallowing secretly nauseous substances, while the physician was
anxiously labouring to arrest the progress of what he supposed to be a grave
form of disease. The intense anxiety of a loving father, the deep, indescrib-
able agony of a devoted mother, the pallid cheeks and fast-falling tears of all
who surround the couch, have no other effect on these subjects than that of
incentives to carry the gross imposition to extreme lengths. Notoriety is the
object?the poor gratification of being pitied and talked of as suffering in a
manner and to an extent which no other mortal ever endured, is the paltry
NO. XVIII.?NEW SERIES. T <
270 FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE.
reward that lures the victim on to ruin and the grave. And where shall we
seek a solution of the problem involved in these cases, save in the morbid con-
dition of the brain; and if this is their source, in what light are we to view these
perverted actions but as evidences of insanity ? I am one of those who believe
that the poet availed himself of the licence of his tribe when he wrote:?
' A rose by any other name would smell as sweet.'
I think there is a great deal in a name, and especially where disease is con-
cerned. I am sure I have known persons to die who might have survived if
their malady had been correctly named, and I am pretty certain that 1 have
seen some die in the bloom of youtli who might have lived to a green old age,
if the practitioner had had the discernment to perceive, and the moral courage
to pronounce the true name in such cases as are the subjects of this paragraph
before it was too late to rescue the infatuated one from the grave
'? I presume every gentleman present has met with cases among those confided
to his care where food was refused for some time, for the obvious purpose of
effecting some particular end, or in revenge for some fancied wrong. With
such subjects there exists neither hallucination, illusion, perversion of taste,
nor derangement of the digestive organs. They are deliberate attempts to
extort some privilege or favour which it may not be thought proper to grant
at the time, or mere petty efforts to annoy those having them in charge. The
device may have been suggested to the patient by witnessing the anxiety of
the physician, in regard to some real case of sitomania, in which he was evi-
dently ready to allow any privilege or favour that promised to effect a com-
pliance with his wishes. For this, among other reasons, the observation of
other patients should be always avoided when it becomes necessary to resort
to forced alimentation."?(.American Journal of Insanity, July, 1859.)
4. On the Criminal Responsibility of Hysterical Individuals. By
Dr. Leguand du Saulle.
Yery recently the question lias been raised in France of the criminal
responsibility of persons subject to attacks of hysteria. A girl had
been guilty of child-stealing, in order to impose upon a former lover
the belief that she had been pregnant by him. In her defence it was
pleaded that her moral liberty had been weakened from her being a
subject of hysteria, and on this ground she was acquitted. Dr. Le-
grand du Saulle discusses and disputes the legitimacy of this decision.
He asks, Does hysteria fetter the moral liberty ? Does an affection
which has its source in a particular sensibility of the nervous system,
and not in mental disease, exclude culpability, and transform a crime
into a simple fault (delit) F To these questions lie answers as follows :?
" It is evident that hysteria may well shake a little the edifice of our facul-
ties, properly so called; but in order that no one may consider this an equivocal
expression, we ought in the first place to define what we understand by facul-
ties, and to show what is the order of faculties, the exercise of which is liable
to be disturbed by the maladv in question. "VVell, then, looking at man from
the physiological and psychical points of view, we see that he is the subject of
two orders of faculties?the affective faculties and the intellectual faculties.
To the affective faculties belong the phenomena which express a love, a pro-
pensity, for certain things, and a hatred, a repulsion, for certain others. _ To
surrender oneself to the affective faculties, being otherwise of sound mind, is to
defer to the impulses of the passions; it is to subordinate the actions of life
willingly and knowingly to the satisfaction of the desires.
FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE. 271
" To the intellectual faculties appertains the gift of enlightening the determi-
nations of the will, and making apparent the conformity or disparity of our
actions with the precepts of morality. By the aid of j udgment, based on ob-
servation and experience, they discover also the consequences of each action.
"From a consideration of the phenomena of hysteria, it may be concluded
that this affection might forcibly re-act upon the affective faculties, and in the
end might conduce to their injury, but that the intellectual faculties would
ordinarily remain intact, the reason assisting in the ruin of the heart, but sur-
viving it.
" The first degree of affective disorder results from the passions, the second
from insanity. The passions alone being in question in the consideration of
hysteria, and the affectivity being only obliterated iu the first degree by this
malady, we need not occupy ourselves with insanity, to which hysteria only
leads in prodigiously rare exceptions.
" But if the passions leave to the law full liberty of action in the matter of
repression, it is not the less true that they are a very frequent cause of exte-
nuated responsibility, and in certain cases familiar to all, of absolute exonera-
tion from all penalty?as, for example, in the case of the murder of a wife found
in flagrant adultery in the conjugal dwelling; or again, where it concerns the
crime of castration immediately provoked by a violent outrage upon modesty.
" As no one could promise for himself that at any given moment he would
have power to master one of those impetuous motions of the mind under the
instantaneous influence of which an action is committed, justice, before apply-
ing the rigour of the law, is accustomed to inquire whether at the moment of
action there was not a partial eclipse of reason, and if such be the case, she
allows the accused the benefit of extenuating circumstances. Tlie culpability
is lessened, and the punishment also.
" According to the intensity of the hysteria, and the more or less marked
perversion, concomitant or consecutive, of the affective faculties, there ought,
we think, to be responsibility or extenuated responsibility, but never, or almost
never, should total irresponsibility be allowed for this cause."
From these considerations it follows:?That in hysteria the affec-
tive faculties are disordered in various degrees, but the intellect almost
always remains intact. That an hysterical condition of weak or even
medium intensity, interfering in no way with the perception of the
quality of actions committed, it ought not to constitute a title to
the indulgence of a tribunal. That hysteria, raised to a high pitch of
intensity, carries with it extenuation of responsibility, and consequently
of penalty.?(Annates Medico-Psi/chologiq^ues, Jan. 1860.)
5. On the Mental State in Chorea. By Dr. Marce.
The moral and intellectual faculties are very commonly disordered in
cases of chorea. In a given number of instances, two-thirds at least
will manifest, in a more or less prominent manner, indications of this
psychical disturbance. As to the immunity which is observed in the re-
maining third, it cannot be explained either by the age or the sex of
the subjects, or by the extent or intensity of the convulsive movements.
Four morbid elements, sometimes isolated, more often associated one
with another, ought to be studied in the mental state of patients suf-
fering from chorea:?
' - (1) Disorders of the moral sensibility, consisting in a notable change
272 FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE.
of the character, which becomes bizarre and irritable; in an unaccus-
tomed tendency to gaiety or to sadness, especially the latter.
(2) Disorder of the understanding, characterized by weakness of
memory, and great mobility in the ideas and impossibility of fixing
the attention.
(3) Hallucinations, phenomena which until now have never been
noted in chorea. These hallucinations supervene in the evening, in
the state intermediate between sleeping and waking, more rarely in
the morning when awaking, and sometimes whilst dreaming. Often
they are limited to the sense of sight, but in rare cases they affect the
general sensibility and even the sense of hearing. They are met with
in purely uncomplicated chorea, but their occurrence is much more
frequent whenever the affection is associated with hysterical symptoms.
If, in the majority of cases, these hallucinations constitute a symptom
without gravity, they may, under certain exceptional circumstances,
induce excitement and delirium.
(4) Finally, chorea may, at its commencement, or during its course,
be complicated with maniacal delirium. This gives rise to a very
grave state, which in more than half the cases has a fatal termination
in the midst of formidable ataxic accidents; and even in the favourable
cases, it often induces sundry disordered states of the intellect of vari-
able duration. Inhalations of chloroform, prolonged baths, and anti-
spasmodics are the therapeutic means which have proved most service-
able in the treatment of this delirium, which, in the majority of cases,
is to be regarded as a purely nervous affection.?(Annales Medico-
Psycliologiques, Jan. 1860.)
6. On Consecutive Cerebral JRamollissement. By Dr. Adolphe
Gubler.
Dr. A. "Waller has shown that if the anterior root of a spinal nerve
be divided, the nerve tubes towards the peripheral extremity of the
nerve quickly become modified in structure, whilst the portion of the
nerve-trunk remaining attached to the spinal column retains its nor-
mal character. But if the posterior root of the nerve be divided,
between the ganglion and the cord, it is, on the contrary, the central
portion of the nerve which undergoes a change of structure, whilst the
peripheral remains unaltered. Dr. Gubler thinks that this difference in
results may be explained by the inverse nature of the two nerve cur-
rents, centrifugal in the first case, centripetal in the second: the per-
manence of the current, that is to say of the function, maintaining
integrity of structure, and the cessation of the current or function
inducing quickly alteration of structure in the diseased organ. Thus
he conceives that we see constantly verified a general law of physio-
logy, to wit, that the organ is made for the function. Whatever the
explanation may be, the experimental facts demonstrated by Dr.
"Waller exist, and Dr. Gubler believes that traumatic or spontaneous
lesions, which occasion an organic breach of continuity in the nerves
and nervous centres, will bring about structural results and conse-
quences, similar to those observed on experimental division of nerve-
cords.
FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE. 273
In illustration he relates a fatal case of illness marked by symptoms
of cerebral ramollissement, unilateral hemiplegia, with muscular ri-
gidity, and abolition of speech. The autopsy showed plastic infiltra-
tion with inflammatory softening of a great portion of the medullary
substance of the left hemisphere ; and softening of different parts of
this hemisphere situated between the first lesion and the spinal cord,
and particularly of the inferior portion of the left cerebral peduncle.
The pathological changes were, he conceives, to be assigned to two
orders of facts, the one active, the other purely passive. The plastic
infiltration of the left hemisphere was evidently of an inflammatory
character, and had doubtless marked the outset of the affection, giving
rise to symptoms of softening with irritation which had been observed
four months before the fatal termination. On the contrary, the soft-
ening of those portions of the encephalon situated between the centre
of the left hemisphere, the seat of the inflammatory change, and the
periphery of the body, Dr. Gubler regards as a phenomenon com-
parable to that alteration of the peripheral portion of a nerve, which
follows a section of its anterior root in the vicinity of the cord. If
we note the seat of the peduncular softening, the inferior portion of
the peduncle, we find that it is precisely this locality in which, accord-
ing to all anatomists, are found the prolongations of the anterior
pyramids, in other terms, of the motor bundles which are about to be
distributed to the members. This would follow from what we have
premised, these lesions being regarded as peripheral ones in relation
to the primitive centre of the cerebral affection. Another circumstance
to be noted was, that the softened parts below the region of the he-
misphere which was inflamed chronically and infiltrated with plasma,
did not present any signs of exaggerated vascular action, any exuda-
tion, and nothing which indicated active morbid action : there was seen
simply a breaking down of structure, and an accumulation of fatty glo-
bules, coming no doubt from the axis cylinder of nerve tubes in pro-
cess of destruction. The softened and nearly deliquescent bed of the left
cerebral peduncle seemed to be about to undergo a melting like the
putrefaction of a dead foetus in the uterus, or of a sphacelated organ.
Dr. Gubler concludes, therefore, that there was in this case a primi-
tive lesion due to active changes of an inflammatory nature, and a
consecutive and passive lesion, depending upon the interruption of the
nervous efflux in the^ bundles of motor nerves. The same thing, he
thinks, may have place in all cases of cerebral affections, and it is im-
portant to bear this probability in mind.
- Lallemand relates (Letter II., obs. 3, ? 4) a very extraordinary fact,
which may be looked upon as an example of secondary lesion, ascendant
or centripetal. A soldier suffered from a traumatic aneurism of the
right axillary artery. The vessel was tied, but unfortunately the
the brachial plexus was included in the ligatures. The operation was
immediately succeeded by excruciating pain in the neck, which often
recurred during the following days. To this pain were subsequently
joined cerebral phenomena, convulsions, and sinking. Death occurred,
and at the autopsy the posterior extremity of the left hemisphere was
found softened and greenish, these changes extending to the corre-
274 FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE.
sponding lateral ventricle. The softening had proceeded even to
diffluence, and in the centre there was more than a spoonful of a thick
greenish liquid, which Lallemand considered to be pus.
Dr. Gubler asks, by what mechanism this profound alteration of the
left cerebral hemisphere was produced, which arose from and depended
upon the nerves of the right brachial plexus? Was it caused by a
transmission of irritation, a propagation of inflammation, or a suppres-
sion of function ? If it were certain that the ultimate cerebral changes
were purulent, it would be requisite to have recourse to the first of
these hypotheses, and the probability would be in favour of the trans-
mission of irritation, with the creation at the spot of an inflammatory
change determined by nervous excitation; but the greenish tint of a
ramollissement does not necessarily imply the presence of an infiltrated
purulent liquid, certain cerebral gangrenes independent of all inflam-
matory action having shown a like tint. A doubt then is permissible,
and the idea of the case being one of ramollissevient atrophique is not
improbable. Dr. Gubler thinks, also, that other cases are on record
which support his views. For example, M. Charcot has published a
case of atrophy of a cerebral hemisphere, coinciding with atrophy of
the spinal cord on the opposite side; and M. Luys has communicated
to the Society of Biology the result of his researches upon a case
of alteration of certain nerves of the members, as the sequel of an
attack of hemiplegia of cerebral origin.
Dr. Gubler terminates his observations by the_ following conclu-
sions :?
1. It is necessary to distinguish, in affections of the nervous system,
two classes of lesions : the one promordial and essentially variable ; the
other secondary, or consecutive.
2. The consecutive alterations are sometimes localized around the
protopathic lesions, sometimes transmitted to a distance. The first,
long known, are occasioned by eliminating or irritating inflammation,
and consist in circumferential softenings, ventricular or sub-arachnoid
effusions, resorption of tissues, formations of cysts, &c.
3 The secondary lesions, propagated to a distance, and newly sub-
mitted to observation, appear to be of two kinds?active and passive.
4. Those resembling the retrograde transformations undergone by
tumours which have ceased their evolutions, or by a foetus which has
died in the uterus, ought to be considered as the result of an abolished
or enfeebled nutrition ; in a word, of atrophy. And as these changes
are characterized by a diminution of cohesion of the nervous substance,
extending even to diffluence, it will be convenient to apply to tlieni
the denomination atrophic softening?ramollissement atrophique.
5. This atrophy appears to be linked to the suppression of the func-
tions of the part which is the seat of it; consequently, a protopathic
lesion being given, there will be secondary passive ramollissement in
two directions; on the one hand, between the primitive lesion and the
central parts, affecting the bundles devoted to feeling; on the other,
between the same lesion and the periphery, affecting the conductors of
movement.
. C. Thus the softened tracks in the one and the other direction,
FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE. 275
studied by attentive observers, will serve to fix the respective situation
and position of the sensitive and motor fibres in the cords, as well as
in the nervous centres. Here still pathology will furnish light to ana-
tomy and physiology.
7. Clinical observation has not yet given us any information upon
the particular symptoms of secondary atrophic ramollissements; but
we can foresee that in their progress the phenomena of excitement,
such as muscular rigidity, will cease, provided that the long duration
of the primitive affection has not given place, in the muscles, to changes
of condition which are opposed to the mobility of the parts.?(Archives
Generates de Medecine, July, 1859.)
7. On Interdiction. By M. H. De Castelnau.
M. Castelnau examines the question of interdiction physiologically
and legally, and arrives at conclusions differing very considerably from
those usually entertained on the subject. He considers that the law
of interdiction, although ostensibly instituted for the benefit of the
lunatic and his family, sins egregiously against both the one and the
other, and that it should be removed from civilized legislation. This
law he holds is the means of effecting much injury to the civil and
personal rights and the property of many individuals?injury which is
in no degree compensated by the therapeutical good which is supposed
to be, but which in reality rarely is, obtained from having recourse to
interdiction. We shall not follow M. Castelnau in his arguments, but
solelv confine ourselves to one or two points which may serve to indi-
cate "his method of thinking.
M. Castelnau thinks that interdiction is rather unfavourable than
favourable to the interests of a family, these being rightly understood.
"The bonds," he says, "which unite all its members constitute the essence
even of a family; the more these bonds are straitened, the more solid is the
foundation which a family gives to social order. All law ought, therefore, to
have for object to draw tighter these bonds in a measure compatible with
liberty; and interdiction, so far from cementing these bonds, is in effect a
powerful solvent. Before being pronounced, it places the family in opposition,
if it be in enmity with the pretended lunatic, and we can certainly predict that,
if the least resistance be exhibited on his part to the first steps, all feeling of
affection, or even of mutual kindness between him and his family, is irreco-
verably destroyed. , .
" The first effect of the measure is to place those who demand interdiction in
one of those situations which the immortal melancholic of Geneva said that we
should apply ourselves to avoid ; which, indeed, place our duties in opposition
to our interests, and which show us our welfare in the ills of others. 'In
such situations,' he said, ' whatever be our virtue, it will decline sooner or
later without our being aware of it, and we shall become unjust and wicked in
act, without having ceased to bejust and good in soul.' Observation shows
that in the case under consideration, this happens too often.'
M. Castelnau conceives also that the law in prohibiting the mar-
riage of lunatics has exceeded its just bounds. He thinks, moreover,
that?
" Medicine has equally lost sight of important truths of physiology, to wit,
276 FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE.
that the natural appetites never lose their rights, and that is that which con-
cerns the sexual functions; monogamous marriage is not solely the best social
condition to accomplish them, but also the most salutary. To interdict, there-
fore, marriage to all insane, is then to neglect the rules of hygiene, to injure
the interests of the family that they wish to serve, and to pay a legal tribute to
immorality."
M. Castelnau terminates his remarks by several considerations upon
the rights and interests of society in their relations with the rights and
interests of lunatics.
" The rights of society upon the individual may be reviewed in a word. Every
citizen has a right to live free, who does not interfere with the liberty of an-
other. He who cannot effect his good without compromising the liberty and
security of his fellows, it is evident that society ought to have the right of
taking against him all necessary measures to shield itself; but these measures
have not and ought not to have anything in common with interdiction. More-
over, society cannot punish on suspicion of a presumed danger; it is necessary
that the danger be manifest. Science often assumes the pretext of fore-seeing,
and sometimes justifies this, sometimes'not; to authorize preventive measures,
it is requisite that science should never deceive itself; still it is probable that
many excellent persons recoil before the idea of inflicting a punishment for a
fault which is not yet committed.
" This day the law suffers to wander freely in our cities relapsed criminals;
it is demonstrated by experience that the majority of them, if not all, renew
their criminal attempts against the person or against property, but the law re-
spects their liberty until the committal of the act which can be most surely
foreseen. How then can society be more rigorous with those who are
thought to have lost their reason, than with those that they regard as acting in
the plenitude of their freewill ? Not only is it repugnant to the notion o
equity to punish for presupposed facts, but true justice, that is to say, enlight-
ened justice, would have it that society used its rights with moderation for
accomplished facts, and that it should not show itself eager to rank among
punishable actions perfectly innocent extravagances, as too often happens vix-a-
vis of lunatics."
M. Castelnau's opinions will at least rank among the curiosities of
psychological literature.?(Brown-Seguarcl's Journal de Physioloqie
October, 1859.)
