A Medical Psychologist of the Seventeenth Centully
===================================================

Art. II^ We wish to introduce to our readers a worthy of the seventeenth
century. John Bulwer, to wit. He does not take rank with
the great ones of his day, and yet he well deserves to be had in
remembrance. He would claim this of us from his writings
THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. 295
alone ; first, on account of their intrinsic interest, and, secondly,
from the illustration they afford of the early effects of Bacon's
method and teachings. But a higher claim may be advanced,
inasmuch as Bulwer was the first Englishman who systematically
gave himself up to the search for a scheme by which the moral
and intellectual cultivation of deaf-mutes might be effected.
Of himself we know little or nothing, except what is derived
from his works, and we cannot even say whether these, dated
from 1G44 to 1 653, were published in the prime or the
decline of his life. He was a physician, and the son of a physician, and he constituted a portion of the better mental soil which
existed at that period, of which Macaulay has thus written:?
" While the lighter literature of England .... was becoming a nuisance and a national disgrace, the English genius was effecting in science
a revolution which will, to the end of time, be reckoned among the
highest achievements of the human intellect. Bacon had sown the
good seed in a sluggish soil and an ungenial season. He had not expected an early crop, and his last testament had solemnly bequeathed
his fame to the next age. During a whole generation his philosophy
had, amidst tumults, wars, and proscriptions, been slowly ripening in.
a few well-constituted minds. While factions were struggling for
dominion over each other, a small body of sages had turned away with
benevolent disdain from the conflict, and had devoted themselves to
the nobler work of extending the dominion of man over matter. As
soon as tranquillity was restored, these teachers easily found attentive
audiences. For the discipline through which the nation had passed
had brought the public mind to a temper well fitted for the reception
of the Verulamian doctrine."*
Among the small body of sages thus referred to, Bulwer
deserves to hold a note-worthy place. True, his works abound
with those credulous eccentricities which too frequently disfigure
the writings of his day on experimental philosophy (then but
merely dawning) and which were made the butt of Butler's
bitter satire. True, that Bulwer is, perhaps, best known at the
present time, among bookworms, by the curious and wonderful
recitals which are found in his last and most popular work; yet
notwithstanding these things, we think it may be shown that his
works form a happy illustration of the early ripening of Bacon's
method, and that thus they may be regarded as an apt, if an
odd comment upon the sentences we have just quoted from
Macaulay. Further, Bulwer's writings have a special interest for
us, because they contain an early attempt deliberately to solve
several questions of great psychological interest, and this in a
manner from which we may even yet learn a lesson.
We shall, as far as is consistent with the space at our disposal,
* " History of England from the Accession of James II.," vol I c iii
x 2
296 A MEDICAL PSYCHOLOGIST OF
let Buhver tell Lis own story. His works are now very rare,*
and but few persons are familiar with them. Moreover Chaucer
instructs us that?
" Who so shall telle a tale after a man,
He most reherse, as neighe as ever he can,
Everich word, if it be in his charge,
All speke he never so rudely and so large;
Or else he must tellen his tale untrewe
Or feinen thinges, or finden wordes newe."
To adopt the latter expedient would be to offer our readers an
artificial for a real flower, to set before them mock-turtle when
real was in the larder.
Bulwer's works are five in number, each being complete in
itself, but each forming a portion of a wide scheme of observation
and research. The two earliest published works?Chirologia and
Chironomia?are found under the same cover, and with the following
common title-page, which well expresses the nature of the books:?
" Chirologia : or the natural language of the Hand ! Composed of
the Speaking Motions and Discoursing Gestures thereof. Whereunto is
added Chironomia : or the Art of Manijall Biietoricke. Consisting
of the Natural Expressions, digested by Art in the Hand, as the
chiefest Instrument of Eloquence, by Historical Manifesto's,
exemplified out of the Authentique Begisters of Common Life and
Civil Conversation. With Types or Ciiyrograms : A long-wished
for illustration of this Argument. By J. B. Gent. Philochirosophus.
?Manus metnbrum hominis loquacissimum. London. Printed by
Tho. Harper, and are to be sold by Henry Twyford at his shop in
Eleet-street. 1644."
The volume is dedicated by Bulwer to " his Heroique Friend
Edward Goldsmith of Graies-Inne, Esqr.," and in the dedicatory
epistle he writes :?
"?Affecting no Dedication that rises above the levell of Friendship,
having intentionally consecrated all the issues of my recesse and leisure to certain select Friends ; This book by prescription and signiority of acquaintance as by a Prerogative, and by a reciprocation of love
for your affection to it, falls to your Tuition. I confess some other of
my digested thoughts struggled for precedencie, claiming by the
analogie of Natures usuall course, and the head would have had the
priviledge of primogeniture. But it fell out in the contention somewhat like as in the case of Tamar's twins, where Zarah put forth his
Hand, and the midwife said, This is come out first. However this
Chirosophie or first fruits of my Hand be accepted abroad, having put
forth my Hight Hand in signe of amity to you, and for performance
of promise, there remaines nothing (most noble Chirophilus) but
that you take it between Yours in token of warranty and protection,
as the tender offspring of one who is Your affectionate Friend."
* There is a complete series of liis works in the library of the British Museum.
THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. 297
The preface of the book is addressed?" To the Candid and
Ingenious Reader: This Copy of ray Idea; or the Hint, Scope,
and general Projection?which are thus quaintly set forth :?
" The consideration in generall, and at large of humane Nature, that
great Light of Learning hath adjudged worthy to be emancipate and
made a knowledge of it selfe. (Franc. L. Verulam. Viscount St.
Albans, de Augmen. Scient. I. 4.) In which continent of humanity
hee hath noted (as a maine deficiencie) one Province not to have been
visited, and that is Gesture. Aristotle (saith he) ingeniose et solerter,
corporis fabricam, dum quiescit, tractavit, eandem in noctis, nimirum
gestus corporis, omisit, that is, he hath very ingeniously and diligently
handled thzfactures of the Body, which are no less comprehensible by
art, and of great use and advantage, as being no small part of civill
prudence. For the lineaments of the body doe disclose the disposition
and inclination of the minde in generall; but the motions doe not only
so, but doe further disclose the present humour and state of the minde
and will, for as the tongue speaketh to the eare, so Gesture speaketh to
the eye, and therefore a number of such persons whose eyes doe dwell
upon the faces and fashions of men, do well know the advantage of
this observation, as being most part of their ability ; neither can it
bee denied but that it is a great discoverer of dissimulation, and great
direction in businesse. For, after one manner almost we clappe our hands
in joy, wring them in sorrow, advance them in prayer and admiration ;
shake our head in disdaine, wrinkle our forehead in dislike, crispe our
nose in anger, blush in shame, and so for the most part of the most
subtile motions. Taking (therefore) from hence my Hint, I shall
attempt to advance in the scrutinie and march after the scattered
glances, and touches of Antiquity, tracing them through most classical
Authors, with intent to reduce them into one continued and intire
History, propounding this form to myself, to handle Gesture, as the
only speech and generall language of Humane Nature. For ballast to
the subject, and to make the matter in hand more sollid and substantive,
I shall annex consultations with Nature, affording a glosse of their
causes ; and for the further embellishing thereof, I shall inrich most
points of expression with examples both of Sacred and profane Authority,
more especially drawnefrom Poets and Historians, the only great Doctors
in this point of Humane literature ; wherein, by the way, I shall lay
claime to all metaphors, proverbiall translations or usurpations, and all
kinde of symbolicall Elegancies taken and borrowed from Gestures of
the Body, with the depredations the subtiler Arts of Speech have made
upon them for the advancement and exaltation of their particular
inventions and designes. All these (together with the civill rites, and
ceremonies customes and fashions of divers Nations in their nationall
expressions by Gesture, with the personall properties and genuine
habits of particular men) being but as so many severall lines that
meet in an angle, and touch in this point; I intend to reduce and
bring home to their fountaine and common parent the Body of man.
Two" Amphitheaters there are in the Body, whereon most of these
patheticall subtilties are exhibited by Nature, in way of discovery or
impression, proceeding either from the effect of sufferance, or the
298 A MEDICAL PSYCHOLOGIST OF
voluntary motions of the Minde, which effect those impressions on the
parts which wee call the Speaking Motions, or Discovering Gestures,
and naturall language of the body, to wit, the Hand and the Head ; in
answer whereof, I intend two receptacles of the observations, falling
within the compasse of their particular Districts, under the generall
Titles of Chirologia and Cephalalorjia?The naturall language of the
Hand, and, The naturall language of the Head; and these two comprise the best part of the expressions of humane Nature. Chironomia,
or the Rule of Hand is adjoyned as the perfection and sublimation of
Chirologie, as Cephalelonomia, or the Rule of the Head, is to appear
with Cephalelogia, as being the gratification of all Cephalicall expressions, according to the Lawes of Givill Prudence. The personall or
genuine expressions fall in with these. What I finde remarkable in
the naturall expressions of the other parts, I shall refer to a generall
Rendevouze, wherein I shall take a muster of the Postures and Gestures of the body in generall. All that I shall have to say more to
the Hand in point of Gestures, is under the title of Chirethnicologia,
or the Nationall expression of the Hand. This I account my left
Hand. By this Clavis (I suppose) the Intellectual Reader will see that
the work will be supplementall to Learning, and not of supererogation,
New, and in regard of the generality of the Designe, never attempted
by any, affording profitable hints to such ingenious spirits, who desire
to understand the mysterious properties of so admirable and important
a piece of themselves."
The psychical aspects of gesture and movement constitute
then the theme which Bulwer discusses in the Chirologia and
Chironomia, and it is interesting to observe that this theme was
suggested to him by a passage in Bacon's Be augmentis Scientiaruin (first published in 1G05).
In the Chirologia Bulwer works out a complete alphabetical
and phraseological system of Manual expression, and shows the
practicability of its application to several useful purposes.
The hand he holds is by no means a bad substitute for the
tongue, for from the use made of gestures in carrying on trade
with foreign nations, whose language is hut imperfectly or not at
all understood,??
" 'Tis apparent, that there is no native law, or absolute necessity,
that those thoughts which arise in our pregnant minde, must by
mediation of our Tongue flow out in vocall extreame of words, unto
which purpose we must attend the leisure of that indtased instrument
of speech. Since whatsoever is perceptible unto sense, and capable of
a due and fitting difference, hath a natural competency to expresse
the motives and affections of the minde, in whose labours, the Hand,
which is a ready midwife, takes oftentimes the thoughts from the forestalled Tongue making a more quicke dispatch by gesture; so when
the fancy hath once wrought upon the Hand, our conceptions are display'd and utter'd in the very movement of a thought. For the
gesture of the Hand many times gives a hint of our intention, and
speakes out a good part of our meaning, before our words, which
THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. 299
accompany or follow it, can put themselves into a vocal posture to be
understood. And as in the report of a Piece, the eye being the
nimbler sense discernes the discharge before any intelligence by conduct
of the vocall wave arrive at the eare ; although the flash and report
are twins born at the instant of the Pieces going oif, so although
Speech and Gesture are conceived together in the minde, yet the Hand
first appearing in the delivery, anticipates the Tongue, in so much as
many times the Tongue perceiving herself forestall'd, spares itself a
labour, to prevent a needlesse tautologie. And if words ensue upon
the gesture, their addition serves but as a comment for the fuller
explication of the manuall Text of utterance ; and implyes nothing over
and above but a erenerall devoyre of the minde to be perfectly understood." (p. 4.)
If the details of Bulwer's system of manual expression are now
regarded as somewhat cumbrous, yet it must be granted that they
display a rare ingenuity and quick apprehension. The subjects
of both the Chirologia and Chironomia are illustrated with neatly
executed plates; and both works are preceded by curious allegorical
frontispieces.
The laudatory verses which preface the Chirologia, manifest in
a very curious manner the influence which Bacon's writings were,
at the time when the work was published, beginning to exercise
over literary men. One gentleman, tendering his rhythmical
homage to Bulwer, writes :?
" Since the Great Instauration of the Arts
By Verulamian Socrates, whose parts
Advanced Learning to a perfect state,
Thou art the first that from his hints must date,
For arts bemoan'd defects a new supply,
(The hardest Province in Humanitie).
Which doth in thy Projections ample spheare,
Another Novum Organum appeare.
And as we much unto Thy Hand doe owe
For Augmentation, some as farre shall goe
Another way, to shew their learned might,
While Science, Crescent-like, extends her light."
Another admirer writes:?
"Let Bacon's soule sleep sweet: the time is come
That Gesture shall no longer now be dumbe ;
And Nature's silent motions shall advance
Above the Yocall Key of utterance :
There every Digit dictates, and doth reach
Unto our sense a mouth-excelling speech.
Arts Perfeetor ! what Rabell did denie
To Lips and Eare, t' hast given the Hand and Eye;
Hast reconciled the world, and its defect
Supply'd by one unmeaning Dialect."
A third, most attracted by the immediate practical applications
of Bulwer's ideas, exclaims ;?
300 A MEDICAL PSYCHOLOGIST OF
" All that are deafe and dumbe may here recruite
Their language, and then blesse thee for the mute
Enlargement of thy Alphabets, whose briefe
Expresses gave their Minds a free reliefe.
And of this silent speech, Thy Hand doth shew .
More to the world than ere it look'd to know.
He is (that does denie Thy Hand this right)
A Stoique and an Areopogite."
The title-page of the Chironomia runs as follows :?
" Chironomia : or the Art of Manual Rhetorique, with the Canons,
Lawes, Rites, Ordinances, and Institutes of Ruetoricians, both
ancient and moderne, touching the artificiall managing of the Hand
in speaking, whereby naturall Gestures of the Ha:nd, are made the
Regulated accessories or faire spoken adjuncts of B-iietoricaee
Utterance. With Types, or Ciiiroorams : A new illustration of this
Argument.?By J. B. Philochirosophus.?Ratio est Manus Intellectus;
Rationis Oratio; Orationis Manus. Seal. London: Printed by Thos.
Harper, and are to be sold by Henry Twyford, at his shop in FleetStreet, 1644."
Although Bulwer simply gives the initials of his name on the
title-pages of both the Chirologia and Chironomia, he signs his
name in full at the termination of the dedicatory epistles contained
in the works. After the publication of these works be became
known as the Chirosopher, a cognomen which he adopted in the
hooks he subsequently printed.
The publication of the Chirologia and Chironomia was
followed, in 1648, by that of the Pliilocophus. The title-page of
this work reads thus :?
" Piiilocopiius : or the Deafe and Dumbe Man's Friend. Exhibiting the Philosophicall verity of that subtile Art, which may enable one
with an observant Fie, to Heare what any man speaks by the moving
of his lips. Upon the same Ground, with the advantage of an Historical
Exemplification, apparently proving, that a man borne Deafe and
Dumbe, may be taught to Ileare the sound of words with his Fie,
and thence learne to speakewith his Tongue.?By I. B. sirnamed the
Chirosopher.?Sic canimus Surdis?London. Printed for Humphrey
Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Church-yard, 1648."
This work is dedicated to " the Bight Worp11 Sir Edward
Gostivicke, of Willington, in the County of Bedford, Baronet;
and M. William Gostivicke, his yongest Brother: and all other
intelligent and ingenious Gentlemen, who as yet can neither
heare nor speake. To be communicated unto them that can, and
have acquaintance or alliance with any whom it may concern."
In the dedicatory epistle Bulwer writes :?
"?What though you cannot expresse your mindes in those verball
contrivances of man's invention ; yet you want not speech, who have
your tvhole body, for a Tongue, having a language more naturall and
significant, which is common to you with us, to wit gesture, the
THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. 301
generall and universalI language of Humane nature, which when we
would have our speech to have life and efficacy wee joyne in commission
with our wordes, and when wee would speak with most state and
gravity, we renounce wordes, and use Nods and other naturall signes
alone
" When coasting along the borders of gesture, and voluntary motion,
I discovered a community among the Senses, and that there was in the
continent of Humanity a Terra incognita of Ocular audition; a
treasure reserved for these times, which had escaped their privy search,
who guided by the illumination of their own endeavours had in sudore
vultus ransackt the bosome of nature, wherein wisdome had hid it
among other Arts and Sciences which have their foundation in Nature,
and neither grow nor increase, but appeare when time and observation unlockt them unto us: Having well scanned this magna naturae,
I found it to be one of the subtlest pieces of Recondit learning, and
that it bordered upon other avenues unto the braine, as Orall and
Dentall Audition, of which we have discovered sufficient ground to raise
a new Art upon, directing how to convey intelligable and articulate
sounds another way to the braine than by the eare or eye ; showing
that a man may heare as well as speake with his mouth. Upon which
and other unlooked-for discoveries, I began in idea, to conceive the
modell of a New Academie, which might be erected in favour of those
who are in your condition, to wit, originally deafe and dumbe."
Tlios. Diconson, Esq., of the Middle Temple, who acts as chief
chorus to Bulwer's writings, has so aptly expressed the object and
tendency of the Philocojilius, in certain laudatory verses, prefixed to the book, that we should err if we did not quote them.
" Rejoice, you Deafe and Dumbe, your Armes extend
T1 embrace th' inventive goodnesse of a Friend !
Who heere intends, for your relief to Found
An Academie, 011 Nature's highest ground:
Wherein He doth strange mysteries unlocke,
How all the Sences have one common Stocke,
Showes how indulgent Nature for each sence
Wanting, allows a double recompence.
How she translates a sence, transplants an Eare
Into the, Eye, and makes the Optiques heare.
Inoculates an Eare with sight; whereby
It shall performe the office of an Eie.
Presents rich odours Tasted, viands Smelt,
And Sound and Light in a strange maner felt.
The sences (Art's new Master-piece) are taught
T' exchange their objects by a new-found thought.
The Deafe and Dumbe get Hearing Eies, which breake
Their Barre of Silence, and thence learne to speake.
Words may be seene or heard: w' are at our choyce
For to give Eare or Eie unto a Voyce.
Where men by their transposed sences gaine,
This Anagramme of Art and Nature's plaine."
Bulwer thus sums up the " Hiuts and Notions" he has ex302 A MEDICAL PSYCHOLOGIST OF
pressed in the Philocophus, which "more directly concerne Deafe
and Dumbe men:"?
" That men born Deafe and Dumbe have a kind of significant speech
and naturall language; and what that is.
" Wherefore it is that Deafe and Dumbe men can expresse themselves so lively by signes.
" That all Deafe and Dumbe men seeme to have an earnest desire to
unfold their lips to speak, as if they accounted their Dumbness their
greatness unhappiness.
" That a man born Deafe and Dumbe may be taught to heare sounds
or ivorcls with his eyes.
[" That articulate speech doth not necessarily assist the audible
sound of the voyce, but may consist without it, and so consequently
be seen as well as heard.?c. xiv.]
" The strangenesse of that expression abated and qualified, by
proving a community among the sences, and their mutuall exchanging
of objects.
"And hearing to be nothing else but the due perception of motion."
We now come to the rarest and, in a psychological point of
view, perhaps the most interesting of Bulwer's works, the
Pathomyotomia. In this work we see still more thoroughly
worked out the ideas which had governed Bulwer's previous
writings. Moreover, from it we learn how clearly he apprehended
the importance of these ideas as clues to a wide, and at that time,
almost undisturbed field of research. The title-page of this,
Bulwer's fourth published work, is as follows :?
" Pathomyotomia, or a Dissection of the significative Muscles of
the Affections of the Mind. Being an Essay to a new Method of
observing the most Important movings of the Muscles of the Head,
as they are the nearest and Immediate Organs of the Voluntarie or
Impetuous motions of the Mind. With the Proposall of a New
Nomenclature of the Muscles.?By J. B., Sirnamed the Cliirosopher.
?Augebitur Scientia.?London, Printed by W. W. for Humphrey
Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop at the Princes Armes in St.
Pauls Churchyard. 1649."
The author dedicates this work to "his loving Father, Mr.
Thomas Bulwer," writing (and this dedicatory epistle contains a
curious piece of contemporary medical history),?
" It hath been a laudable Custome with Persons of eminent degree
to descend to honour their Sonnes with directing Books unto them ;
the reciprocation of which affectionate Complement is a duty wellbecomming a Son; moved (therefore) with a certaine Filiall Decency, I
made choice to dedicate this Book unto you in regard the Argument
of it is Provinciall to Physick, wherein your experience hath crowned
your Profession, having ever been Fortunatus in Praxi. You shall
find in it that which I use to call the Clock-work of the Head, or the
Springs and inward Contrivance of Instruments of all our outward
motions, which give motion and regulate the Dyall of the Affections,
THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. 303
which Nature hath placed in the Face of Man ; Being a New light,
and the first Irradiation which ever appeared through the Dissections
of a Corporeall Phylosophy. Could the Times have afforded it, it had
come to your hands illustrated with the Ornamental Demonstrations of
many Figures prepared for it; but indeed the Stationers cautionary
prudence met with an indisposition in me; for I thought that in such
new and unexpected matters too great a splendor might possibly have
dazled. I confess I have met with little encouragement in this
Designe, for all the Physicians and Anatomists that I have hinted it
unto have held it scarce fecible, Doctor Wright Junior onely excepted,
with whom having interchangeably communicated Intellectual Affaires,
He shewing me the hint of his grand undertaking, which was
Anatomia Gomparata, that great Dcfect in Anatomy noted by my L.
Bacon in his book De Aug mentis Scientiarum, in returne whereof I
having first told him of an Atchievement of mine in this Art, which I
called Vox Corporis, or the Moral Anatomy of the Body ; I acquainted
him also with this Essay, whose apprehension I found so well possessed
with the gallantry (as he was pleased to speak) and the possibility
thereof, that he promised me (to testifie his approbation,) he would
commend it in his first publique Lecture of Anatomy in the College ;
a day much expected by those who had took notice of the most eminent
and Divine Impulsions of his Anatomique Genius. But prevented by
his much lamented Death, what entertainment this Essay shall meet
with among the Sect of Corporeal Philosophers, (having bin so infortunately deprived of the advantage of such a Recommendation,) must
be left to the Fate of Books. However, I hope it shall find acceptance
with you, and be received as an evidence of the proofe of that Education you bestowed on me, and of my Duty."
Bulwer next proceeds to unfold " Tlie Scope and Use of the
Essay for some previous satisfaction to the Intelligent Readers.
More especially Physicians and Masters in Anatomia, whose
Candor and Indulgence on this Essay is most properly desired."
This is the cream of the book, and together with the fragments
we have quoted from the Chirologia, Cliironomia, and Philocophus,
will enable our readers to form a tolerably accurate judgment of
Bulwer's habits of thought. He writes :?
" Having resolved to trace the Discoursing Actions of the Head to
their Spring and Principle upon which their outward significations
depend; when 1 had passed the superficial parts, and digged a little
more than skin-deepe into the Minerall of Cephalicall Motion, I came
to the Muscles,' the instruments of voluntary motion ; or the instruments of those motions that are done by an earnest affection, that is,
from an inward principle. The effects of whose moving significantly
appeare in the parts moved; when by an arbitrary motion we freely
reject or embrace things understood (not with our mind only, but with
our mind and body both). Here I made a stand ; and began curiously
to enquire and hunt after all the Anatomists both Ancient and
Moderne that had writ of the Muscles, and the motions of the Head,
as well to satisfie my self as to crave in ayde of them: and having
304 A MEDICAL PSYCHOLOGIST OF
had a view of as many as I could heare of and conveniently procure,
and observed their severall views and methodicall variations no way
answering my expectations; An emergent thought suggested to my
imagination a notable Defect, hitherto undiscerned in that Art which
of late hath attained unto a great perfection, which cast me into an
extasie of admiration at so strange a Pretention, that among the
Conscript Fathers of Anatomy there hath not been any one who,
Data opera, had undertaken a generall survey and Cognomination of
the muscles of the Body, as they are the necessary Instruments of all
those motions of the Mind, which are apparently expressed and made
manifest by the effect of their use and movings in all the parts of the
Body, although more Emphatically, by those operations they have in
the Head and the most remarkable parts thereof. Galen, in that
excellent Commentary, De Motu Musculorum, wherein he went beyond himselfe, and shewed the greatest miracle of his wit, a Book
which all Anatomists kisse with reverence, as containing the Oracles
of Myologie, doth not so much as glance at it, but under the generall
notion of voluntary and arbitrary motion; and in his Anatomicall
Administrations wherein he abundantly prosecutes these motions, and
glories to have found out many which were hid and unknown to the
Physicians that were before his time, and where he teacheth a method
whereby every single motion may be found out; Nor in his Dissection
of Muscles not a word, scarce, pointing to this Intention, not naming
many, but only numerically, not three with an imaginable reference to
any Emphaticall motion of the Mind. And all the Nomenclators
since his time, who have undertaken to play with new names, which
for memory, brevity of speech, and perspicuity of the thing, they
have imposed upon the Muscles, have omitted the due regard proper
to the Spirit and Life of their mentall significations : whereas the
Denomination had been better from the Nature and energeticall property of the Muscle, which should by that Rule have been taken from
the more extant and patheticall representation of those parts they
actuate, and by which they exhibite their Organicall significations.
More strange yet, that no Artists should have made this the Subject
of their Orations, but should have all to this day, either turned their
discourse to the structure onely of the Humane Fabrique, the perfecfections or Symetry of the Body, or the excellency and antiquity of the
Anatomique Art, or the Encomiums of the Antient and Moderne Anatomists : whereas nothing could have set a greater glosse upon the
Art, or have bin more glorious and honourable, than together with
their Dissections, to have enriched their discourse with a relation of
the Essence, Regiment, and proprieties of the Soule, whose well-strung
instrument the Body was; Dr. Floud being the first that in his peroration (when he was Praelector of Anatomy in the College of Physicians in London Anno 1G20) exhibited such a kind of Method, together with an Explanation of his Reason, and an Example thereof;
which Forme he did not magisterially propound unto them, but to
declare that the Subject of an Anatomicall prceludium ought to be the
Internall and spirituall man, which is rather to be dissected with living
words, than any knife how sharpe soever, and so consequently to be
discovered and explained by a style of discourse. The field oi which
THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. 305
subject as it is more ample and spacious than the rest; So the Studious
in Anatomy shall never find it barren, but most fruitfull; So that
every one herein may hit of much variety of invention. If then a
Prologue onely of this nature is held so convenient by so great an
Artist, how much more advantageous and delightful would a discourse
interwoven throughout the Dissection! Finding (therefore) that
neither the great Parents of Ph}'sick, nor their Learned Off-spring
had pathologized the Muscles, and thence bestowed significant names
upon the most remarkable of them ; I resolved to attempt the Designe,
so to take away the blemish which hath fallen upon the Art by the
slovenly and careless Denomination of some of them, and the sixfooted Barbarismes of those Greeke Conjuring names which are fit only
for the bombastical Anatomy of Paracelsus ; wherein I was encouraged
by observing that half a dozen of Muscles named according to our new
intended modell, or the Species of their most significant motion ;* and
seeme to have been stumbled upon by the way of sport, or a llhetoricall Chance-Medley of wit; appeare so wonderfully pleasing to our
moderne and most ingenious Anatomists, that they are still borrowing
from one another those patheticall Apellations, or as Hiolanus calls
them, Elegantissima nomina, as if they were much affected with the
felicity of that Pen from whence they first distilled, qtice omne tulit
punctum, for Elegancy, Memory, Brevity, and Perspicuity. 'Tis true
many have exercised their pens in discourses of the muscles: But an
exact Description of the Discoursing Motions of the Muscles none of
the Great Professors of Anatomy have so much as thought on ;
whereas the facility, utility, and delightsomenesse of such motions
might have invited many ; for, what is more easie than to discerne the
parts manifested to Sense, and the fidelity of an Ocular assurance ?
that are so subject to our touch, that in the semblance of those motions
wrought in the parts by the endeavour of the Muscles, we may not
only see, but as it were feele and touch the very inward motions of the
Mind; if you aslce what delight will hence acrew to the understanding ? What is so delightfull as to know by what kind of movings
those varying motions and expressions of the Head and Face are performed ? What Muscle doth accomplish this or that speaking motion p
To observe the scheme or outward figure of each Affection in the Countenance ? That is the situation of each in its Motion, as it is drawn by
the Muscles, and to read their significations couched in their names ?
So that observing these accidents of the Head and Face, the Types
and representations of the Affections which are accidents of the Mind,
according to the nature of Correlatives, we may find out one by the
other. And though it be but Negative ignorance not to be skilled in
such matters, and so may be thought a needlesse Nicety or overeurious Inquisition to know every Muscle of our Head and Face : Yet
certainly it cannot but be some disparagement to one that pretends to
any ingenuous Education or Reading, to be as a meere Puppet or
Mathematicall motion, and not to understand why, or after what
manner, the Muscles of his Head move in obedience to the command
of his Will; and so to have no better a Head-piece than that, which
counterfeiting the naturall motions of Speech, uttered its mind to
Thomas Aquine, and the learned Frier Bacon. And who I pray you
306 A MEDICAL PSYCHOLOGIST OF
that is well versed in Philosophy, does affect to behold the cold
effects of common Actions, without a Discourse of their Causes and
intrinsicall Agents?the Soule and the Muscles ? Since that is familiar
to Sense, and so by consequence to Beasts,?But this is subjected to the
Intellect, to wit, the Internall Principle of man, wherefore we will
think it a thing worthy to be corrected with the whip of Ignorance, if
any rashly plunge himself into the Muscular Sea of corporal Anatomy,
or of the outward man, without any mention of the Internall man,
since the Soule only is the Opifex of all the movings of the Muscles,
whose invisible Acts are made manifest by their operations in those
parts into which they are inserted. Not that any perfection or exact
knowledge of this nature can be acquired; since the wisedome of the
Creator in the fearefull and wonderfull structure of the Head is not yet
fully found out, although it has been sought after by illustrious men
with much piety and Diligence: and therefore that which is most
probable, and has the countenance of Authority, must passe for truth.
To those also that shall hereafter Physically and Ethically handle the
Doctrine of humane Affections, this may serve as a Mercurius Ethicus,
to give intelligence to all Athenian Pathologists, of the motions of the
Muscles which beare the greatest sway in matter of Affection : whereas
heretofore Pathology hath beene confined, as it were, to Aristotle's
Muscle, to wit that principle of inbred Heate, or ever movable substance of Spirit and blood, which seemes to frame the severall images
of all the affections of the Mind; and has had little or no entercourse
with the Muscles of the Affections ; whereby she has been deprived of
a great- part of this ornament whereof shee is capable. But perchance
the modernes have bin frighted with the difficulty of such Designe, as
supposing such a Muscular Philosophie not fecible or reduceable into an
Art: or else if it ever came into their Heades, they thought it a kind
of impudence after Galen that glorious light of Anatomy, to endeavour any thing in this kind. Yet Galen in his Booke T)e JMotu Musculorum seemes to have given any one a faire occasion of daring, where he
writes, Whereas we have partly found out many things, and partly also
intend diligently to make a thorow search after other things ; and some
other may find out what is wanting. With his leave therefore, I shall
endeavour by a light Essay, to take notice of the figure and signatures
of those Muscles that belong unto the Head, and are the Authors
of the speaking motions thereof, and of the Superficiall parts comprised in it, by the way, raising Allegoricall inferences from them,
and adapting and imposing new names upon them according to their
Physiognomical significations, which shall be as the Keyes of their
important actions. Describing the rising and insertion, together with
the fibres which modify the Determinate actions of each Muscle that I
find, instrumentall, adjutant, or any way concurring to the expedition
of any remarkable gesture of the Head or Face: So ordering th(4
matter, that occasionally, most, if not all the mysteries of voluntary
motion shall be brought in, at least in such a manner, as shall be more
than sufficient to lay a firme foundation to our virgin Philosophie of
Gesture, and to serve my turne for the present occasion. And because
none that hitherto have treated of the moving of the Muscles, have
driven after this Scope of their significations; I shall name the
THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. 307
authors by vvliose light I walke, and upon whose Bowie I clap
the Bias of the Affections, neither my Margin, nor the nature of
an Essay admitting any more criticall formalities of quotation. I am
not ignorant that such daring attempts and undertakings are very
obnoxious to envy, and apt to fall under the censure of Arrogancy and
ostentation, imputations I have no reason to feare, since I arrogate,
not to my selfe by the conduct of my owne light, to have found any
new or great thing to add to the Doctrine of Muscular motion, to
which (to speak the truth) I thinke there cannot much be added:
neither am I so conceited of these animadversions, as to hope they
should be admitted into the schoole of Anatomy, and straightwise be
made Canonical; for, to fit a Novelty of this nature for such an admission, would require a whole College, or rather a nationall Synod of
Anatomists to consult about it; my single Phantsie being not therefore par negotio, I have adventurd far with little strength and lesse
encouragement to recommend the Designe to men of stronger Brains
and publique Spirits. I think I may with modesty suppose, that I
have sprung a new veine, and say that I was enforced to dig my way
through, and out of much Oare and Drosse, to refine what was fit for
m}r purpose before I could come to ransack this Secret and undiscover'd treasury of the Muscles ; or to cast the old metall of their
matter into a new mold, to make it more illustrious by conjoyning it
with the inward motions of the minde, which set a representative shape
and glosse upon the outward motions of those parts which are moved
.by the Muscles. If they are contented to allow me to have bin the
first that by Art endeavoured to linke the Muscles and the Affections
together in a new Parthomyogainia ; or at least to have published the
Banes between Myologus and Pathology, that any Physiologicall
Handfaster that can marry them stronger together, might doe it if he
pleas'd: I aske no more: as for the rest, Veniam pro laude peto.
And if the Scoi'buticJc wits of this Age, who preferre an idle Head
before an active, should bee loath to afford me that, I can easily comfort my selfe with that of Cremutius in Tacitus, Suum Cuique posteritas rependit, nec deerunt, si Damnatio, ingruit, qui mei meminerint."
The excellent and far-reaching philosophy of the preceding
observations of Bulwer must certainly commend itself to our
readers. It is perhaps not too much to say that, neither Lavater
in his great work on Physiognomy, nor Bell in his Anatomy of
Expression, manifested that lofty conception of the subject with
which each dealt, that Bulwer did. With him Physiognomy and
Expression, even when the latter was restricted to its connexion
with the Fine Arts, were the natural offshoots of a wide-extending idea so fertile in its application and results, that the latter
are still far from being exhausted. Doubtless, from the imperfect
state of anatomy in Bulwer's time, he, in elaborating and applying his idea, fell almost as far short of success as Bacon did,
when that great philosopher endeavoured to practise the method
he so admirably taught. Yet, we think, that had an idea as
pregnant and as philosophical as the one which guided Bulwer,
308 A MEDICAL PSYCHOLOGIST OF
influenced Lavater and Bell, when, with pen and pencil, they
sought to give definiteness to our knowledge of the outward
manifestations of the mind, their works would have possessed a
higher and perhaps more abiding interest than they now possess.
The last, most curious, and most generally known of Bulwer's
works is, the Artificial Changling, the title-page of which runs
thus:?
" Anthropometamorphosis; Man Transformed: or the Artiticiall Changling, Historically presented in the mad and cruell
Gallantry, foolish Bravery, ridiculous Beauty, filthy Finesse, and
loathsome Lovelinesse of most Nations, fashioning and altering their
Bodies from the mould intended by Nature. With a Vindication of
the Regular Beauty and Honesty of Nature. And an Appendix of
the Pedigree of the English Gallant. By J. B., Sirnamed the
Chirosopher.?In nova fert animus, mutatas dicere fovinias.?London,
Printed for J. Havdesty, at the Black-spread-Eagle in Duck-Lane,
1650."
This, tbe first edition of the work, is in duodecimo, and contains 263 pages of text, exclusive of prefatory matter and tables
of contents, these not being paged. The book has a folding
frontispiece exhibiting, on the one side, various heads illustrative
of the text; on the other, a portrait of the author. It would
not be advisable to attempt to describe Bulwer's physiognomy
from this counterfeit presentment of him, and it is doubtful even
whether the face which is represented, is that of a man of mid
or in the decline of life.
Another edition of the Anthropometamorphosis was published
in 1653. This is a small quarto work, and tbe title-page
contains, after the words "intended by Nature/' the following
addition :?" With figures of these Transfigurations. To which
artificiall and affected Deformities are added all the Native and
Nationall Monstrosities that have appeared to disfigure the
Humane Fab rick." The authorship and printer of this edition are
thus stated:?" Scripsit J. B. Cognomento Chirosophus, M.D.?
London, Printed by William Hunt, Anno Domini 1653."
The book contains 569 pages, in addition to the introductory
matter and table of contents. The title-page is preceded by a
most singular frontispiece, and the cuts dispersed throughout the
book are very curious, and as roughly executed as curious.
W. T. Turnbull, Esq., of the Record Office, the learned editor of
the lately published Metrical History of Scotland, has in project
a republication of tbe last edition of the Anthropometamorphosis,
with fac-similes of the cuts. If, as we hope, this project should
be carried out by our worthy friend, we can promise our readers
(such of them at least as are bibliographically inclined) a rare
treat.
THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. 309
The Artificial Changling is dedicated to Thos. Diconson, Esq.,
and in the dedicatory epistle Bulwer writes:?
" Friend, the Heroique Disease of writing hath (as you well know)
long seized upon me, this being the Fifth Publique JParoxisme I have
had thereof. It hath been ever the humour of my Genius to put me
upon untrodden pathes, and to make up aggregate Bodies of very
scarce and wide dispersed notions ; which had been more easie for the
Faculty of my weak Body, had I had a signality of spirit to summon
Democriticall Atomes to conglobate into an intellectual Forme; or
that Mercury had been so propitious a Lord of the Ascendant in my
Nativity, as he was Amphion's, and bestowed some Orpharion upon
me, with whose sound I might have attracted notions, and made them
come dancing to the Construction of a Book. What I here present
you with, is an Enditement framed against most nations under the
Sun ; whereby they are arraigned at the Tribunal of Nature, as guilty
of High-treason, in Abasing, Counterfeiting, Defacing, and Clipping
her Coine, instampt with her Image and Superscription on the Body
of Man. ......
" I doubt not you will soone discerne the prepense malice of Satan
in it; tempting mankind to a corporall Apostacy from himself, as if in
an Apish despight of the glory of Man's Creation, that divine consultation, Faciamus hominem, Let us make man according to our Image ;
He would have his Defaciamus hominem, Let us deface man according
to our likeness ; insomuch as that of the Psalmist, I am fearfully and
wonderfully made, might be ironically applyed to man in this abusive
Transformation
Bulwer explains that this portion of his " Corporall Philosophy,"
is an " Historicall Tract of the Use and Abuse of Parts," and is
intended to teach the foolish perversity of man in running into
error; and he would have the book to " serve as a Glasse for
the pernitiously-affected Gallants of our own time to looke in,
and see the deformity of their Mindes and their Pedigree and
Alliance; who practise such phantasticall emendations of nature,
as dishonour her, and apparently show that they glory in their
shame. And that men descending into themselves, may know
themselves to be men not beasts, and leai'ne to order the August
Domicil of man reverently to the health of the Body and honour
of the Soule."
The subject of the "Anthropometamorphosis may have been
suggested to Bulwer (as that of the Ghirologia was), by a passage
in the Advancement of Learning.
Bacon, in that work, teaches us that "the knowledge that concerneth man's body is divided as the good of man's body is
divided." Now, "the good of man's body is of four kinds,
health, beauty, strength, and pleasure; so the knowledges are
medicine, or art. of cure: art of decoration which is called
cosmetique; art of activity, which is called atliletique; and art
NO. XIX.?NEW SERIES. Y
310 A MEDICAL PSYCHOLOGIST OF
voluptuary, wliicli Tacitus truly call'eth ' erud'it'us 'luxus.'"
Further we are taught that Cosmetique " hath parts civil and
parts effeminate: for cleanness of body was ever esteemed to
proceed from a due reverence to God, to society, and to ourselves.
As for artificial decoration, it is well worthy of the deficiencies
which it hath; being neither fine enough to deceive, nor handsome to use nor wholesome to please."
This last sentence may possibly have prompted the "Artificiall
Changling." Bulwer, however, in dealing with his subject displays all the originality of a thoroughly active and thoughtful
mind. The outrageous extravagancies of dress and personal
decoration which had been in vogue previous to the fall of the
monarchy, were favourite subjects of the moralists and satirists
of Bulwer's day; and an admirable illustration of their method
of dealing with the matter is to be readily found in the learned
wrath which Burton lavishes upon Artificial Allurements, in his
Anatomy of Melancholy* But Bulwer endeavours to construct
a comparative view of the methods of artificial decoration as well
as of the artificially produced deformities of mankind generally,
and so doing, maugre the imperfect materials at his command, he
not only achieves the main,?the moral object which he aimed at,
but, by his method and arrangement, he breaks the ground for a
psychical comparison of different races of men.
Of course we, in our advanced wisdom, are provoked to much merriment by the wonderful recitals which are plenteously scattered
throughout this book. For example, there is the familiar instance
quoted by Dr. Nash in his notes upon Hudibras,f and familiar
because so quoted. Bulwer, in the chapter on "Tailed Nations,
Breech Fashions, and abusers of that part," relates, among other
accounts of individuals possessed of a caudal appendage, a story
told to him by "an honest young man of Captain Morris Company,
in Lieutenant General Ireton's regiment, that at Cashell, in the
County of Tipperary, in the province of Munster, in Carrick Patrick
Church, seated on a hill or rock, stormed by Lord Inchequine,
and where there were near seven hundred put to the sword, and
none saved but the Mayor's wife and his Son ; there were found
among the slaine of the Irish, when they were stripped, divers
that had Tailes neare a quarter of a yard long ; the Relator being
very diffident of the truth of the story, after enquiry, was ensured
of the certainty thereof by forty soldiers that testified upon their
oaths that they were eye-witnesses, being present at the Action."
This belongs to the category of errors which, as Bacon tells
us, can be corrected by time alone. We can laugli at such credulous mistakes now, and can understand how, even when first
* Pt. III., sec. 2, mem. 3, sub-sec. 3.
f Pt. II. c. i. 1. 742.
THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY: 311
vended, they did not fail to come under the lash of shrewd men;
hut we cannot yet afford to lay too much stress upon the surpassing acuteness of our own days. There is always one or more
of the descendants of Autolycus roaming about shouting forth
some wondrous story "with five justices' hands at it, and witnesses
more than his pack will holdalways many children of Dorcas and
the Clown ready to swallow with avidity the numerously attested
tale. But when the children's part in this act of the drama is
played by the Emperor and Empress of a great nation, as is
reported of their Imperial Majesties of France in certain "spiritrapping" exhibitions recently said to have been enacted before them,,
our laugh at John Bulwer's credulousness, as we affect to consider
it, degenerates into a very melancholy quaver.
At the termination of the Anthropometamorpliosis, Bulwer
gives a list of the works which he had published (all of which we
have now noted); also of the works which he had "accomplished,"
and which he might be induced " hereafter to communicate."
That hereafter does not appear to have ever arrived, but it is
proper, if we would obtain a right understanding of the man, to
know the titles of the works which we have unfortunately lost.
It may be well also to remark that the list of accomplished but
not communicated works appended to the edition of the Anthropometamorphosis in 1653 contains two titles more than the list
appended to the edition of 1 G4.4. The list of 1C53 is as follows:?
" Chirethnicaeogia : or, The Nationall Expressions of the Hand.
" Cephalelogia : or The Naturall Language of the Head, being an
Extract of the most noble and Practical Notions of Physiognomy.
" Cepiiaeenomia : or the Art of Cephalicall Rhetorick.
"Vox Corporis : or the Morall Anatomy of the Body.
" The Academy of the Deafe and Dumbe: Being the manner of
Operation to bring those who are so borne, to heare the sound of
Wordes with their Eyes, and thence to learn to speake with their
Tongues.
" Vultispex Criticus : seu Physiognomia JSledici.
" Glossiatrus : Tractatus de removendis Loquelse Impedimentis.
" Otiatrus : Tractatus de removendis Auditionis Impedimentis."
This list, then, was alone needed (if the intimations given in
the prefaces to his books had not sufficed) to show how completely Bulwer had apprehended, worked out, and applied to
practical consequences of unusual importance, the play of the
mind in gesture and movement. This list, also, completes our
justification in claiming for Bulwer a notable position as a
medical psychologist, and a loftier standing 'as a man of science
than it has been customary to yield to him.
Bulwer deserves a very honourable place in the history oi
English, and, indeed, of European medicine. He first of all,
Y 2
??? s?
312 A MEDICAL PSYCHOLOGIST OF
apparently, reasoned out on thoroughly scientific grounds, the
practicability of instructing deaf-mutes. He did this, certainly,
at a time when Bonet's success in educating deaf-mutes in Spain
was becoming known in England, and when there were other
workers in the field besides himself. Indeed, a sentence in the
title-page of the Chirologia?to wit, that the Types or Chirograms
were " a long-wished for illustration of this argument"?would
lead to the supposition that the subject of the book was one which
had excited some attention previous to the publication of Bulwer's
investigations. To others, so far as we can now ascertain, belongs
the honour of first showing experimentally, in this country, the
practicability of teaching the deaf and dumb. But this in no wise
detracts from the peculiar merit of Bulwer; and even now we
cannot but admire the effective manner in which he paved the
way for and facilitated the labours of contemporary and subsequent workers in the same field. Bulwer, however, saw that the
culture of deaf-mutes was but one of several important practical
applications of the psychical principle from which he started ;
and it is the clear and full apprehension of the vitality of this
principle, so quaintly set forth in the prefaces to his works,
which, we conceive, constitutes his highest and best claims as a
scientific man and medical psychologist.
Bulwer's works, as we have already intimated, possess the
additional and collateral interest of being a charming illustration
of the earlier and direct effects of Bacon's writings and method, on
thoughtful literary and scientific men in this country. Bulwer
derived his inspiration from Bacon, and that he made a most
excellent use of this inspiration in the then unsatisfactory state
of biological science, will hardly be denied.
What Bulwer chiefly deserves to be remembered and honoured
for has been so well recited in the Pathomyotomia, by his principal
chorus, Thos. Diconson, Esq., Med. Tempi., that we shall permit
this gentleman again to recount the merits of his friend in resounding verse. Nay, the verses which wre are about to quote
are worth reading as verses, if for their quaintness merely, and
they are by no means a bad example, and might serve as a capital
type of eulogistic poesy. Dedications of books are once more
becoming the fashion, and who knows but that laudatory verses
may again come into requisition ?
" To the daring ADVANCER of all SOMATICALL SCIENCE,
his Selected Friend, on his Pathomyotomia.
" Thou Grand Adventurer, wits Magellan,
To whom our Microcosme or Isle of Man,
By tliy all searching Pen's so thoroughly scand,
There's now no part in us an unknown land;
THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. 313
How thriving is thy head in new Designes,
To bring home, not the minerall, but the mind.
This Pathologicall Anatomy,
Deare Friend, hath wound our admiration high.
A strange Essay, indeed, that dares to trace,
All the rare Springs and Wards that move a face ;
To make Anatomy by muscles wind
The swiftest motions of the winged Mind,
Nature's high piece of Clockeworke this you call,
Reason the Spring winds up, the Muscles all,
Like wheels move this or that way, swift or sloe,
As the Affections' weight doth make them go.
All the Soules motion's seen, the Head and Face,
Discovering all, as through a Cristall Case;
Here the Affections keep an Open Marte,
By Patent seal'd by thy Cephalick Art.
The Itchnographie of the Art do's smile,
A promis on us, of some stately pile,
And puts us in good hope abroad to see
That Masterpiece of Physiognomie,
Thy Magisteriall Quintessence of Bookes,
Or extract Scientificall of lookes.
Then that whereby as a Face-Prophet shown,
Thou know'st the Affections' are the Bodye's own,
"Whence subtiley thou'rt wont to ken and trace,
The Criticall Disease-discovering Face,
That though the humors bedded are within,
Yet thou canst track their footsteps in the skin.
Strange secrecy of Art and mysticall,
To cast our Faces as an Urinall;
Nay, by a stranger's Face well copyed out,
For to pronounce by Art He hath the Goute.
Such are thy common Augries; we may
Sure trust thy skill, that doth such beames display.
The last Yeare stil'd you Deafe and Durnbe man's friend,
Now Thy Design more deeper doth descend.
I see Thy knowledge and invention fiowes
As far in man as Sense and Motion goes.
Then take the Chair, where maist Thou Doctor sit,
Command our health's, as Thou hast done our wits.
Lure down thy soaring Truths, solve every doubt,
And by convincing practice make them out
To Faith-bound Sceptiques, who count nothing good
Till flat experience make it understood.
Now to the Art-forsaken Deafe dispence
Thy skill as Aurist to restore their sense.
Wert thou once known Surdasters would come on
To court Thee for Thy Autocousticon.
Next as a Linguist teach the dumb to breake,
Or pick the Padlock lets his Lips to speake.
31 $ THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE SOUL.
Ransom each captiv'd tongue, weak speech improve,
And the impediments thereof remove.
Then as a Motist by this healing light,
Set all our Heads' depraved motions right.
And may success attend, while swelling Fame
Fills up thy Sailes with an All-healing name."
