Homicidal Insanity
====================

All medical jurists of the present day recognise a homicidal monomania which can exist without frenzy; that is to say, that peculiar condition of a man in which, without any derangement of the intellect, he
is hurried away by an irresistible inclination, [penchant,) driven, impelled hy a blind instinct that cannot be accounted for, to such or such
an action which his reason reprobates and condemns. Beset by ideas of
robbery, of incendiarism, of murder, of suicide, which he in vain strives
to combat with, he feels all the horror of such desires, and yet his will
is overborne; without a motive, without an interest, he robs, burns,
slays, or sheds his own blood. (Pincl, Esquirol, Marc, Gall, &c.)
We feel ourselves unable to adopt, absolutely, this opinion, although
it is now universally admitted by medical jurists; at least, we can receive
it as correct only during the period the monomania continues before
the deed is consummated; for, according to our ideas, every monomania
which impels a party to the commission of such an act, is a case of
monomania with frenzy, at least at the moment of the execution of the
act. That is to say, there always, then, exists a sudden alteration or
disorder, more or less remarkable, of the reason, and sufficiently powerful to deprive the individual of moral liberty, and to pervert the will to
the extent of rendering it purely physical and animal. We admit, then,
this impulse, this most vehement inclination, but not that it is absolutely
irresistible; for in our opinion it becomes irresistible only at the precise
HOMICIDAL INSANITY. 331
moment at which the derangement of the intellect supervenes. "We
think the opinion that there is a sudden frenzy, an instantaneous eclipse
of reason at the moment of the act, is preferable to, and more in consonance with moral science, than the hypothesis of medical jurists, who
hold that the monomania, whether it he homicidal, or suicidal, or incendiary, &c., may terminate in the execution of the deed, ivithout frenzy
or disorder of the intellect. We repeat, we are unable to admit the
theory or the principle of monomania with irresistible impulse, and without frenzy in the act, because it appears to us dangerous, inasmuch as it
suspends the course of free will, destroys the morality of human actions,
and tends to favour impunity of crime; for if the impulse is irresistible,
and without frenzy in the act, what becomes of free will 1 Besides, in
our opinion, a disorder of the reason will always be more easily appreciated and verified by the common sense of mankind than a perversion
of the will joined to an effective lesion without frenzy in the act, which
no one, after all, is able peremptorily to prove. We think, moreover,
that the sudden and momentary disorder of the reason is the consequence
or effect of an insufficient struggle against the wretched impulse, or of
negligence in avoiding the occasions suited to its encouragement and
further development. It is the circumstances, or generating causes, of
the sudden or partial frenzy, which ought to determine the degree of
culpability of the action of the monomaniac ; because moral will is subordinate to moral liberty, as this again is subordinate to the integrity of
reason. J
Let us recapitulate, and say that, on the supposition the monomaniac
has no reasonable interest, nor any motive sufficiently strong to urge
him to an act reprobated by sound reason, such act, if completed, ought
to be attributed to frenzy, and not exclusively to irresistible impulse, or
to depraved will; and that we also think the doctrine of monomania
without frenzy tends evidently to the overthrow of free will, or the
moral liberty of human actions.
It may perhaps be objected that " if perception, judgment, and moral
sensibility may be separately perverted or abolished, why should not the
will, that complement of our moral and intellectual being, also be liable
by itself alone, to the same perturbations, the same prostration V This
is the most plausible argument that can be opposed to our opinion; and
undoubtedly we admit, with all medical jurists, and even with the generality of medical men, that the will may be more or less weakened, perverted, or depraved; but we maintain that this perversion of will without motive never terminates in action, unless there be at the moment of
its performance, disorder or suspension of the intellect, or loss of the
free will. We say without motive or interest, for every man who acts
without motive or interest does not act like a reasonable person; he is
in opposition to the laws of common sense?that is to say, he is a madman. The following story has been given as an instance of monomania
without frenzy:?
" Mania without frenzy," Pinel says, " gave rise to a singular scene at the time of
the Revolution, the recollection of which one would be glad to efface from our history.
The revolutionists, during the massacres in the prisons, broke into Bicetre Asylum, under
pretext of rescuing certain victims of the old tyranny whom they represented were confined
332 HOMICIDAL INSANITY.
on the plea of insanity. They went armed from cell to cell; they questioned the persons
in confinement, and passed on if the insanity were obvious. But one of them, who was
kept in chains, arrested their attention by his sensible and rational conversation, and
by his bitter complaints. Was it not detestable that he should be kept in irons and
associated with madmen? He defied anyone to reproach him with the least extravagant act; it was a case, he said, of the most revolting injustice, and he implored his
visitors to put an end to such oppression, and become his liberators. In short, he
excited among this armed gang violent murmurs and loud imprecations against the
superintendent of the hospital. They compelled him to appear, and to give an account
of his conduct, while every sabre was pointed against his breast; one accused him of
lending himself to the most crying vexations, and another ordered him to be silent when
he attempted to justify himself. He in vain stated his experience of similar cases of
alienation without frenzy, though remarkable for being combined with a blind fury;
their only answer was invective, and but for the courage of his wife, who shielded him
with her body, he would have been assassinated. They ordered him to unchain the
insane prisoner, and they carried him oft' in triumph, amidst redoubled cries of ' Vive
la republique !' The sight of so many armed men, their loud and confused talk, their
faces inflamed with wine, rekindled the madman's fury; with a vigorous arm he seized
the weapon of some one near, cut away right and left; blood flew, and had not
his sword been rescued from his grasp, he would, for once at least, have avenged outraged humanity."?(Thesis of Dr. Morin.)
This is plainly a case of sudden explosion of maniacal frenzy, and
instantaneous suspension of reason; and had the man committed homicide, the criminal character of a murder could not have been attached to
it. There are, however, other instances more applicable to the maintenance of the opinion opposed to ours.
" A servant throws herself at the feet of her mistress, and asks permission to leave
the house; she confesses that every time she undresses the child entrusted to her care
?a child for whom she has all the tenderness of a mother?she experiences a desire
almost irresistible to rip it open."?Marc.
" A kind and amiable man, of distinguished merit, daily prostrates himself at the
foot of the altar, imploring the Divine Mercy to deliver him also from an atrocious
inclination, for which he has never been able to give any account."?Marc.
" A country woman, who had not long been put to bed, and dearly loving her newborn infant, feels herself suddenly seized with a desire to cut its throat- She holds it
in her arms, her eyes are fastened on it, and she is about to yield; she shakes with
horror, and rushes out with the dread of being unable to control herself. She returns
to suckle it,?is again agitated and distracted,?but flies. During an entire day she
struggles against the ideas of destruction which unceasingly present themselves to her
imagination."?Michu, Mem. de la Monoman.-homicid.
The following case of homicidal mania is as remarkable for its etiology
as it is rare at an age so early as that of its subject. It is furnished us
by M. Cerise, who lias himself drawn it up for Esquirol's work on
Insanity, vol. ii., p. 115.
" A young girl, about eight years of age, had manifested a determination to kill lier
step-mother. She was brought to M. Esquirol, and subjected by this celebrated
physician to a series of questions, which she answered with sincerity, without hesitation, and with the perfect calm of innocence. She declared that she entertained no
hatred whatsoever against her father's wife, that she was affected by her kindnesses, but
that at the sight of her she experienced the desire of killing her. The mere presence
of this woman was sufficient to excite this horrible thought. M. Esquirol, after a
conversation pursued with dexterity, and a solicitude which we cannot sufficiently
imitate, traces back this frightful monomania to its obscure and already forgotten
origin. He discovers that some words of hatred and anger, probably accompanied with
violent gestures, had been uttered some years before by her father's parents against
the person whom he was about to make his second wife. The child was at that time
only two years old, and this violent scene had taken place in her presence. An impression was produced,?a fact of initiative innervation corresponding to the impression,
HOMICIDAL INSANITY. 333
and which is renewed every time she sees her step-mother. An abnormal and
vicious association is established between the efficient impression received at two
years of age, and the sensorial impression produced every day by the presence of her
step mother. Thence the reproduction of the initiative innervation for which this
child was brought to M. Esquirol. Ignorant of any hatred, irreproachable in conscience, pure in her sentiments and will, she was moved by a blind mechanism, she
obeyed an impulse at once obscure and potent, of which the murder would have been
the result. What a subject for grave thought regarding the pathogeny of this form of
nervous over excitement! What a subject for grave reflections on the impressibility of
man in the tender years of his infancy! M. Esquirol concludes this remarkable case
by calling the attention of parents to the deplorable consequences which may attend
their conversation and actions in presence of their children, whose mind and heart
may be thus corrupted from earliest infancy."
The reader may perceive, from this short statement, that our opinion
differs from that of those medical men who admit two kinds of homicidal
and suicidal monomania?one with, and the other without frenzy. We
reject that species which is said to be without frenzy in the act. On
the other hand, it is necessary to add, that magistrates and authorities on
criminal law reject monomania absolutely, without any distinction. For
instance: the advocate-general, in the case of Henriette Cornier, and
M. Dupin, in the trial of Darzac; where they say that " monomania is a
chimera?a mere phantom, summoned as much for the purpose of
snatching the guilty from the just severity of the law, as of depriving a
citizen arbitrarily of his liberty." This negative, decided, and exclusive
opinion is not a whit nearer the truth; it is contradicted by hundreds
of facts, which prove incontestably a homicidal or suicidal monomania,
or, if you will, an impulse more or less strong and overbearing to commit criminal actions, and co-existing always' with free will, or moral
liberty, which is lost only at the moment of the deed. We think it
would be much better to say, with M. Collard de Martigny, that " monomania is nothing but a passion which might be stifled in its birth."
Let us adopt, then, an opinion intermediate between that of physicians
and that of magistrates, and say that homicidal and suicidal monomania
really exists, but never without frenzy, at least, when it realizes its project or borders on the act. It is then only that the inclination, incapable
of being longer subdued or repressed, can legitimately be considered as
irresistible. M. Esquirol himself, that great authority in such matters,
used, in 1821, these appropriate expressions:?
" It cannot be denied, that there are some individuals whom a fatal inclination draws
on to the commission of suicide by a sort of irresistible attraction. I have never seen
such persons; but I venture to think that, had people better studied the individuals
who are said to have obeyed this insurmountable attraction, the motives of their determination might have been made out."?Diet, des Scienc. Med.., art. Suicide.
But that took place in 1839. At that period, the " Gazette des Tri"
bunaux" and other journals disclosed to France a very extraordinary
fact of great importance. It is this:?In 1826, a young girl was condemned for life to the public works, for having in cold blood cut off the
head of a child belonging to one of her neighbours. In the absence,
says the " Gazette des Tribunaux," of all known interest in the commission of the crime, the medical men declared that the mental condition
of the accused presented unequivocal symptoms of mental alienation.
Since this condemnation, several works on medical jurisprudence have 
placed this crime among the number of cases of homicidal monomania,
and in more than one criminal affair this bloody recollection has been
cited as a case in point for the defence of accused parties; but the real
state of the facts came afterwards to stagger, or else to overthrow, these
new theories of monomania. It would appear, according to the journals,
that this woman had confessed, that after being abandoned by her lover
for another person, whom he married, she had conceived the thought
and project of a horrible revenge, and that she had completed her crime
by butchering the child of her lover and her rival. She admitted being
a little touched by the cries of the poor infant, but she kept to her purpose of vengeance. This fact, and the conclusions which have been
drawn from it, joined to the avowal of the criminal, are of a nature to
produce grave and serious reflections among both criminal law officers
and medical jurists.
