The Pellagra
==============

(Address delivered at the Annual Meeting of the Academie Roy ah de
Medecine, 
:Author: Dr Baillaiiger, Physician to the Asylum of the
Salpetriere. Communicated by Dr Sigmoid.)

The pellagra, a disease already the subject of study for more than a
century by a number of observers, is now generally known. Its seat
is ascertained to be Lombardy, in some parts of Spain, and the South
of France; it rages almost entirely in the country, and principally
amongst the poorest peasants; it is also remarked, that although at its
first attack it is very trifling, yet it is not generally long before the most
serious symptoms are developed. To an erythema of the hands, which
sometimes scarcely attracts the attention of the invalid, quickly succeed
obstinate diarrhoea, gradually producing extreme emaciation; infiltration
takes place into the limbs, serous effusions into the cavities, and then,
after many years of suffering, the patient sinks under extreme marasmus.
Amongst the symptoms remarked by authors are, meningitis, quickly
fatal; suicidal melancholy, and mania. The variety of forms under
which the disease appears, explains the numerous appellations which
have from time to time been given to it. Amongst these denomina-
tions is one which indicates a very frequent order of symptoms, which
exhibit themselves in their most aggravated form,?the paralysis scor-
butica of Louis Aldalli. This author is not so much struck with the
cutaneous erythema, nor the gastro-enteritis, nor the delirium, which
characterize the disease, as with the paralysis and the scorbutus. If it
were desirable briefly to sum up the symptoms of this spccies of para-
lysis, it would be by stating that it affects all the limbs at the same
moment, but that its progress is slow and progressive, that it is accom-
panied by disorder of the mind, which terminates in insanity. It is
impossible, whilst reflecting upon this abolition of mind and of muscular
]lower, not to recal to mind that there exists in our lunatic asylums a
disease, unfortunately too frequent, which consists also of abolition of
mental and of muscular power. Struck with this resemblance, I at-
tempted, at the meeting of the 3rd of August last, to demonstrate the
striking analogy which appears to me to exist between the paralysis of
those who labour under the pellagra, and that of the insane. I restricted
myself to speaking of the analogy. In fact, there was wanting in the
descriptions upon which I relied several important symptoms, whose
absence could not permit me to regard the two diseases as identical.
These symptoms are, especially, hesitation of speech, and the delusion
which is manifested by ambitious hallucinations. Stuttering is one of
the most constant symptoms of the paralysis of the insane, and it is
decidedly one of the most valuable diagnostic signs that we possess of
the first onset of the disease. As for the ambitious hallucinations, its
absence would at once establish a marked difference between the diseases.
The singular fact, that the monomania of grandeur is always accom-
panied by general paralysis, however inexplicable it may be to psycho-
logists, is, in fact, one of the best demonstrated facts in pathology. It
is necessary to bear in mind, for the complete elucidation of the ob-
THE PELLAGRA. 4Gl

servations wliicli follow, that this delirium may exist in different degrees
of intensity. Amongst the paralytics of whom M. Calmeil speaks,
some are in possession of provinces, some of empires, some of worlds,
hut there are others whose fancy is infinitely more limited. Amongst
some even, there is nothing very observable beyond a sense of extreme
self-satisfaction, of confidence in their own strength, and in the dura-
tion of their lives. These varieties, it must be remembered, do not
change the leading principle, a circumstance so remarkable and so com-
mon, that it was pointed out by Hallam at a time when this general
paralysis was actually unknown in France. " These insane persons," ob-
served he, " whilst they cannot support their limbs, consider themselves
full of vigour, and capable of the greatest efforts. Whatever pity," he
adds, " such a state is calculated to inspire, it is nevertheless fortunate
for these afflicted people that their confidence and their pretensions are
exaggerated in the same ratio as their degradation is real. The sight
of these people, almost incapable of movement, deprived entirely of the
power of moving, stuttering with great difficulty a few unintelligible
words, often covered with sores, yet still preserving in this miserable
state the most brilliant illusions, is a contrast too striking not to have
made a vivid impression upon observers."

But if the symptoms of paralysis pellagrosa are far from being iden-
tical with those of the paralysis of the insane, the opinion of authors
upon the seat of the two maladies tends still further to separate them.
The paralysis of pellagra, as the lesions observed in patients have
demonstrated, is to be referred to the spinal marrow, whilst the general
paralysis of our asylums is, on the other hand, more generally ascribed
to a purely cerebral affection. With the exception of certain cases, the
spinal marrow has been uniformly found healthy. Such, then, are the
principal differences which appear to exist between these two states, in
which paralysis is present. These differences?are they real? Ought
these two affections to be considered entirely independent? or, on the
other hand, is the paralysis of those afflicted with pellagra incompletely
studied, at least, in the greater number of instances, and therefore not
so well known as the malady so admirably described by Bayle and
Calmeil? These questions have appeared to me to be worthy of being
examined with care, as much that we might become intimately ac-
quainted with the history of pellagra as well as that of general paralysis.
This inquiry required new researches, and it is the researches made in
different hospitals of Lombardy that I wish to have the honour of
making known to the Academy. I should fear to trespass on your
time if I were to relate the twelve cases which form the basis of my
labours. I shall therefore confine myself to the detail of the first.
A peasant, named Garaviglia, forty-six years of age, entered the
great hospital of Milan, afflicted with pellagra, on the 21st of June
last, for the purpose of taking baths. He soon gave signs of mad-
ness, and was admitted into the receptacle of the insane. Three
months afterwards he was transferred to the chronic ward. This
transferring from the larger ward to the chronic cannot take place
without a consultation of three physicians. This is the rule of the hos-
pital. Iu this consultation a few words described the nature of the
disease. Marasme pellagreux, tabes pellagrosa, was tlic diagnostic
placed upon Garaviglia's ticket, and his insanity was ascribed
to a pellagra some time existing. When I examined Garaviglia, he
offered all the symptoms of general paralysis in an extreme degree; his
physiognomy exhibited stupidity; his memory Avas altogether gone.
He had an extreme embarrassment in speaking; trembling and feeble-
ness of limbs, especially in the upper extremities; the legs were drawn
back; standing was quite out of the question, and he had a large eschar
upon the sacrum.

This man did not appear to have any ideas of grandeur, but upon his
arrival at the hospital he had made himself remarkable by his magni-
ficent promises to the people around him, by the complacency with
which he spoke of his herds of cattle, of the number of his horses, &c.
He had, besides this, two other symptoms which appeared to me worthy
especially of notice. The first was a grinding of the teeth, a very
frequent symptom amongst paralytics in our asylums, and which
Strambio has pointed out as a sign of approaching death. It is par-
ticularly remarkable, and the sound is produced by the rubbing of the
large molares against each other. The second symptom of which I
would speak, is a movement, almost automatic, of the lips and jaws,
and which has been compared by the author of whom I have just
spoken, to the action of tasting. Quidarn oris motus quasi hominis
quid sapidum gustantis. This last symptom had not been observed
amongst the paralytics in our institutions, but since my return I have
ascertained that it is not peculiar to paralysis pellagrica. My colleague,
M. Trelat, has already observed it in a paralytic under his care, and I
now see it clearly in a case under my own management. The second
observation is that founded upon the case of a peasant, aged forty-five,
sent from Monza to the hospital of Senavra, at Milan. It was a female
suffering under pellagra. She had all the symptoms of general para-
lysis, characterized by embarrassment of speech and ideas of ambition.
I cite this, because the nature of the delirium is clearly indicated in the
certificate of the physician of the Canton of Monza, Dr Mezotti.
It appears from this certificate, that for three successive years she had in
the spring, besides the erythema pellagrosa, a monomania of prodigality.
She laid claim to the possession of a large fortune, and thought only
of living in great style, and ordered magnificent dinners at the hotels.
The third fact is one of those which I collected at Brescia. It is
remarkable, from the excess of the ambition displayed during the
delirium. The invalid, named Martinelli, was a fisherman at Iseo.
The pellagra had existed many years. When I saw him, he stammered,
and could scarcely sustain the weight of his limbs, but he still retained
all the marks of great cerebral excitement. He constantly repeated
that he was the Emperor Napoleon, and spoke of nothing but his
immense treasures. This poor invalid seemed, above all, to insist upon
his having a claim to be the proprietor of the Lake of Iseo. He wished
to change the name of the lake, and was desirous that it should be
called Lake Martinelli. In one of the cases of general paralysis which
I observed, the pellagra 'was preceded by that which is called in Loin-
hardy the " master's malady," a sort of hypochondriasis which is very
common amongst the peasants. This appearance of cutaneous erythema
occurs very frequently; so much so, that some author has gone so far
as to assert that the pellagra and this species of hypochondriasis are
one and the same malady. Strambio has had no difficulty in refuting
this opinion, without, however, being able to deny that the two diseases
have a singular association. This point seems to me to be of essential
importance in the etiology of pellagra. I will add, that it is not
only hypochondriasis, but almost all the neuroses which constitute a
decided predisposition to this disease. It is even very rare to see a
development of erythema upon the hands in the lunatic asylums in
those who have never had any signs of pellagra before they entered the
hospital. Excess of drink and delirium tremens also predispose to
erythema pellagrosa. This fact has been placed beyond doubt, by the
researches of Dr Nobili, and by those which have been recently made
by the commission at Piedmont. But it is by the hereditary disposition
that the link between pellagra and madness may be rendered more
easily intelligible. Many persons afflicted with pellagra spring from
insane parents, and many insane persons from pellagrose parents. The
development of one or other disease is dependent upon occasional
causes. I will only cite here the following fact, which belongs to the
history of general paralysis.

A peasant of the neighbourhood of Bergamo had three children, two
sons and a daughter. The eldest son and the daughter had, like the
father, the pellagra. The second son left the labours of the field, and
became a servant in the town. He thus escaped the erythema pella-
grosa, but was soon attacked by ambitious madness, and became para-
lytic. Besides this connexion between pellagra and madness, there is a
fact which I hope I shall be excused for now mentioning. In the
session of 1844,1 had the honour to read before this Academy a memoir
upon hereditary madness, (published in the ninth volume of the Bulletins
of the Academy.) My object was to prove that hereditary madness is
more generally transmitted from the mother than from the father, and
more generally from the mother to the females, and from the father to
the boys. At the commencement of the same month, M. Calderini, who
could have no knowledge of my labours, published upon hereditary
pellagra statistic conclusions which exactly coincided with my own
observations. This, which is at least a coincidence, ought to be men-
tioned. I will add that the principal cause of the propagation of pel-
lagra is hereditary predisposition. This fact, well studied and well
understood, ought, in my opinion, to overthrow the hypothesis, other-
wise well supported, of the exclusive action of maize. How can it be
admitted that a single toxocological agent could bring into action the
hereditary germ; how can it be understood that by a singular exception
the symptoms of poisoning produced by maize could be transmitted from
parent to child? The hospitals of Venice contain many pellagrose
patients, and I met there a certain number of paralytics. One among
them, at the outset of the disease, was a prey to suicidal ideas. This
symptom, so common, as is known, in pellagra, has been differently ex-
plained. I will try to demonstrate that, most probably, one of the
principal causes has been neglected.

It lias been asserted that pellagrose patients destroy themselves, to
put au end to the pains they have to endure; it is said, also, that the
despair which seizes upon these unfortunate persons takes it origin from
the conviction of the incurableness of the disease. This explanation
might he admitted, if the suicidal tendency was observed amongst the
pellagrose who are not insane; but this is not the case. The invalids
who have sound reason do not seek, or very rarely seek, to destroy
themselves. A young physician attached to the hospital at Brescia
declares, in an admirable work upon Pellagra, that he has never seen the
tendency to suicide, and above all, adds he, to the celebrated hydro-
mania of Strambio. M. Calderini, who has marked with minute care the
symptoms which presented themselves in a thousand pellagrose patients
of sound mind, never speaks of the idea nor of attempts at suicide.
This symptom, then, belongs almost exclusively to pellagrose madness,
and its extreme frequency seems to be explained in the following
manner:?

Ideas of suicide are never observed to be more frequent than in that
species of insanity to which Esqnirol has applied the term, demence
aigiie; and Georget, stupidite. They exist in at least a third part of
those who are thus diseased. It results from this observation, that to
give the proportionate number of suicides amongst a given number of
insane, it ought to be ascertained beforehand whether the demence aigiie
has been of frequent or of rare occurrence. The pellagrous insanity
offers a singular exception. In our asylums we scarcely find three
cases in a hundred which are demence ciigiie; 011 the contrary, in
the pellagrous insanity, according to the researches of M. Pelt, physician
to the insane at Venice, the proportion is thirty in a hundred. The
demence aigiie is, then, ten times more frequent amongst pellagrous
insane than in our asylums. Is it not, then, evident that there is here
one of the principal causes of the numerous eases of suicide remarked
in pellagra? Other facts also come in support of this explanation.
" The pellagrous," says Strambio, " destroy themselves without giving
any sign of passion, or menacing any one." It is precisely thus when
suicide occurs in demence aigiie. These lunatics, motionless, inert,
silent, and apparently stupid, seek self-destruction without giving the
slightest sign of excitement; one might say the act was purely auto-
matic. It appears to me, then, that this great proportion of suicides
amongst the pellagrous insane may, in a great part at least, be explained
by the number of cases of demence aigiie. This last fact is otherwise
easily to be understood. Stupidity is most generally to be noticed in
subjects of debilitated constitution; it is to be seen after losses of blood,
after long abstinence. Sydenham has described it as occurring after
intermittent fever of long standing. It is, therefore, that the pellagrous,
arrived at the second or third stage of the disease, are often attacked
with this species of madness. I return to pellagrous paralysis. Be-
sides the observations which I have collected, I have thought it right to
consult the registers of the hospitals; and those of the Seuavra of Milan
have furnished me with several interesting facts; amongst these, there
is one in which the embarrassment of pronunciation amongst the para-
lytics is described in a manner as striking as true. " The words of the
diseased," says the author of the remark, " were troncati con solfeggio."
Nothing could be more exact. The pronunciation of paralytics produces
to a certain degree a sort of solfeggio. Thus, when M. Calmeil wished
to describe this pronunciation, he found no better means than to sepa-
rate each syllable by a line, exactly as the notes of music are separated
from each other. Besides this fact, there are some curious remarks upon
what the author calls pellagrous encephalitis. This disease, says he, is
more frequent than is imagined. It commences by an inflammation of
the membranes, which gradually extends to the brain. Upon morbid
examination, the membranes are found thickened, infected, infiltrated
with plaster lymph, the cortical substance very red, and the brain itself
more or less softened throughout its substance. All this" bears a re-
semblance to that which is observed in the paralysis of the insane, and
there are in both instances the same anatomical changes. Pellagrous
paralysis, in the second stage, may easily be confounded with another
.state very different: we know that the pellagrous have often a tottering
walk, a kind of titubation very poetically described by Strambio, some-
times there are cases in which this is easily cured; on the contrary, there
are others totally incurable. The first have a tottering which may
almost be called convulsive; the second, a simple feebleness of limbs,
especially the lower, sometimes accompanied by trembling. The con-
vulsive titubation appears to me to be to paralysis that which la demence
aigiie is to madness. I will add, that these general symptoms allow
very often a distinction, of which the importance may be imagined
in the forming a prognosis. It remains for me to point out the result
of the autopsies which I made in Lombardy, to ascertain if pellagrous
paralysis is a cerebro-spinal or a purely cerebral affection, and to demon-
strate, under the head of anatomical alterations, the convulsive titu-
bation which is not paralytic; but the examination of these questions
will lead me on too long, and I find myself compelled to postpone these
subjects till I can give the result of my extended labours upon pellagra.
These labours only can confirm the observations made upon those
symptoms which have already been described, and which teach us the
identity of pellagrous paralysis with insanity. Before concluding, I
think it right to remark, that inquiry into paralysis pellagrosa completely
confirms the union between the monomania of grandeur and general
paralysis. I have encountered in Lombardy that special monomania
amongst many paralytics not affected with pellagra, and I can assert that
such cases arc not so uncommon as has been said in the hospitals of
Milan. One of those I saw pretended to be the prophet Elias; one
would have imagined that he had only come into the hospital to relieve
himself from the inconvenience of receiving the homage of the multi-
tude out of doors. A poor artist, named Ambrose, would do nothing
but regenerate the world; his ambitious dream, described in all its
details in the asylum of Senavra, is only an exaggerated painting of the
golden age. In another month, all disease would disappear from the
earth, and death cease to strike. The men would everlastingly be thirty-
five, and the women twenty-five years of age; life would only be one
long-continued fete.

As may be seen, the pretensions of the paralytic in Lombardy do not
^66 CORRESPONDENCE FROM PARIS.

yield to those of the deranged in our asylums. This singular union of
the %mbitious monomania with paralysis is the same everywhere. In
vain has it been attempted to explain this by some of the ideas which
prevail in society. That which shows the little value of such explana-
tion is, that this alliance between paralysis and ambition was pointed
out as well in the last as in the present century, that it is found amongst
peasants afflicted with pellagra, careless of the future generally, as well
as amongst individuals engaged in the pursuit of wealth and of
honour.

It remains, then, only to point out this as a fact which will remain
one of the most curious in the history of the disorders of the mind.
