State of the Lunatic Asylums in Ireland
==========================================

It was our intention to have entered fully into the consideration of this
subject, with the view of forcing upon public and legislative attention the
melancholy condition of some of the principal institutions for the recep-
tion of the insane in the sister kingdom. As we ponder over the details
before us we can hardly conceive such a state of things to exist in a
civilized state in the nineteenth century. In this country, where the
legislature in its wise enactments enforces the residence of a qualified
medical practitioner in every establishment where the number of inmates
amounts to 100, will our readers believe?can they credit the fact1?
?that in Ireland there are public asylums for the insane, containing
upwards of four hundred lunatics, without there being one resident
medical officer in the establishment! Is this not disgraceful to a Chris-
tian country and a Christian government1? We maintain that no phi-
losophic or successful system of treatment, medical or moral, can be
carried into operation in any establishment, in which acute cases of
insanity are admitted, where a medical man does not reside. It is the
duty of parliament to enforce the residence of a qualified medical man
in every asylum.
Unless the medical officer-in-chief resides in the hospital; unless he be
empowered to meet all difficulties as they arise by the possession of clear,
definite, and unquestioned, but strictly responsible authority, a lunatic
152 STATE OF THE LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN THE LAND.
asylum under the best non-medical management is not an hospital for
the treatment and cure of the insane, but with its sanded floors, clean
beds, and whitewashed walls, is merely a well-regulated jail, holding
within its walls patients or prisoners, who must be guarded as best
they can by resident officers, hampered with restriction, and cramped in
their authority; circumstances which reduce them to cyphers, and the
patients or prisoners (it is unnecessary to cavil with either term) ulti-
mately to incurable insanity!
In a great surgical or medical hospital for the treatment of bodily
disease, which is plain, palpable, and often visible, should a patient be
taken suddenly ill, so as to require immediate relief, a medical officer is at
once sent for or at hand; but in our Irish Lunatic Asylums, devoted or
supposed to be devoted to the treatment-and cure of insanity, who ever
dreams of sending for its solitary medical attendant to visit a patient
suddenly excited, or bursting out into a furious paroxysm??a matter of
hourly occurrence in a great hospital. Yet these attacks are clear, plain,
and unequivocal symptoms of cerebral disease or excitement, involving
in their results, and repeated but neglected attacks, the loss of that which
is of equal value to life?reason! Let it be taken for granted, that even
in such a case the visiting physician should be sent for to the distance
of a mile, the usual space between the asylums and the medical officer;
he may be ten miles off at a private call, or by a special rule intro-
duced for his personal convenience, be absent on his own leave for
a fortnight altogether, so that patients are then thrown on the care
of such casual medical friends as may give a call three times a week.
Thus restraints are unavoidable, thus seclusion is necessarily resorted
to, the results of which are frequently worse than those which follow
restraint.
" Quo nunquam radiis oriens medius ye cadens ve
Phoebus adire potest nebulae caligine mistae
Exlialantur humo, dubioeque crepuscula lncis
Quo cubat ipse miser, Membris languore solutis
Nec flecti cervix nee bracliia reddere gestus
Nec pes ire potest."
Had immediate and adequate authority been at hand; had a resi-
dent medical director, with free and unrestrained powers, existed, as he
ought to exist, in the asylum, mild medical, combined with other and
equally efficacious measures, would to a certainty allay sudden cerebral
excitement, prevent its recurrence, and probably hasten a cure. Instead of
that, an officer with no defined powers, no medical authority or knowledge,
with a consciousness that he is doing what may be undone, and thus be
exposed to the humiliation of official inferiority, is called on to interpose.
Restraint alone, or seclusion, offers a ready subterfuge to escape from the
difficulty, and as a consequence, one fit of excitement follows on the foot-
steps of another, until reason becomes, from the inability to bear up
against the struggle, permanently unsettled; the usual consequences close
the scene, and thus fill the Irish asylums with an overwhelming mass of
despair, to remedy which, an additional number of similarly conducted
STATE OF THE LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN IRELAND. 153
asylums are recommended, and will of course be called into existence in
due time and place.
Another and an equally fatal result of the non-medical system is
deserving notice.
By rules specially and studiously framed, so as to loosen all bonds of
responsibility and order (vicle rules 42 and 50), the visiting physician
can attend at any hour it may suit his taste or convenience, or private
interests; suppose (an ordinary matter) that he visits at three, four, five,
or even later in the day. He prescribes for such as he may think fit, and
departs. The apothecary must then be sent for, half a mile or a mile
off'; he has to compound and dispense his medicines, to apply blisters, to
cup, bleed, &c., &c. The patients may be going to or actually in bed at
the time these things have to be done. As lunatics are far different from
any other class of patients, opposition, annoyance, or ill-humour, on the
part of one patient at an unseasonable time, in a room where eighteen
or twenty may be at rest, or in a cell or a corridor where fifteen or six-
teen other patients may be settled for the night, excites the others.
Waistcoats must be resorted to for the purpose of keeping on appliances
which should have been attended to at ten or eleven o'clock, a.m. The
consequences are torment or opposition; and a scene of disorder in the
entire establishment during the rest of the night perfectly indescribable.
The mischievous consequences of irregular medical attendance do not
end even here. The medical attendant, as before observed, under the
provisions of rules specially made for his convenience, can attend at any
hour that may suit his private advantage, or be accommodated to his
other avocations; but subordinate servants of a great institution, engaged
in attending on the sick, the wards, or walking rooms, must obtain
leave of absence in due time, in regular succession, and at stated hours,
otherwise no establishment could be conducted with order, or an approach
to discipline. They are or may be absent when the medical attendant
pays his desultory visit, and of course no satisfactory information can be
given with anything like correctness, respecting the chief and essential
duties relating to the inmates. How different would all this be 1 How
little noise, confusion, or irregularity would exist, were the medical
director of the asylum regularly to pay his professional visit at ten
o'clock, a.m., accompanied three or four times a week by the visiting
or consulting medical attendant, cheering some, comforting and advising
all ! How different from the present clumsy, noisy, bustling, and hurried
mode of attending to the mental wants of hundreds!
When a visiting physician sees a patient, or a number of patients, in
his hurried visits, who by a thousand devices know full well the hands
where authority rests, he may order them a certain kind of treatment,
according to his then view of their condition, and depart; they become,
on his withdrawal, and with him the withdrawal of all supreme authority,
restive, unmanageable, mischievous, or dangerous, in the extreme. They
must then be controlled as best they can by those who, when the visiting
physician again comes in a day or two, find their view corrected and their
authority superseded, as it is most likely, nay almost certain, that the
patients bow in cunning to his superior powers, make all kinds of pro-
154 STATE OF THE LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN IRELAND.
fessions of amendment, and gain their point. He departs as usual.
The same game is played over again; hostility, moreover, is engendered
in the minds of patients towards those who, to protect themselves,
must resort to restraint or seclusion, while, in the meantime, as far as
the patients are concerned, the fable of Penelope's web is re-acted, with
this melancholy difference, that the thread not of flax, but of reason, is
frequently snapped asunder for ever in this game of divided and irre-
sponsible authority.
We subjoin below a tabular statement of the various asylums in Ire-
land, illustrative of the preceding remarks. In our next number, we
hope to return to this important subject.
District Lunatic Asylums in Ireland.
Population of No. of Physicians Physicians or Surgeons
District. Inmates. 01 residing.
137 ... 1 ... None resides.
251 ... 2 ... One resides, one does not.
214 ... 1 ... None resides.
289 ... 3 ... None resides.
193 ... 1 ... None resides.
310 ... 1 ... None resides.
339 ... 1 ... None resides.
194 ... 1 ... None resides.
137 ... 1 ... None resides.
127 ... 1 ... None resides.
419 ... 2 ... None resides.
Armagh
Belfast
Londonderry
Richmond
Carlow
JBallinasloe
Limerick
Maryboro'
Clonmell
Waterford
Cork
832,474
722,321
831,578
810,984
605,169
1,418,859
910,303
557,578
411,578
196,187
854,118
Private, Asylums.
Name. County. No. of Patients.
Retreat
Citadella
Lindville
. Bellvue
Bloomfield
Eagle Lodge
Tarnh am
Finglass
Hampstead
Hartfield
Lisle
Bushy Park
Anne Brook
Woodville
Cheek Point
Armagh
Cork
ditto
Dublin
ditto
ditto
ditto
ditto
ditto
ditto
ditto
Limerick
Queen's County )
ditto J
Waterford
23
17
41
33
22
17
46
12
24
10
6
1
13
2
Very few of these have a resident medical officer.
Local Lunatic Asylums.
House of Industry ... Dublin ... 103
Island Bridge ... ... ditto ... 196
LifTord ... ... Donegal ... 7
Kilkenny ... ... Kilkenny ... 50
