The use of the Body in Relation to the Mind
=============================================

:Date: OCTOBER 1, 1848.
Analytical ictus. ^
Art. I.?
The use of the Body in relation to the Mind.
By George Moore, M.D., Member of tlie Royal College of Physicians. Second
Edition. Longman, 1847. 8vo, pp. 433.
Practical Hints on tlie Moral, Mental, and Physical Training of Girls
at School. By Madame de Wahl. Parker, 1847. Small 8vo,
pp. 190.
" Pourquoi," said the Cardinal Polignac, quoted by Gall,?"pourquoi
des hommes tres vicieux, pour qui le crime a des delices, et qui ne se
croient pas criminels, se repentiraient-ils V Read the biographies of
all the tyrants who have ever yet desolated the earth, and say, if you
can discover one who voluntarily renounced his crimes ere death or
public vengeance had cut him off' from fellowship with mankind. For
the study of psychology teaches us, that gross delinquents are for the
most part inaccessible to pity or remorse, and that the moral sense,
abandoned to its own blind caprice, rarely fails in warping the judgment,
and misguiding the steps, not only in the jocund hour of youth, but,
what is still worse, in the more mature season of manhood, ambition
and strength. In persons of feeble organization and imbecile tempera-
ment, the perception of good and evil lies dormant or inert, suffering
the wild fire of passion to flame and flicker over their slumbering energies
with its alluring, seductive, and fatal fascinations. Self-indulgence covers
the broad way to destruction ? and in the condign felon or the hopeless
maniac we may detect the first neglected germ of all his miseries?viz.,
the want of self-control. The extent of depravity to which this single
moral deficiency is sure to lead, would be incredible, were it not but too
well attested both by history and our own common experience. The
perfidious and cruel Gabrino-Fundulo, condemned to lose his head on
account of his atrocious crimes, fiercely confessed, that the only thing he
ever repented of, was not having precipitated Pope John XXIII. and
NO. IV. k K
V
490 V ON THE EDUCATION OF CHILDREN
the Emperor Sigismond from the top of the tower of Cremona, when
they adventurously ascended that dangerous pinnacle together with
him ?* and Dion Cassiust informs us, that what added to the horror of
a plague that broke out at Rome and carried off 2000 persons in a day,
was the desperate wickedness of certain individuals who went about
pricking others with poisoned needles with the view of causing their
death ; and that when some of these culprits were arrested and put to
extreme punishment, they confessed, that for the sake of a bribe they
had been induced to perpetrate this horrible deed.
The wretch devoid of conscience is of course morally defunct; but we
must never forget that conscience is a relative, not an absolute term,
and that, like every other faculty, it requires education, direction, and
discipline. The cannibal, who first fights and kills and then eats his
enemy, pretends to the mens sibi conscia recti just as confidently as the
soldier who receives a baton, a ribbon, a title, or a star as the reward of
merit and the distinguished token of his military prowess. For the
standard of rectitude ascends and declines with the shifting habits of
society, the prevailing notions of the day, and the spirit of the age in
which we play our part. The natural conscience, so proper to our hearts,
is superseded by an artificial one (the product of civilization or bar-
barism), which comes and goes with the fashion of the world, glimmering
in the morals of Seneca, the odes of Horace, the coterie of un roi-phi-
losophe such as Frederic of Prussia, the myths of ancient Egypt, the
strange astrology of the Chaldsean Magi, and the antique, gorgeous re-
pasts that have long since loomed and vanished in perspective along the
halls of Old Belus. Such and so various are the destinies of mankind,
that we are almost tempted to look on and disregard passing events with
as much indifference and contempt as we do the racket-ball that leaps
from the player's hand and rebounds only to be struck back by him
again.
But the necessity of living confines us to our post, and forces us to
observe and attend with the deepest interest. Every age has felt and
acknowledged the difficulty of solving the problem of education. Each
family carries within its own bosom the fruits of a good or an evil one.
Lycurgus and Solon, convinced, like all other legislators, that the fate of
empires depended on the education of youth, exhausted their best
energies in designing a mode of teaching which should at the same time
strengthen the body and elevate the mind to the highest degree of
physical and moral perfection. The divine legation of Moses, under the
sanction and guidance of a far more authentic archetype than theirs, was
primarily directed to the attainment of this same mighty object. Read
the canons of the councils of the church throughout the middle ages, and
you will find the same theme pervading them all?namely, the repeated
inculcation of strict moral habits as the surest correction of error, de-
linquency, and vice. Survey every country in Europe, not even ex-
cepting Great Britain herself, and see how the hands of each govern-
ment are shackled by a population, vicious because they are untaught.
* Gall sur les fonctions du Cerveau, tome v. pp. 284?294.
t Hist. Roman., lxvii. 11; lxxii. 14; quoted by Littre, CEuvres d'Hippocrate, tra-
duction nouvelle, Paris, 1846, tome v. p. 68.
PREDISPOSED TO INSANITY. 401
and ungovernable because they are ignorant. * Enter the workhouse or
the asylum and count the numbers whose brains have been cracked by
the load of life which they were never taught how to carry with ease and
safety to themselves. Obtain admittance into the glittering mansions
that adorn our cities or our parks, and behind their sumptuous hangings
you will meet a spectre with the sign and seal on its front of woeful self-
indulgence?manhood sapped in its prime, talents wasted at their source,
and the warmest affections cankered at their core ! The chance medley
of the world everywhere discloses scenes of depravity, ignorance, vice,
and want, which are only the more disgusting among the lower orders
because they are not glazed over with the semblance of virtue so pleasing
in the saloons of the wealthier and more influential classes of society.
Lust, which is, as it were, a sculptured idol of gold to be adored or adu-
lated by the rich, lurks like a foul fiend within the hovels of penury and
dirt. And the mind and the moral being, where are they 1 Where is
the life to come, the present hour, peace, contentment, wisdom, and the
happiness of house and home h Are they the fictions of the poet, or the
idle visions of a religion that has no existence save in the unreal mockery
of a sublime ideal 1
One of the surest consequences of self-indulgence is the loss of mind,
account for it as we please on physiological or metaphysical principles;
* Thirty-thousand destitute children disgrace the metropolis of Great Britain. Out
of a given number of 1000 young persons,?102, one-tenth of the whole, confessed
that they had been frequently in prison; 116 had run away from home ; L70 slept in
lodging-houses which are the nests of everything that the human mind could conceive
of abominable ; 253 avowed that they lived by begging; 210 had no shoes or stockings ;
280 had no caps, hats, or bonnets; 101 had no body linen ; 249 never slept, or had no
recollection of ever having slept in a bed ; 08 were the children of convicts ; 125 had
step-mothers, to whom might be traced much of the misery that drove them to the
commission of crime ; and 300 had lost either one or both parents.?Parliamentary
Reports, Lord Ashley's Speech oil Emigration and Ragged Schools, June 5th, 1848.
The facts, at least such as have come within our own knowledge, rather tend to de-
monstrate that spirit-drinking, debauchery, excesses of all sorts in the parents, and
occasionally the debility of privation and the abuse of mercurial medicine, have been
the principal causes of the lamentable increase of diseases of the brain in children ;
but these are rendered more intensely mischievous to the offspring by the misery of
mind which accompanies bad habits, and depresses the moral being into reckless de-
spondency.?Dr. Moore, op. cit. ut supra, p. 98.
The serious evils inseparable from dark and filthy dwellings, such as abound in all
our large cities, are incalculable. It is easy to conceive the physical evils of such
crowding, want of ventilation, and filth. It is equally obvious, that where decency and
decorum are violated, and the most corrupting and revolting associations aie not only
promoted but rendered unavoidable, the moral evils which result from them must be
enormous; and it is no marvel that such quarters are the nurseries of the criminals
who fill our jails.?Means of Promoting and Preserving Health. By T. Hodg/nn,
M.D. 2nd edit., 1841, p. 38.
We observed to Captain Stuart, the superintendent of the police at Edinburgh, in
one inspection of the Wynds, that life appeared of little value, and was likely to be held
cheap in such spots. He stated, in answer, that a short time ago, a man had been exe-
cuted for the murder of his wife, in a fit of passion, in the very room we had acci-
dentally entered, and where we were led to make the observation. At a short distance
from that spot, and amidst others of this class of habitation, were those which had been
the scenes of the murders of Burke and Hare. The working-classes in these districts
were equally marked by the abandonment of every civil or social regulation.?Mr.
Chadwick on the Labouring Population, quoted by William Kebbell, M.D., on the
Diseases of Towns. Brighton, 1848, p. 94.
K K 2
492 ON THE EDUCATION OF CHILDREN'
for tliere is nothing so true as that the continual indulgence of the appe-
tites leads to the premature extinction of the reason. Those who go
down to the grave with clear minds, good eyesight, sound teeth, un-
paralysed limbs, and placid tempers, are the self-denying and the tem-
perate; the modest and the retired. It is as our days are spent that our
years are told; and the virtuous demeanour that imparts such a charm
to the venerable patriarch is, independent of natural vigour, the last
flower of the seed sown in the early twilight of his days.
Now, Dr. Moore and Madame de Wahl, both of whose works we have
placed at the head of this article, have seriously taken up the subject of
mental culture, at opposite points of view indeed, but with equal sincerity,
piety, and zeal. The distinguishing feature of Madame de Wahl's in-
teresting brochure is that of good sense, joined with that nice perception
of propriety so peculiar to a lady's writings. Our own notions are there
easily expressed for us upon a subject on which we acknowledge that our
pen would be by far too heavy and laborious, if not altogether inefficient;
and we thank her for her pains. Dr. Moore's work, which is a medical
essay addressed ad laicos, considers the grand question of education on
its physiological and moral basis, and is, therefore, the more discursive
and philosophic of the two. Without quoting verbatim from either, we
shall avail ourselves of the materials which they have both so happily
placed at our disposal.
The chief mark at which each of these writers aims is that of self-con-
trol. As human beings, we are not mere spirit, for our soul is united
to a body, not like that of the lower animals governed by instinct, but
instigated by active feelings that are perpetually revolting and making
war against the jealous supremacy of the soul. By the aid of religious
restraints, moral discipline, or legal penalties, this ruling power is
assisted in maintaining the ascendant; and, for the most part, on com-
mon occasions, is enabled to direct its very awkward companion, the
body, to the best and surest ends. For, so long as we are refreshed by
sleep, nourished by food, entertained by conversation, and amused by
seeing, walking, and acting, life proceeds peaceably enough along its
beaten and accustomed path; but when pride, covetousness, lust, anger,
gluttony, envy, or sloth, are engendered within the breast, then kindles
and breaks forth the strife of passion, which all the philosophers in the
world, from Plato down to Kant, have owned themselves weaponless and
defenceless in fighting against. It is a commotion that overthrows the
noblest faculties of man, and ruthlessly tramples on the heart. For how
can you expect, that in one, addicted to the grosser pleasures, the heart
should go on beating with the usual placidity of health % or, that the
nervous system should respond with accurate vibrations throughout
the unsettled tracery of its delicate fibres 1 It is impossible; and, in
exact proportion to the assaults of ungovernable passion, does the in-
tellect, shaken to its centre, threaten to decline. Mania may be im-
planted in its germ, and the passionate child might, .unchecked or un-
corrected, become a madman or a fool.
Insanity is not the growth of a day or a week; frequently it is the
product of years, the germ being* generated and the seed often sown, in
early life. The experienced psychologist can trace back its origin to a
PREDISPOSED TO INSANITY. 493
very early date, when it assumed no other form than that of caprice, (a very
suspicious symptom at all times,) self-will, ungovernable passion, want of
self-control, a propensity to lie, to steal, to drink, stimulation to excess, a
tendency to excessive dislike?to motiveless dislike?a pleasure in acts of
cruelty, irritability, a temper irascible only 011 a single point (fcenum liabet
in corau), and a peculiar expression of the eye which it is not possible to
describe by the pencil or the pen, and yet is so very significant. We
have predicted mania in individuals whose gait and habits have alone
betrayed the lurking malady to us. Some children are born idiotic, and
even in the nurse's arms there is an oddity of manner that bespeaks the
lack of ordinary intelligence. As they grow up, their passions are
always violent, and not amenable to reason; or they display their angry
feelings without a cause, or give vent to them out of all proportion to
the cause. During the development of their minds, particular ideas, in-
compatible with the comfort, order, and accustomed habits of those about
them, are evinced and pertinaciously acted upon. Selfishness is the
ruling motive; and spite, malignity, taciturnity, and dogged perverseness
are manifested in return for the mildest check placed upon their un-
ruliness. Teaching, according to the usual routine of schools, is out of
the question;?the boy runs away, regardless of disgrace and shame, or
the girl heads a party and takes the greatest delight in trying to corrupt
the rest. Their after-lives are in accordance with their youth; and the
misguided or head-strong woman abandons herself to excesses, while the
perverse man excommunicates himself from society by a wanton derelic-
tion of duty, totally at variance with the received modes of society in
which they had been respectively brought up. It would be easy to
account for these extravagances upon moral grounds alone, or, plireno-
logically speaking, according to particular organizations of the centro-
spinal system; and, doubtless, over-indulgence on the part of parents, and
defects on the side of nature, are very powerful and common causes.
Poetxy, music, novel-reading (illuminism?), and dissipated pleasures,
operate very largely in promoting the development of deleterious pas-
sions, by exciting the imagination and the finer sympathies of our
nature to a morbid degree of exaltation, and substituting an ideal for
the ordinary standard of excellence. Some of the eccentricities that
tarnish the lustre of names famous in history, may be imputed to sources
such as these. Cambyses, after burying a dozen Persians alive, as
Herodotus tells us, in Thalia, shot the son of Praxaspes through the
heart with an arrow, on purpose to prove his own sanity, so seriously
called into question by his ablest subjects. The ancients affirmed that
Orestes was struck with madness for killing his mother; QEdipus, for a
similar crime, and Ajax Oileus, for violating the sanctity of a temple.
Dolabella, Cicero's worthless son-in-law, who demolished the altar erected
to the latreia of Caesar, subsequently miscarried in all his public under-
takings, and at last terminated his existence with his own hands. This
was the sacred disease of the ancients, which gave rise to the hackneyed
line, " Quern Jupiter vult perdere prius dementat." There can, likewise,
be no doubt that peculiar conformations of the body indicate or produce
peculiarities of the mind and temper, so that a giant is popularly stig-
matized as big and stupid, while dwarfs are generally looked down upon
494 ON THE EDUCATION OF CHILDREN
as conceited and spiteful. Distortions of the spine are proverbial for tlie
irritability of tlie brain, the vivacity of thought, and the biting sarcastic
humour incidental to their deformity, such as every one is familiar with
in the persons of Pope and iEsop. Large foreheads are proper to
philosophers ; eyes wide apart, to draftsmen ; rotund temporal fossae to
architects and misers; and projecting orbital* ridges to calculators,
chronologists, and the lovers of order and colour. Thick lips betray the
gourmand and the debauchee, aquiline noses signify even tempers and
clever understandings, thin lips insinuate a vindictive disposition, and
projecting chins point out either buffoonery, or its direct opposite,
mental ascendancy and clear common sense. Byron, Hunter, and
Newton, have each of them the organic development essential to the
manifestation of their personal talents; and the historian, Gibbon, with
his prominent eyeball and voluminous cranium, may be profitably com-
pared with the retreating forehead of Robespierre, Nero, and the profile
of the Dutch adult idiot portrayed by Gall. Hereditary taint is
another fruitful source of moral and intellectual eccentricities; and so is
scrofula, that prolific origin of all that is imperfect, excessive, ecstatic,
obstinate, and incurable in the physical history of man. Crooked spines,
gout, asthma, phthisis, mania, imbecility of mind or body, short lives,
effeete offspring, and an existence scarcely worth the having, fill up the
weary catalogue of its daily?nay, of its hourly lamentations. See Essays
on Scrofula, by W. Ring, M.D., Cantab., Brighton Med. Gaz. 1847.
All these are causes of mental derangement beginning very early
in life, almost as early as the cradle, and eventually producing a class of
diseases as difficult to manage as they are dangerous in their tendencies.
Treatises have been written upon them, and plans of treatment have
been devised, reflecting the greatest credit on the benevolence and
sagacity of their authors. The dead-house has yielded its stock of
scanty information. The pharmacopoeia has been searched for remedies,
which have been vaunted for a time, found ineffectual, and then laid
aside and forgotten. Religious training has, of course, not been omitted,
and the Scriptures have been quoted for the thousandth and first time,
but, as usual, all in vain. Physiology has not been left out of the
inquiry, nor even dry statistics, so much in vogue at present, with its
tiresome list of unimaginative numerals. All has been tried, and
hitherto in a great measure without success, because, perhaps, no one
has gone back to the beginning, and acted on the adage of a by-gone
generation, that prevention is better than cure. It might be affirmed,
that, if a great deal too much has been attempted, a great deal more has
been left undone in the prevention of insanity. This omission is in the
nursery?at that season and in those hours when nobody but the nurse
and the mother are in attendance on the patient, and when the malady
is as yet in its latent state, invisible to unskilled eyes. This is the
point at which we must begin in order to effect a radical cure, nor can
we justly hope to succeed, even at this timely moment,' until a sub-
sequent generation of mothers shall prove themselves to be more
enlightened in the art of preserving both the mental and bodily health
of their children than we can allow the present " heads of houses" the
honour of being fairly entitled to.
PREDISPOSED TO INSANITY. 495
As it is not our intention to enter on all tlie minutiae of hygiene,* so
ably prescribed in works written expressly on tbis subject, and, indeed,
so satisfactorily dwelt upon in the two essays at the bead of tbis
article, especially tliat of Madame de Wahl (an earnest of better tilings),
we will consider one point only, and tbis is the power of self-control.
Taking it for granted, that, in the greater number of cases, no organic
change has actually occurred, and that nothing else than a morbid
excitement prevails within the sensorium, we are confident that not only
actual disease itself will be warded off, but that a share of happiness and
buoyancy of animal spirits can be attained, by a cultivation of the habit
of self-control and self-respect, early acquired, which none but those who
are intimately acquainted with the lives of children,+ and the protracted
history of mania, in its manifold shapes and phases, will ever feel them-
selves inclined to assent to. By self-control, we do not mean the harsh
government of a child?the rod, the menacing mien, and the drum-head
court-martial of a little garrison. Nothing of the kind. The child
should be early taught that there are some things which it may, and
others which it may not do, and it should be shown and given to under-
stand that the permission is as conducive to its happiness and comfort
in the one case as the prohibition is in the other, and tbis regulation
should be made with united mildness and firmness, and without, for a
single moment, interrupting the favourite game of play, the merry
laugh, and the frolic and fun, which, alas! sooner or latter passes away
with the bright sunshine belonging to the morning of life. Particular
cases will require particular management. The tendency to avarice];
may be counterbalanced by the superinduced habit of liberality; sloth
by that of activity; and native haughtiness and pride by daily induce-
ments to delight in the practice of humility. Children are naturally
curious, eager after information, the why and the wherefore of every-
thing, and what they have once learned they never forget. With this
happy discipline, which will render learning a pastime rather than a task,
should be conjoined a course of instruction on tlie realities of life.
Everything should be real?nothing should be covered or glossed over,
* There is a very interesting work entitled Mental Hygiene, or an examination of
the intellect and passions, designed to illustrate their influence on health and the
duration of life. By William Sweetser, M.D., New York, 1843. It is cleverly com-
posed, and tlie style, if not everywhere quite correct, is always lucid. Its author
is evidently a diligent student and a thoughtful medical man.
t- Those" who have, like the writer, been much in the nursery and among the lower
orders, will scarcely have failed to remark a strong resemblance between children,
ignorant persons, and idiots. The idiot is an absolutely ignorant child, the ignorant
person is a conditional idiot, and the child is an ignorant postulant. Hence the
difficulty of guiding young persons, and of governing ignorant masses of the population,
whose motives are selfish, imprudent, impolitic, misdirected, and headstrong.
| A young man, who had grown weary of waiting for the death of a wealthy relative,
whose gold he was to inherit, at length came into possession of his long wished for
treasures. But very soon afterwards he was seized with a serious illness, and his
physiciau, foreseeing his end approaching, gave him to understand that if he had any
aflairs to settle in this world, the sooner he did so the better, as he had no time to
lose. " What!" exclaimed the irritated heir, starting up with the dtw of his last agony
on his brow; "what!?I die??impossible!?1 have not had time to enjoy my
property yet!" So saying, he fell beck on his pillow, a corpse.
4 9G ON THE EDUCATION OF CHILDREN
and made to appear like what it is not. This reality should extend to
the dress and the behaviour, which ought to be the same in the nursery
as it is in the parlour. Their daily habits ought to be as real as their
speech, and the reality of their speech will ofiend no one if it spring
from habits that are really virtuous. There can be no virtue Avliere
there is no reality, and no religion where there is not virtue. And what
is reality, but truth 1 and what is unreality or pretence, but falsehood or
double-mindedness 1 and what is mania, but a false or unreal condition,
which may end in a permanently disorganized state of the once really
healthy mind 1 The actual madman knows no difference between truth
and falsehood, between the positive verities of nature and the negative
idealities of his own morbid dream?out of which, perhaps, he never
awakes except in the life to come. O, if men but knew the inestimable
value of truth, and the ultimate horror, to say nothing of the bad policy
of a lie, whether it be an acted or a spoken one !
If there is any other virtue besides self-control which exerts a benefi-
cial and salubrious effect on the functions of the living organism, it is
that of humility. The humble minded person (actual disease apart) can
scarcely become insane. The chances and changes of this mortal life
flow over without buffeting him with its waves. No position in the
world is to him either high or low; for he knows that every affair must
come to a close, and that the longest life is short. He respects mankind
as he wishes to be respected, and in the imperfections of others he
beholds the admonitory reflection of himself.
We have been speaking of those with apparently healthly constitutions
in whom insanity is surreptitiously produced as a consequence of moral
mismanagement. But we have seldom seen such individuals as are
decidedly predisposed to mania, who do not exhibit some organic mal-
formations of the frame, especially of the nervous system or its appur-
tenances, too visible to be overlooked?some strong hereditary taint or
inveterate scrofulous diathesis. Some children, thus predisposed, are
deaf, others short-sighted, or the subjects of lippitudo or incipient
amaurosis; or they are disfigured by glandular enlargements, or a short
leg, or a strumous hip-joint, or a club-foot, or luevi, or encysted tumours
of the scalp, or crooked squab features with an acute facial angle, and a
low slanting forehead. The vertex is often prolongated, and the hair,
straight and stiff", radiates from the crown, and falls over the head like a
night-cap. The eye tells a great deal?its movements are restless or
drowsy, and the upper eyelid hangs down half over the globe, or else
from sudden emotion is spasmodically elevated, showing the white of the
eye all the way round the iris. There is a spasm or twitch of a leg or
an arm, and the chin is thrown up, and in moments of gratification,
chiefly sensual, the smile of pleasure passes off into the grin of the risus
sarclonicus. The mouth is generally open, the under lip pendant, and
it often slavers. In general the stature is short, with a long back,
stunted legs, and long arms. All these signs may not exist in conjunc-
tion, nor any one of them in so very marked a form as in that above de-
lineated; but that they do exist in a more or less modified degree, the
practised eye will not be slow in perceiving, nor in deducing the legiti-
mate inferences.
PREDISPOSED TO INSANITY. 497
It is obvious, that in cases of this description, ordinary tuition is out
of the question. Much must depend on particular indications, and be
adapted according to the judgment of the practitioner, and the local
advantages of the patient. A situation high and dry, in the country,
apart from the noise and dense atmosphere of a city, is indispensable.
Plenty of wholesome and unstimulating food,* early hours of rising and
retiring to rest, ablution, and personal cleanliness, are among the first
requisites towards recovery, amendment, or an amelioration of so unpro-
mising a condition. As to moral superintendence, the intellect must be
cultivated less sedulously than the feelings; and the feelings must be
cherished and won over, as much as possible, to sociality and a cheerful
intercourse with others. Peculiar propensities or antipathies must be
diverted rather than checked, and drawn aside from an improper object
and carefully directed towards a more suitable one. Manual employ-
ment will be found of the greatest service, for there is nothing so con-
ducive to health, and so invigorating to the mind, as manual labour.
We would especially recommend such an occupation as is concerned in
rural pursuits?the garden, the field, or even following the plough with
a proper attendant in fair weather, and, in winter, sweeping, dusting,
arranging the furniture, &c.?taking part, in short, in some of the daily
business of the household affairs. According to the class in life, the
occupation may be more or less menial) but, whether menial or not, the
pursuit must be an active one, and the hands must be exercised more
than the head. Habit is everything?the habit of being tidy, orderly,
harmlessly engaged, and of having the time filled up with useful trifles;
so that what is begun as a habit shall be persisted in because it is
habitual. Education, which is nothing more than a repeated drill, com-
mences with the body rather than with the mind ; and the experienced
teacher knows that, in the best constituted intellects, the first difficulty
to be overcome is that of rendering the body subservient to the will. We
are the creatures of habit, and use is second nature. It is upon this
principle we must act, and our main endeavour must be to counteract
idiotic or maniacal tendencies by counterfeiting the practice of common
sense till it become habitual and natural. Nor does the good effect of
this kind of training terminate with the mere habit thus artificially ac-
quired, for its ultimate effects penetrate much deeper than the surface,
and end by changing, or helping to change the intimate organizations of
the body itself, entirely and eventually for the better. It is a regimen
which, like that undergone by the jockey for the purpose of racing, or
by the prize-fighter, alters the form and texture, both inward and out-
ward, of his frame, and reduces it to the precise weight and measure
required for his service. It is, in the literal sense of the word, a recre-
* There is one regulation of the health which, simple as it may seem to be, is of the
utmost importance in the treatment of children liable to cerebral excitement, as well as
to maniacal or idiotic symptoms :?it is, that they should never be allowed to eat be-
tween their meals. Insignificant as this direction may sound, it is, notwithstanding,
one of those items the importance of which can be recognised and fully appreciated only
by a practical man, for nothing irritates the temper so much, and helps to keep up a
continual fret upon the mind and spirits, as an irregularity of this description. Nothing
should be taken between meals, not even a glass of water, and the meals should punc-
tually return at their stated hours.
498 ON THE EDUCATION OF CHILDREN
ation or renovation which may be rendered so complete as to surpass
the distant hopes that the serious nature of the malady had at first
reasonably led us to entertain.
The influence of diet, climate, and locality over the character, dispo-
sitions, and morals of a people, both nationally and individually, is a
doctrine that has received the countenance and support of some of the
greatest names in science and literature, such as Hippocrates among the
ancients, and Montesquieu in much more recent times.* That so in-
constant, self-willed, and independent a being as man should, like the
inferior animals, be subjected to the perpetual modifications arising from
food, temperature, air, and soil, might at the first glance seem to be a
bold proposition. But, nevertheless, so it is; and, within the limits of
certain restrictions, there can be no question that man, both bodily and
mentally, is, with all his intellectual ascendancy, the helpless creature of
telluric and sidereal agencies. In many points, the doctrine of Hippo-
crates, concerning the varieties of mankind, agrees with that of M.
Geoffry Saint-Hilaire upon the varieties of domestic animals; and if,
on the one side, according to the French naturalist, the number and
degrees of varieties among animals expresses the number and degrees of
the different influences to which they are submitted; so, on the other,
according to the Greek physician, the varieties of people represent the
varieties of soil and climate, while the resemblances between the indi-
viduals of the same nation prove that these same individuals are exposed,
upon an extensive scale, to the same influences, whether we regard them
as the results of a semibarbarous state, like that of the ancient Scythians
or modern natives of New Zealand, or suppose them to be the effect of
castes such as those mentioned of Egypt more than three thousand years
ago, or such as we may discover for ourselves among the various groups
that compose our Anglo-Indian empire at the present day.
We have, in the preceding observations, taken but a cursory view of
the all important subject, the education of children predisposed to mental
derangement; at present this field of inquiry is untrod?thousands of
children, with a clear and obvious predisposition to insanity, are left
without the advantages of that education of the moral, intellectual, and
physical faculties, which alone can save them from the fearful abyss, into
which, at a future period, they must be hurled, unless something is done
to avert so direful a calamity! In many of these cases, where the nervous
system is in a precocious state of development, and the unnatural amount
of intellectual capacity and vital energy developed in early life clearly
indicate the existence of a latent tendency to affections of the cerebral
apparatus, nothing literally is done to quell the impending storm, or
adapt the vessel for the approaching hurricane;?the mother and the
father, delighted with the precocity evinced by the darling child?the
infant prodigy?instead of keeping down these unnatural and unhealthy
manifestations of nervous and mental vigour (the sure harbingers of
terrible disease !) do their best to encourage the excited brain and fragile
mind to the exercise of its utmost power, until the poor creature sinks
prematurely into the grave, the victim of water in the brain, or chronic
? CEuvres completes d'Hippocrate, Traduction Nouvelle, par E. Littre, tome ii.
pp. 3?5. Paris, 1840.
PREDISPOSED TO INSANITY. 499
inflammation of the encephalon; or lives only to linger out a painful
existence, at an advanced period of life in a state of positive imbecility,
or inmate of a lunatic asylum. Mothers! fathers! listen to the voice
of experience. Remember that the precocious child is often like a
meteor?it flashes in all its brilliant effulgence for a few minutes above
us, and then expires. Believe us, when we say, that the seeds of fatal,
incurable, melancholy disease of the brain and mind are often the con-
sequences of the mistaken fondness and excessive indulgence of those
who ought to be the last to bring about such sad results !
The consumptive, the scrofulous, the gouty diatheses, are marked in
the outward lineaments of the human frame, and the practised eye of
the physician can generally predicate with accuracy the possibility of
such affections being developed at certain ages, provided the constitution
is subjected to agencies known to excite into actual development these
diseases.
In the same manner the maniacal diatheses is easily detected by the
observant and experienced physician, and by the use of all devised means
the brain and its appendages may be preserved intact and free from any
serious affections. Our object in this paper is more to point out the
importance of education under these circumstances, than to lay down
any minute and specific rules for the guidance of those to whose care
such cases may be trusted. At some other time we purpose fully dis-
cussing this subject in all its important ramifications.
