On Hallucinations
==================

BY GEORGE SIGMOND, M.D., PROFESSOR OF MATERIA MEDIC A, ETC.
The subject of hallucinations lias excited in tlie French School of
Psychological Medicine deep interest, in consequence of the Academy of
Medicine having, in the year 1844, offered one of its annual prizes for the
hest dissertation on the causes which produce them, and the diseases
which they characterize. There were no less than eleven candidates in
the field, and it is understood that amongst them were some of the most
distinguished psychologists of the day. The reward, however, was
assigned to Dr. Baillarger, the physician to the Salpetriere, to whom
science is already deeply indebted for his inquiries into the anatomy, the
physiology, and pathology of the nervous system, and whose numerous
works on mental diseases have placed him one of the foremost men of
the age. He has published the essay which gained the prize, and we
have also had the results of the inquiries of Brierre de Boismont, of
Moreau, and of others ; still, however, a vast and most important field
for observation remains from which to glean results of the most import-
ant character. The distinction to be drawn between hallucinations,
monomania, mental delusion, and fantasia, is much insisted upon by
many foreign writers. The English school seems scarcely to admit that
there is sufficient ground for a decided diagnosis ; and on perusing the
best works written by its leaders, we generally find that they have not
noticed any classification of these different states of disordered intellect,
but mix them indiscriminately together. Between hallucination and
monomania, there is at any rate a most striking distinction; the latter
is a fixed idea, predominating over every faculty of the mind, absorbing
all other ideas, and generally influencing the actions of the body; whilst
the other is a false impression, made on the sensorial apparatus, often
very slightly interfering with the intellectual powers, and unaccompanied
hy irresistible impulse. With regard to the actual definition of halluci-
nation and its diagnosis between mental delusions and fantasias, until
we have more maturely reflected on their nature, and studied them
under all their various phases, it would be premature to attempt such
axioms as would be acknowledged to be both philosophically and morally
undeniable. Who, after studying with unwearied perseverance the
structure of the human mind, or having read the most acutely reasoned
disquisitions, can fancy that he has sounded its depths, or has even
pierced beyond the surface 1 Still do we feel that it is not inscrutable;
Q Q
580 ON HALLUCINATIONS.
but that, guided 1>y reason, by humanity, and by confidence in a Supreme
Power, we shall gradually have some of the beauteous truths of nature
revealed to us. There is apparently a link between hallucination and
extreme credulity, which has as yet not been investigated. Those who
have so completely yielded up their conviction and their reason to the
belief in apparitions, in demons, and in sorcery, as to have been con-
vinced not only that there is supernatural agency constantly at work,
but that they themselves have been acted upon, have had neither false
perceptions, nor any condition of the sensorial apparatus that would
lead to the idea that they were of unsound mind, yet have they been
considered as labouring under hallucinations by the incredulous portions
of society ; whilst they may have been ranked according to the people
amongst whom they have lived as saints, as enthusiasts, or as philoso-
phers. They have not been men of inferior intellect, but of high and
commanding capacity, who have thus been bordering on hallucinations.
Volumes of great learning exist on the Nymph Egeria, of Numa Pom-
pilius, of the Demon of Socrates, the vision of Brutus, the inspirer of
Mahomet, and the mystic messengers of one-half of the saints of the
catholic church ; and while some of those have commented upon them
as men of high character and endowments, others have characterized
them as visionary dreamers, half impostors, half self-deceivers. There is
scarcely a man of eminence who has written his autobiography, or laid
open the secrets of his inmost soul, but has not acknowledged some
preternatural event in his life ; the most sceptical have felt, at some
period or other, a mental emotion, either a fantasia or an hallucination.
The man avIio, in the age just passing away, has been considered at
once the most philosophic, the most worldly, and the most wedded to
material doctrines, the Prince Talleyrand, never could speak of one
circumstance of his life without shuddering, and without betraying an
emotion, which amounted to something like an exhibition of momentary
excitement, and that of the most extraordinary kind, in an individual
who was remarkable for his passive bearing under every circumstance of
life. The anecdote has been related by M. Colmache, his private secre-
tary, as he learnt it from him ; and his widow has assured me that the
subject was always one to which, when allusion was made, the Prince
displayed a most unusual state of mind. " I remember," he said, " upon
one occasion, having been gifted for one single moment with an unknown
and nameless power. I know not to this moment whence it came ; it
has never once returned; and yet, upon that one occasion, it saved my life.
Without that sudden and mysterious inspiration, I should not have been
here to tell my tale. I had freighted a ship in concert with my friend,
Beaumetz. He was a good fellow, Beaumetz, with whom I had ever
lived on the most intimate terms ; and in those stormy times, when it
needed not only friendship to bind men together, but almost godlike
courage to show that friendship. I could not but prize most highly all
his bold and loyal demonstrations of kindness and attachment to me.
I had not a single reason to doubt his friendship. On the contrary, he
had given me, on several occasions most positive proof of his devotion
to my interest and well-being. We had fled from France ; we had
arrived at New York together ; and we had lived in perfect harmony
ON HALLUCINATIONS. 587
during our stay tliere. So, after having resolved upon improving tlie
little money that was left by speculation, it was, still in partnership
and together, that we freighted a small vessel for India,?trusting
to all the goodly chances which had befriended us in our escape from
danger and from death, to venture once more conjointly to brave the
storms and perils of a yet longer and more adventurous voyage. Every-
thing was embarked for our departure?bills were all paid, and fare-
wells all taken?and we were waiting for a fair wind with most eager
expectation,?being prepared to embark at any hour of the day or night,
in obedience to the warning of the captain. This state of uncertainty
seemed to irritate the temper of poor Beaumetz to an extraordinary
degree ; and unable to remain quietly at home, he hurried to and from
the city with an eager, restless activity, which at times excited my
astonishment; for he had ever been remarkable for great calmness and
placidity of temper. One day, he entered our lodging, evidently labour-
ing under great excitement, although commanding himself to appear
calm. I was engaged at the moment writing letters to Europe ; and,
looking over my shoulder, he said, with forced gaiety, ' What need to
waste time in penning those letters ??they will never reach their destina-
tion. Come with me, and let us take a turn on the Battery ; perhaps
the wind may be chopping round ; we may be nearer our departure than
we imagine.' The day was very fine, although the wind Avas blowing
hard, and I suffered myself to be persuaded. Beaumetz, I remembered
afterwards, displayed an unusual officiousness in aiding me to close my
desk and put away my papers, handing me, with hurried eagerness, my
hat and cane, and doing other services to quicken my departure, which
at the time I attributed to the restless desire for change, the love of
activity with which he seems to have been devoured during the whole
period of our delay. We walked through the crowded streets to the
Battery. He had seized my arm and hurried me along, seemingly in
eager haste to advance. When we had arrived on the broad esplanade
?the glory then, as now, of New York?Beaumetz quickened his step
still more, until we arrived close to the water's edge. He talked loud
and quickly, admiring in energetic terms the beauty of the scenery, the
Brooklyn heights, the shady groves of the island, the ships riding at
anchor, and the busy scene on the peopled wharf?when suddenly he
paused in his mad, incoherent discourse ; for I had freed my arm from
his grasp, and stood immoveable before him. Staying his wild and
rapid steps, I fixed my eye upon his face. He turned aside, cowed and
dismayed. ' Beaumetz,' I shouted, ' you mean to murder me : you
intend to throw me from the height into the sea below. Deny it,
monster, if you can.' The maniac stared at me for a moment; but I
took especial care not to avert my gaze from his countenance, and he
quailed beneath it. He stammered a few incoherent words, and strove
to pass me ; but I barred his passage" with extended arms. He looked
vacantly right and left, and then flung himself upon my neck, and burst
into tears. ' 'Tis true?'tis true, my friend ! tlie thought has haunted
me day and night, like a flash from the lurid fire of hell. It was for
this I brought you here. Look ! you stand within a foot of the edge
of the parapet: in another instant the work would have been done.'
Q Q 2
588 ON HALLUCINATIONS.'
The demon liad left him ; his eye was unsettled, and the white foam
stood in bubbles on his parched lips ; but he was no longer tossed by
the same mad excitement under which he had been labouring, for he
suffered me to lead him home without a single Avord. A few days'
repose, bleeding, abstinence, completely restored him to his former self ;
and, what is most extraordinary, the circumstance was never mentioned
between us. My fate was at work. It was during those few days of
watching by the bedside of poor Beaumetz, that I received the letters
from France which announced to me the revocation of the decree which
had sent me a wanderer to America, and I was invited to return with
all speed. I could not resist the appeal, and at once decided on leaving
Beaumetz to prosecute our speculation alone, and on returning to
Paris immediately. Prince Talleyrand, to the latest hour of his existence,
believed that " he was for an instant gifted with an extraordinary light,
and that during a quick and vivid flash the possible and the true was
revealed to a strong and powerful mind ;" that upon this the whole of
the destiny of his existence hinged; and that the sudden impulsive
madness of another was destined to be his future greatness in life. This
species of momentary excitement, which is not again repeated, but is
remembered with the most vivid impression, is what is more immediately
known by the name of fantasia. It differs from mental delusion from
its absence of intensity, and from its not recurring; and from hallucina-
tion in the likelihood that certain coincidences and probabilities of some-
thing like truth were mingled with superstitious feelings. Hallucinations
not only exist within the walls of the lunatic asylum, and amongst those
who have an intellect completely disturbed, but individuals who, under
the ordinary circumstances of life are fully capable of performing their
duties, are subject to momentary impressions which have no foundation
in reality, and which, from their occasional recurrence, lead to the belief
that the mind is in an unsound state.
When a person actually insists that he sees, hears, feels phenomena
inexplicable to any but himself, the question that arises is, are the senses
that convey to the brain impressions in an unhealthy state, or are they
in a normal condition whilst the imagination is the seat of the delirious
error 1 Is there a physical cause, or is there a psychological disturbance 1
In order fully to study and to elucidate such questions, it is first neces-
sary to examine the physiology of the senses, to ascertain how far they
are capable of misleading the reason, and urging the imagination to
dreams unconnected, and reveries which have no true foundation; and
then to learn whether certain pathological conditions produce the same
effect, such as cerebral congestions, venous retardation, following on
arterial acceleration, febrile conditions, the different neuroses, changes
of temperature, effects of severe cold, privation of food, indulgence in
alcoholic stimuli, habits of narcotism, lesions of organs distant from the
brain, and various corporeal states, which either sympathize with the
nervous system, or call it into unwonted action. In fact, the history of
mankind, and the experience of those who have had the opportunity of
studying the ills that flesh is heir to, prove that the manifold causes
which give rise to hallucinations can be referred to causes innumerable,
which oftentimes escape the active curiosity and the careful watchfulness
of the most enlightened.
ON HALLUCINATIONS. 589
The hallucinations of the sense of hearing are the most frequent; and,
as Dr. Baillarger has most truly observed, they are also the most compli-
cated. Amongst those who are decidedly insane this species of false percep-
tion is infinitely more common than that of any other of the senses ; it is
not only one voice that is heard, hut many; it is not only the less in-
structed, hut the intellectual; it is among men of great imagination
and of deep learning. It haunts the mind in the form of a demon, as
in the case of the imaginative Tasso, or as Satan wrangling upon
divinity, as it did with the disputant Luther, or as a Deity revealing his
will, with the contemplative Swcdenborg. The most simple of the hal-
lucinations is that of noises in the ear, such as sounds made during the
night in the chimney. I have known an invalid complain of a perfectly
sleepless night occurring for weeks, in consequence of the idea that
dwelt upon her mind that some rooks were building a nest in her
chimney. She had lately returned from the country, where a rookery
was established. At the lapse of a few weeks she had an intermittent
fever, after which the noises ceased. But the following year, on her
return again from the country, she underwent a precisely similar state.
I have always attributed this to an effect produced on the nervous
system by an autumnal miasma. A singular case occurred in Paris, in
1831, during one of those bloody emeutes which that unfortunate city
has had to witness. A female saw her husband, a workman, fall dead
at her feet, struck by a ball. A month after this event she was safely
delivered of a child; but the tenth day after her accouchement delirium
came on. At its commencement she heard the noise of cannon, the
firing of piquets, the whistling of balls. She ran into the country,
hoping, in getting out of the city, to escape from the noises by which
she was pursued. She was arrested and conducted to the Salpetriere.
At the end of a month she was completely restored. During ten years
six similar paroxysms have taken place, and the delirium lias always
commenced with hallucination of sound. Always has this patient run
into the country to escape from ideal discharges of cannon, from the
firing of guns. Frequently, in the precipitation of her flight, she has
fallen into the water ; twice has she thrown herself into it to escape the
horror of the sounds that remind her of the death of her husband, and
recal the miseries she endured. Single voices are seldom so common as
two voices, and the subject is oftentimes accompanied and caused by
some emotion in the mind. Pariset, in his lectures, mentioned the case
of a young girl who heard a voice constantly calling her thief, and re-
proaching her with the object stolen. At length, she returned the article,
and the hallucination soon ceased. This, however, approaches to the
state which our forefathers called conscience-stricken; and Ave have in
our court of judicature more than one instance where a murderer has
been pursued by a voice, as was Cain after his fratricide. One unfor-
tunate maniac at the Salpetriere heard a voice proclaiming the an-
nouncement of his death, and the punishment which, for his sins, he
was destined to undergo. Some females who have led the most re-
proacliable lives have heard voices calling them by the worst epithets.
The hallucination which believes that echo is answering every word is,
that the individual speaks what he thinks internally, but unconscious
that he has spoken, and not recognising his own voice, he believes
590 ON HALLUCINATIONS.
that another person repeats his thoughts. A distinguished nobleman,
not long since deceased, who held at one time a high office in the
administration of the country, was subject to an hallucination of this
kind. He not only spoke to himself when alone, as those who labour
under hallucinations most generally do, but even in the society of
strangers, which is less usual.
An anecdote has been recorded for which, although the fact may not
have occurred exactly as it is generally told, there is ample ground for
believing that many circumstances not at all unlike it did actually hap-
pen. The noble lord took a friend, whom he had met at the country
seat of another friend, in his carriage to London, arriving there rather
late in the afternoon ; he said, as he fancied to himself, " I suppose I
must ask this man to dinner," but, from his mental absorption, he ex-
pressed himself aloud. His friend, not knowing that disease was the
cause of this singularity, said, as if also speaking to himself, " I suppose
this nobleman will ask me to dinner ; if he does I shall not accept it."
As may be supposed, a very unfortunate confusion of ideas sprang up
in the mind of this unfortunate nobleman, from similar occurrences, and
his days were terminated under corporeal restraint, so visible did his
malady become.
Two voices in earnest conversation are not unfrequently heard, some-
times loudly disputing, at other times giving advice, the passions or the
feelings of the individual who is subject to the hallucinations imparting
the colouring to the subject: thus a lady was greatly disturbed, she
Avas much given to the toilette, and had to listen to the voices of two men
whom she had never seen, who constantly pursued her everywhere,
leaving her no peace with the compliments that they continually ad-
dressed to her. Early in the morning, they were prepared with their praises
and admiration of the clearness and beauty of her complexion. A case
worthy the narration occurred to me about ten years ago, at the period
when my lectures on the Materia Medica were printed weekly in the
" Lancet." The person who conducted Mr. Wakley's printing establish-
ment, in Essex-street in the Strand, called on me one morning, and
requested my professional assistance for one of the printers imme-
diately under his own direction, who had lately betrayed a singular
species of hallucination, for which his friends were exceedingly anxious
that he should obtain medical advice. He at length consented, although
he believed himself to be in the most perfect health; but, as in one of
my lectures I had spoken of a case which was peculiarly interesting to
him, in consequence of its allusion to the appearance of imps to those
labouring under delirium tremens, he would have no objection to an
interview with me. He was described to me as an individual of supe-
rior ability to those of his own position, a man fond of reading, and
particularly attentive to medical literature; he had lately been gloomy,
misanthropic, and, in contradiction to his former habits, which were
abstemious, he now passed much of his time at the public-house,
and had been frequently intoxicated, but rather from a wish to drown
thought than from a love of liquor. On an appointed day he presented
himself to me, accompanied by a friend; he was evidently labouring
under great embarrassment, and seemed unwilling for some time to
ON HALLUCINATIONS. 591
place confidence in me, for I could not get any acknowledgment that lie
was unwell. At length, he began by imploring me to forgive the un-
usual request he was about to make, and to bear in mind that nothing
but the great misery he endured could lead him to ask me to take the
only steps that could relieve him. He then told me that he had been
persecuted for several months, by the unwearied attacks of two imps
which had taken up their residence in his body; their size was exceed-
ingly small, but their voices were tremendously powerful?one was a
lively, agreeable, merry devil, that had constantly something jocular to
say, but the other was a most sulky, unhappy wretch, who was con-
stantly tormenting him, and advising him to commit suicide; he in fact
it was that rendered his whole life one scene of wretchedness. He had
never confided his sorrows to any one but the friend that accompanied
him, and he should not have done so, but that he was in some measure
obliged to do it, for, whilst walking with him some days ago, in Fleet-
street, he had been under the necessity of borrowing his pocket-hand-
kerchief, a thing he was too well aware was so unusual and so ungen-
tlemanlike, that he felt it a duty he owed to himself to explain the
cause, which was, that, on leaving the house, he had placed his pocket-
handkerchief in his hat, where, by a lucky accident, the two devils were
at the moment, that they of course were in confinement upon his head,
where he hoped to keep them; but the merry little imp had suggested
to his companion that if they tickled the nose of their victim, he would
be obliged to take his handkerchief out of the hat, and they would
escape; to obviate this misfortune it was that he borrowed one from
his friend. All this was told with the greatest gravity, and then came,
with a most piteous look, the prayer of the petition he had to make to
me. After the usual compliments paid to physicians for their skill and
humanity, and the assertion of the belief that I was the only man in
London that could restore him to health, he proposed that every aper-
ture in the room should be carefully closed, that the key-hole should be
stopped, and that not the slightest chink should be left open, whilst he
stripped himself naked, and I hunted after the imps, seized and con-
fined them. This was the only remedy for the state in which lie was.
I humoured him to the top of his bent, I listened with the appearance
of belief to his melancholy narrative, and commenced the shutting up
the crevices; I soon saw, however, how useless any attempt would prove
to relieve his mind. It was evident that, however hermetically sealed
the apartment, the idea was too rooted ever to be removed; and I Avas,
after some length of time given to his assistance, compelled to conclude
my interview. Of course, I could only foretell to his friends the sad
termination of the case, which, I afterwards learnt, he hurried on, by
his complete abandonment to the momentary respite that spirits and
fermented liquors gave him.
One of the most singular hallucinations to which the sense of hearing
lends itself is, to the carrying on a longuninterrupted conversation, during
which the individual speaks, addresses a third party, and waits to listen
to the response, which seems to be perfectly new to the apparent
listener, who gives every attention. Who that reads the life of Tasso,
as given by his friend and biographer, Manso, does not remember to
592 ON HALLUCINATIONS.
have either himself met with a patient who has reminded him of the
description, or has heard from a medical friend some tale which has
carried the same marvellous air with it. Any one accustomed to what
occurs within lunatic establishments must have seen patients walking
up and down, holding an imaginary conversation, or must have heard,
during the night, in some cell or other, an earnest long-continued
dialogue. When Tasso, to convince his friend, Manso, of the folly
of his incredulity, admitted him to his privacy during the visit of
the familiar genius with whom he was in communication, he turned
his head towards the window, ceased to reply to any observations
but those which he supposed were made by this mysterious being.
The language, tlie style he made use of, were of the most elevated cha-
racter, and he waited with great composure for the reply which he
believed that he heard. . Manso, astonished at what passed, though
he could see nothing, was held in a species of ecstasy; he gazed with
wonder at the spot pointed out to him, saw only the rays of the sun
shining, and felt an indescribable sensation, which was only relieved by
the supposed departure of the spirit, when Tasso asked him if he were
yet freed from his doubts, to which Manso replied, that they still re-
mained, although he acknowledged he had heard extraordinary things.
It has been often observed, that during the hallucinations there is a
higher degree of intellectual power exhibited than the individual suffer-
ing under its influence is supposed, in his ordinary state, to possess;
some of those who deliver extemporaneous discourses have been heard
to pour forth, with the greatest ease, the most felicitous expressions,
the most poignant satire, and the readiest wit. During the hallucina-
tions produced by taking the Indian hemp, the intensity of the sense
of sound is most striking. The celebrated Theodore Gaultier related
to Dr. Moreau, in poetic language, which it is hopeless to attempt to
translate, so as to give an idea of the style of this highly imaginative
author, the sensations produced; he says, that " his sense of hearing
was prodigiously developed. I actually heard the noise of colours?
green, red, blue, yellow sounds, reached me in waves perfectly distinct;
a glass overthrown, the creaking of a footstool, a word pronounced low,
vibrated and shook me like peals of thunder; my own voice appeared
to me so loud, that I dared not speak, for fear of shattering the walls
around me, or of making me burst like an explosive shell; more than
five hundred clocks sang out the hour with an harmonious silvery
sound ; every sonorous object sounded like the note of an harmonica or
the yEolian harp?I swam or floated in an ocean of sound." Such is
the exaggerated language which has been employed by an individual
whose taste and enjoyment of music have rendered his criticism on that
art so much sought after. Doctor Carriere, who is one of those who
have made experiments with the haschych upon several medical pupils,
employs similar terms when speaking of its effects upon the sense of
hearing. One of his brother physicians was under its influence, when
a servant girl in the next room began an ordinary song; he put his ear
to the key-hole in an apparent ecstasy of delight, as if lie were unwilling
that the least sound should escape him. He remained under the charm
for nearly half an hour, until the heroine of the mop and pail quitted
ON HALLUCINATIONS. 593
lier work. The situation from which the supposed voice emanates has
not yet been studied with much attention, but there is every reason to
believe, from the few remarks that have yet been made, that some light
may eventually be thrown upon the subject by a more minute exa-
mination. It lias been observed, that the epigastrium has been referred
to as the spot from which voices are generally said to issue; it is the
remark of Bertrand, that all those who profess to have the power of
magnetic somnambulism say, that they derive it from a voice seated in
the epigastrium, and the greater number of highly nervous persons, of
epileptics, and convulsionaires always refer to that spot. The case of
the individual, mentioned by Pinel, who spoke of that region as the
centre of every pain, grief, pleasure, or emotion, will be remembered, as
affording -an ample specimen of how much sensibility is said to be con-
centrated in the epigastrium by those who suffer under derangement in
which melancholy is the principal characteristic. It will be remembered
that in all ages the voice has been said to proceed from the abdomen,
during the contortions of the sybil, the enchantments of the sorceress,
the ravings of the false prophetess, the dreams of the somnambulist, or
the ecstasies of the religious enthusiast. From the pharynx and from
the chest a voice issues, more especially amongst the epileptics and the
hysterical ; they hear unearthly sounds, more generally of a shrill kind,
occasionally bowlings?they seem to inspire the same eagerness for
imitation as do sounds from the epigastrium, and they depend more
generally upon a heated imagination springing from the individual.
The top of the head is not unfrequently described as the position from
which the voice comes. When there are two voices, they are spoken of
as issuing from two different parts of the head; in one case, observed
by Dr. Baillarger, a man of condition had one voice at the back of his
head, recommending self-destruction, another at the anterior, dissuading
him from it. Occasionally the two hemispheres appear to be the seat
of antagonist voices, each inspiring a different train of thought, and
more generally opposing each other. There is much in these halluci-
nations which has for its belief the existence of two ideal beings ad-
dressing the disordered mind, that might indicate some degree of pro-
bability in the idea, so well thrown out, of the late Dr. Wigan, of the
duality of the brain. Many are the cases which seem to have had con-
siderable light thrown upon them by this theory, which remains yet to
be more closely investigated before one can presume to give it denial.
The observations which it has excited at the institutions in Paris, have
led some pathologists and physiologists to become followers of the doc-
trine laid down. When they are more matured, it is to be hoped they
will be given to the profession, that they may further prosecute inquiries
which, in the present stage of psychology, must be considered as valu-
able, and as steps to a higher ground than we have yet been able to
take in our pursuits.
In the consideration of the false representations made to the brain
by the eye, we more immediately recognise the truth of the line of
demarcation drawn by Esquirol, and followed by the succeeding French
school, between hallucination and mental illusion. In the latter, there
has been some impression made upon the external nervous system, but
594 ON HALLUCINATIONS.
it is falsely conveyed to the brain; there has been something that has
impinged upon the optic nerve, but during the transition to the brain
it has acquired some undue character from the imagination, and it is
represented under some new and imaginary form, whilst during an hallu-
cination both the external and internal portion of the sensorial system
are deceived, and have altogether created the object which is presented.
During an illusion, a huge black cat by the fireside has been mentally
transformed into the image of a beautiful woman; a white garment
floating in the wind into a celestial messenger; the dark miserable alleys
of Cairo have been lighted up into magnificent bazaars, and a brilliant
fete has been seen where a few beggars have been assembled. Halluci-
nations of sight, where the fancy is altogether the creator, are very rare
amongst the insane; the eye, more faithful than the ear, - does not
picture objects which have no reality whatever with any very great
facility; when it occurs, it does not betoken a more decided state of
insanity; however, there are many persons who see for a considerable
length of time visionary objects who are well fitted for all the ordinary
duties of life. It has been observed, that those who once have been
thus misled by the senses are liable, not only to its recurrence, but to
the appearance of similar deceptions. So truly does Shakspeare seem
to have known the workings of the human imagination, that he paints
Macbeth as yielding to two hallucinations?first, the air-drawn dagger,
" the false creation proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain," then the
" strange infirmity, the very painting of his fear," Banquo, " the horrible
shadow," the unreal mockery; he describes Hamlet as twice beholding
the ghost of his father, and yet capable of fulfilling the ordinary duties
of life, whilst Lear, in the most incoherent ravings of mania, is beset
with no visions. The illusions produced by the sight are common. The
whole history of ghosts, of preternatural appearance, of special wonders,
must be deeply studied before an attempt can be made to elucidate
them; and, in the present infancy of psychological science, however
large the data may be, we want several links of the chain; these, how-
ever, will doubtless be gradually furnished to us as enlightened medical
men study the phenomena, and bring their labours, however slight they
may be, into the general fund of knowledge.
The imagination is engaged in a very different manner where the
sight is in fault than where hearing is disordered; it does not paint
such exciting scenes, it does not bring the reason into action, as we
have seen it do during the disturbance of the latter organ, when con-
versations sometimes of an intellectual character occur, where the indi-
vidual has to listen to the advice, the reproaches, or the menaces of a
supposed stranger. It is generally one object alone that attracts the
attention, or that is complained of; it may appear under various shapes,
but it is more generally connected with some idea that has previously
struck with great intensity on the mind ; thus the learned and ingenious
Pascal, after being in danger of his life at the bridge of ISTeuilly, saw
afterwards a precipice with a fearful abyss at his feet. Those whose
minds are strongly bent on devotion, and have yielded up their thoughts
to religion, see angels and the Virgin Mary. I was once in a church
where the clergyman, who had for some time betrayed symptoms bor-
ON HALLUCINATIONS. 595
dering on alienation of mind, but wlio never liad evinced its actual
presence, broke off liis discourse, pointing to the presence of tlie Holy
Ghost; he was fortunately prevented, by timely attention, from becom-
ing insane, but he was considered ever afterwards incapable of resuming
his duties. It is generally known that Napoleon Buonaparte was, in
the early part of his career, subject to an hallucination of sight, in
consequence of tlie vivid impression made upon his mind by one of the
occurrences of liis eventful life. In the heat of one of the many battles
in which he was engaged, he was carried, by the ardour of his courage,
into the very midst of the slaughter, his immediate followers fled, he
was left alone, surrounded on all sides by fierce assailants; how he
escaped from death unhurt no one was ever able to ascertain?it was one
of those miracles which seemed to be Avorked by his tutelary genius;
the deep impression, however, of the danger which he had run was not
effaced when he mounted the throne; at certain intervals, a striking
hallucination occurred?suddenly, in the midst of the silence of the
palace, loud cries were occasionally heard, the emperor was seen fighting
with the utmost desperation amongst his visionary foes ; it lasted but a
very short period, but during that time the battle seemed to be a tre-
mendous one. This gave rise to the report that this great general was
subject to epileptic fits; but the fact, as I have stated it, was com-
mented upon by Pariset in his lectures.
These visions will not unfrequently cease upon shutting the eyes;
they more generally, however, are permanent. Esquirol used to state
that he was called upon to attend one of the relatives of Napoleon's
family who had been in the army: after several reverses of fortune, he
exhibited undoubted signs of insanity, and was placed under the im-
mediate care of the great physician, who has left a name more respected
and admired than that of the mighty emperor, who patronised the
humble superintendent of a lunatic asylum. His were both delusions
and hallucinations, for he saw around him members of the imperial
family; and when the servants attached to the establishment did not
pay due homage to these great personages, his anger knew no bounds,
and he worked himself up to a high state of irritation. He fell upon
his knees before one of the imaginary beings, and implored protection and
pardon. In the midst of one of the most outrageous of his paroxysms,
Esquirol advised him to place a bandage over his eyes. To this he
consented: instantaneously, all his delusions ceased; he no longer saw
any imaginary beings; there was nothing to excite him any longer; he
became perfectly calm and collected, and even spoke rationally of his
state of mind. The experiment was afterwards frequently tried, and
was always attended with the most complete success. On one occasion
the bandage was kept on for twelve hours, during which he was com-
pletely rational, and did not betray for one moment during the whole of
the time the slightest appearance of his malady; but at the end of that
period, on his eyes being relieved from that state of darkness, the delu-
sion recommenced.
Sometimes a train of different ideas arise; the hallucination is com-
plex; the removal of one visionary object is followed by the presence of
another. Dr. Moreau relates a case that struck him very forcibly when
50G ON HALLUCINATIONS.
lie entered as a pupil at Charenton, and which has subsequently from
circumstances occupied his attention. A young lady, a near relative, of
lively imagination, had been subjected to some chagrin which preyed
much upon her spirits, but which produced no bad effect either upon her
health of body, or upon the general functions of her mind. Returning
home with a younger sister in the evening, she had scarcely put her
foot upon the first step of the staircase which led to her room,
than she fancied that the whole of the staircase was enveloped in flame.
Being a person of great presence of mind, she reflected that there could
be no reality, but that she must be the sport of her fancy. She, there-
fore, courageously went into her room, knowing where some allumettes
were kept, she felt for them in the dark, but being naturally in a state
of great agitation, she threw the box that contained them on the ground.
On stooping to pick them up, she uttered a most fearful cry, which
excited general alarm : she had seen extended at her feet the dead body
of a man. Her sister, Avho was not in the slightest degree aware of the
cause of her alarm, immediately seized one of the phosphorus matches,
and with its light the whole hallucination disappeared, never to return
again, but it left behind an indelible impression. Dr. Moreau has given
us the result of his investigation of the case, and his attempt to connect
it with some previous occurrence, and with either hereditary or con-
stitutional predisposition to some unusual psychological state. Salverte
relates an instance where a female was bitterly bewailing the loss of
a brother, when suddenly she heard his voice, which by an un-
warrantable deception, somebody near her imitated in such a manner
as to deceive her. Overwhelmed by fright, she exclaimed, and firmly
believed, that she saw his shade surrounded by a resplendent halo of
light.
If one gave way to the belief in the numerous tales that are afloat
upon what is called indisputable authority, of hallucinations having been
succeeded by the actual occurrence of what presented itself in the dream,
one Avould be lost in a labyrinth from which it would be impossible to
escape; besides which, such is the credulity with which some of the
wisest and best of men are endued, that they unintentionally lend them-
selves to the propagation of marvels which do not bear the test of slow
and careful inquiry.
Some individuals do not see a single object; they have represented be-
fore their eyes different objects, generally, however, bearing upon one
matter that absorbs their thoughts. A lady who had been one of the
most decided devotees to the card table, became impressed with the
hallucination that she had succeeded to a large fortune, and that it was
necessary to exhibit great hospitality. She fancied two evenings in the
week that she received her friends, laid out the card-table with great
exactitude at the proper hour; went through all the courtesies of the
hostess with great tact and politeness, looked over the hands of
visionary partners; praised their skill at the game; hoped they would
reach home in safety when she took leave of them, and acted with pre-
cisely the same politeness that she would have done had she not wandered
in her imagination. Bonnet in " L'Essai Analytique sur VAme," tells
us that he was acquainted with a man full of health, of honesty of
ON HALLUCINATIONS. 597
judgment, and of merit, who in open day, and independently of all
external impression, saw from time to time before him figures of men,
of women, of birds, of buildings, &c. He saw these figures make
different movements, approach, retire, go away, diminish, increase,
appear, disappear. He saw buildings rise up before him, and exhibit
all the different parts that enter into their construction; the carpets of
the apartments change into richer carpets: sometimes he saw rich
tapestry on the walls, on which hung pictures resembling beautiful
views in the country; then quickly all this would give place to less
ornamented decoration, or to common materials. All the paintings
seemed to be of the most perfect beauty, and to represent the objects
for which they were intended, with the same life as they did naturally;
but these were only paintings, and neither the men nor the women ever
spoke, they were perfectly silent; nor was the slightest noise attendant
upon anything that he saw. This person had undergone for both eyes the
operation for cataract at an age somewhat advanced. The great
success which at first followed the operation would have continued to be
permanent, had he taken proper care. What is most remarkable is, that
this individual did not, like visionaries generally, take these visions for
realities ; he judged perfectly correctly of their want of reality. These
apparitions are to him, that which his reason knows them to be, and he
looks upon them as a source of amusement. He knows not at what
moment a new vision may present itself, and under what form it may
come. " His brain," says Bonnet, " is as a theatre in which the scenery
is executed by machines, Avliicli afford the greater pleasure to the
spectator because they are totally unforeseen and unexpected."
Where the mind is completely taken up by a particular thought, and
bodily disease (more especially of the nervous system) supervenes, there
are innumerable instances of visions : some of them, if by a strange
coincidence they had been borne out by the actual occun-cnce of some
singular events, they would have passed into the regions which the lovers
of the preternatural love to explore ; thus, the Marquis de Rambouillet,
the eldest brother of the Duchess of Montansier, was in conversation
with a young friend, the Marquis de Precy?they were neither of them
much more than twenty-five years of age, and like the young nobility
in France, were destined for the army, and when about to join their
regiments they discussed together the events of this life, and the pro-
bability of a future state. As they both seemed rather of ar sceptical
turn of mind, they doubted whether, on the occurrence of death, the soul
might not, before leaving this earth for ever, visit a friend; and each
promised the other, that in case of their falling victims during the
battle, the one dying should visit his surviving companion, and make
him acquainted with the nature and causes of his death. At the end of
three months, the Marquis de Rambouillet went to Belgium, where the
war had broken out. De Precy was seized with a violent fever, which
compelled him, in spite of his wishes to join his regiment, to remain
altogether in Paris. Six Aveeks after, when De Precy became con-
valescent, he heard, as he was lying on his bed, about five o'clock in
the morning, some one draw the curtain bed, and on turning round
to see from whence the noise came, to his great astonishment he saw
598 ON HALLUCINATIONS.
the Marquis de Rambouillet booted and spurred. He jumped out of
bed immediately, and rushed to throw his arms round his neck, to testify
the pleasure he enjoyed at his safe return, but Rambouillet, retreating
several steps, repulsed him, and said that his reception was altogether
out of season?that he had only come there with a view of fulfilling the
promise that he had made?that he had been killed the previous day in
the trenches?that all that had been said of another world was true?
that he ought to think of living in a different manner?that he had no
time to lose, for that he would be killed the first opportunity that pre-
sented itself. The astonishment of the Marquis de Precy at the language
thus held may be well understood. Not believing what he heard, he
made still further attempts to throw himself upon the neck of his friend,
whom he imagined to be laughing at him. His efforts were in vain;
he found that he was embracing the air, and Rambouillet, pitying his
incredulity, exhibited to him the wound which he had received; it was
in the region of the kidneys, and blood seemed still to flow from it.
After this, the phantom disappeared, leaving De Precy a prey to fright
easier to comprehend than to describe. He repeated the tale to the
whole house. Had, by some coincidence, the Marquis de Rambouillet
actually been killed about this period, what endless versions of the
marvellous appearance of the young Marquis would have circulated; as
it was, everybody attributed the vision to the access of fever which
acted upon his imagination. There are, however, so many instances of
visions appearing to persons labouring under febrile excitement, that
they can scarcely form an object of the inquiry ; they are observed at
all periods of fever, sometimes during the incubation, at others during
the crisis, frequently at the decline, and occasionally when convalescence
has been pronounced.
It has been said that there arc many states of the body which pre-
dispose to the visions of hallucination, enormous abstraction of blood,
from emptying the minute vessels of the eye, has given rise to an altered
condition of the optic nerve, during which strange effects have been
produced upon the visual rays; starvation has the same effect; the
narratives of ships perishing at sea abound with singular phenomena;
the famished victims have seen not only beings before them luring them
on with promised food, but they have had painted before them the most
beautiful scenes which the imagination can display, gardens abounding
with Hesperian fruit, crystal streams, delicious rills, ever blooming
flowers, and all the fascinations that the poet and the painter give to
the Elysian fields ; sometimes, angels minister to tliem, robed in celes-
tial garbs, and their last hours are rendered happy by the delusions to
which the senses gladly lend themselves. There are certain tonics which
also have an effect somewhat extraordinary; of this nature the prepa-
rations of iron more especially: this is a subject which requires some
investigation, the authorities on which the knowledge of the influence
of this mineral rests are very vague; sundry hints' only are thrown out.
My valued friend, Dr. Moreau, in that charming volume which contains
his Etudes Psychologique, says: " On a dit et on sait, certains principes
toniques excitateurs, tels que le fer, peuvent donner lieu aux niemes
ON HALLUCINATIONS. 599
accidents nerveux, aux memes anomalies intellcctuelles ;" and in a
similar way do several authors speak of the effects of iron, more espe-
cially when administered to delicate females, but neither in my own
practice nor in that of the many friends with whom I have com-
municated, have I learned any particulars springing from actual ex-
perience. The preparations of iron have, from the numerous com-
pounds formed with it, resumed their reign in a vast number of cases
in which quinine had been preferred, in consequence of this remedy
producing some singular cerebral affections, determining, as it does, to
the head, and causing, if not disorder of the senses, an undue stimulus
to the vessels that supply the brain. Congestions have so frequently
followed its use, even in ordinary doses, that it does not maintain its
character. It will, therefore, be of importance to ascertain whether
hallucinations have been observed after the use of iron medicinally, and
whether, on the principle now generally received in mental pathology,
(that which will produce a symptom will cure it, the grounds upon
which hyoscyamus is now administered in maniacal excitement, and
belladonna in excess of emotion), it may not be introduced with hopes of
success to relieve the disordered fancy from some of those hallucinations
which it is imagined to cause.
Hallucinations affecting the sense of smell are not unfrequent; but
they seldom attract much attention, and unless they exist in unison
with some more striking derangement of the sensorial system, afford but
little scope for observation. It is very generally associated with a de-
ranged state of the sense of taste; but this does not necessarily occur.
An insane person believed firmly that he could detect the existence of
cholera by the odour which followed it everywhere. He was first struck
witli it, he said, whilst dining; it came upon him like the smell of a
dead body: he recognised its existence at Orleans, and at Bourdeaux,
directly he entered those cities.
Esquirol had under his care a female, who fancied that she had a
most disagreable odour about her; and on being asked to go into the
garden, refused, under the plea that she was well aware that she should
kill all the vegetables there by the scent that she bore. The late amiable,
learned, yet eccentric Thomas Taylor, who translated the works of Plato
and the Greek philosophers, who was an enthusiastic believer in the
heathen mythology, worshipping Jupiter, Yenus, and Mars, and on one
occasion complaining that his landlady had turned him out of the house,
because he wished to sacrifice a bull in her parlour to one of his gods,?
insisted upon it that his wife exhaled at all times a most ambrosial
smell, which captivated all who approached her. I have heard him
dwell with rapture on the fact, and I was led to ask its confirmation
from one of his intimate friends, who remembered her; but so far from
bearing witness to the fact, he assured me that she was anything but
attractive in her habits of cleanliness. I have known patients who be-
lieved that every object round them was impregnated with some dis-
agreeable odour. This is not at all uncommon towards the termination
of fever, especially if any sordes have been allowed to accumulate.
Some individuals have had an idea that their breath would infect any
GOO ON HALLUCINATIONS.
one that approached them, and have carefully driven away nurses and
young children from them, lest they might he the unconscious instru-
ment of mischief.
Some persons, before death from phthisis pulmonalis, complain of the
smell of charcoal, and declare that every ohject that is brought before
them is impregnated with it. This, however, may depend in some mea-
sure upon the odour exhaled from the vomicae in the lungs, or from the
generally vitiated secretions.
Those who enjoy religious ecstasies among maniacs, speak of the de-
licious perfumes, of the divine exhalations, of the camphor, the myrrh,
the frankincense?the food is holy manna, and the blood is that of the
lamb, sweet yet savory. The language used by these poor beings is
generally that of happiness, and they are frequently made partakers of
some delicious repasts, which ordinary mortals know not of. Happy
indeed are they who thus soothe the sad affliction which hangs over
them, and give to their relations and friends so much sorrow and
anxiety.
The hallucination of touch varies exceedingly. It is singular enough
to find, in an establishment where an individual has been admitted who
believes that he has rats crawling over him, that spiders infest him, that
he receives occasional blows from an unknown hand, how very soon
several others of the confined persons take up the same notion; and if by
any chance suspicion falls upon an attendant that he has been accessory
to a blow, all the others who complain, whether from cunning, or from
a wish to obtain the compassion which is generally shown, load the
servant with charges of being the person who annoys them. Some
invalids will insist upon it that cold water has been thrown on their
heads; others that corrosive substances, poisonous powders, have been
thrown upon them,?that hence their bodies are metamorphosed,?that
they are unlike what they once were,?and that they are grossly mal-
treated. Some of them cannot bear the slightest breath of air to blow
upon the body: those who have witnessed the horror expressed by
patients labouring under hydrophobia when the least air foils upon them,
can judge of the horror which some experience when they fancy that
they are blown upon.
A decayed actress who had become melancholy, after expatiating with
considerable energy upon the miseries which were inflicted upon her by
unknown hands, added, " They are not satisfied with these cruelties, but
they are employed blowing, night and day, upon my skin, which is as
pure and as unsullied as my heart, ingredients which destroy me."
One poor fellow, upon whom the trial of Madame Laffarge had pro-
duced such an effect that he believed his wife was following her example,
and, wanting to get rid of him, was slowly poisoning him, would not
get into bed, in consequence of her throwing poisoned powder in it, and
was thus kept in a state of the most tremendous agitation. He took
upon himself the precaution of locking up his clothes, and hiding the
kev. Soon, however, he discovered that his supposed wicked wife dis-
seminated powders in the air; he respired nothing but poison; he could
no longer bear the horrors which accumulated around him: at last, in a
paroxysm of violent madness, he struck his wife repeatedly with a ham-
ON HALLUCINATIONS. G01
mer, left her for dead, and then inflicted upon himself several severe
wounds, from which he eventually recovered, but his mind is completely
lost. Many patients believe that they have swallowed animals, reptiles,
insects; and even those who have no other indication of the slightest
alteration of intellect, cannot be induced to lay aside the impression.
Sometimes they beat the stomach and bowels with great violence, often
wounding and severely hurting themselves. They assert that the in-
ternal organs have disappeared; they know it by the sense of emptiness,
by the hollowness of sound; they occasionally accuse a friend of being the
cause, or they lay it at the door of some one to whom they have taken,
without apparent cause, a violent aversion. Spiders and mice are fre-
quently charged with being the cause of the mischief, and of having
entered into the stomach. Sometimes the head is very light, at others
it is enormously heavy; sometimes one arm is longer than another;
there may be three arms?in fact, when the sense of touch and the
general sensibility are disordered, hallucination appears in a thousand
indescribable forms, wearing a Protean sliape, altering every day, and
exhibiting itself under the most extravagant guises. Sleep vanishes
under their influence; day and night, for a scries of years, is the un-
fortunate individual haunted and persecuted; devils take them by the
feet during the night, strike them constantly upon the back at the mo-
ment they most require repose; they are seized by vampires, who,
during the night, suck the blood from their veins, till atrophy and de-
formity of their organs takes place. Invisible agency is constantly at
work.
There are cases?especially in diseased states, such as delirium tremens
?in which the senses all partake of the hallucination alike; the eye,
the touch, the hearing, the smell, and the taste, are so disordered, as to
convey unhealthy impressions to the brain. Most generally one of the
organs so predominates over the other, that its deviations only are
complained of; it is only by examination of the invalid, and by repeated
conversation, however, that this is perceptible. At the Salpetriere there
is at present a female, about sixty-five years of age, who has now been
five or six years of unsound mind; she makes daily complaints of the
frightful sufferings she has to endure, and which are consequent upon
the hallucinations in which all her senses are wrapt. At night she sees
forms that menace her,?heads of bodies which frighten her. Some-
times it is her own image, her own portrait, that is represented to her.
Once she saw her mother, who has been some time dead, crawl towards
her on her four paws. She constantly hears voices which insult her;
oftentimes they tell her melancholy tales,?for instance, they repeat
that her mother is dead. They send the bodies of putrefying children
to her. She has sometimes the complete odour of arsenic. This woman
will eat nothing but bread, because both flesh and vegetables taste of
arsenic. Besides all this, she receives blows upon the head?upon the
limbs. They give her cramps in the legs, icy sweats, colds; they take
away her breath, and drive the blood to her head.
Having thus briefly illustrated the opinions that have issued from the
Trench school 011 the share taken in the senses in the production of hal-
lucination, the next question to be discussed is, the phenomena exhibited
NO. iv. R R
002 ON HALLUCINATIONS.
by tlie internal faculties,?sucli as tlie involuntary suspension of memory,
the excitement of the imagination, and the general alteration that occurs
in the reflective powers. The psyclio-sensorial study carries with it the
deepest interest, and demands tlie most profound investigation. Difficult
as is the task, I trust that in your future pages you will allow me to
pursue this subject; trusting that it may induce others who have had
the opportunity of acquiring knowledge to aid me in a research most
interesting, yet, from circumstances, most difficult?one which every one
must feel to be of vast importance; and however limited may be the
power of enlightening others, yet he who gives that little only makes
a slight return to the profession from which he has acquired all the
medical information that he has gained.
As far as examination after death has, however, enabled us to draw
our inferences, we find that the effects produced by those diseases affect-
ing the brain, are exhibited in the membranes that cover it, and upon
its superficial surface, rather than upon the substance of the organ itself,
for, the vascular system being for the greater part exterior, and in that
system the lesions that are more remarkable taking place, it results that
the inflammatory diseases, the flow of blood to the arteries, the re-
tardation in the veins, and serous effusions, are visible there. But
neither the thickening of the arachnoid membrane, granulations on the
surface of the ventricular cavities, redness, nor suffusions, nor any
sort of vascularity, form destructive anatomical characters by which
we can arrive at any undeniable conclusions as to the pathological con-
dition which has existed. We find all these states consequent upon
congestion produced in the last moments of life, either by convulsive
epilepsy, by apoplexy, by embarrassments of breathing, of circulation,
by agony long endured, by long-continued cephalalgia, by fever. The
deeper-seated lesions, the scirrhus, the tubercle, the softening of the
brain, the cyst, are discoverable in diseases producing another train of
phenomena. When we trace the paroxysm which produces violence
analogical with any of the diseases of the brain known to us, we should
point out meningitis as that to which it most approximates. There are
many symptoms in common with it which might lead to the idea that
they had some common origin. There is the same sudden outbreak after a
state of quiescence and apparent stupidity. A perusal of the works of
Abercromby, of Lallemand, of Bouillaud, of Lelot, and an attentive
deduction from the remarks which each has made, can, however, alone
furnish us with data upon which to enter on the discussion, and this
Avould demand far greater space than could be allotted here. It would,
however, be desirable to ascertain what the morbid examination in
lunatic asylums can furnish us with, and unfortunately we have not had
much publicity given to those investigations. The theory that our
limited anatomical knowledge at present allows us to construct,
is, that the debilitating passions have a retarding influence on the
secretions, upon the circulation, and the performance of the functions of
the organs of the human body; the most depressing of these is fear. In
the disease to which we have directed attention, this seems in the first
instance to attack the patient; lie has a dread of the most overwhelming
kind, which gradually grows into a complete oppression, weighing down
ON HALLUCINATIONS. G03
all the other faculties of the mind; it is utterly in vain that he attempts
to drive away the fixed idea; it remains rooted to the very inmost part
of his being; the very circumstance of his attempting to drive it from
him only roots it still deeper; at length, completely overwhelmed with
tlie intensity of the suffering, he yields himself up to that sole per-
secuting thought; there is a complete personal inertia which forbids
him further to mingle with the world, the consciousness of surrounding
objects is lost, as well as that internal conscience which governs the
moral actions of man. The result of this state of the mind is quickly
conveyed to the body, which not only sympathizes with it, but is
governed by it; it is not only that the appetite fails, the power of en-
joyment, and the desire for locomotion, but the nutrition of the body
ceases, the secretions are not duly performed, the circulation becomes
languid, and all the organs are in a state of torpor; this proceeds,
gradually increasing, till there is almost a suspension of all the powers
by which life is carried on; the blood, no longer oxygenized, is replete with
carbon, it slowly meanders through the liver, where the veins, congested
with the material not duly carried from it, begin to stagnate with their
fluid ; the brain is, after some time, surcharged with this venous blood,
and that state which approaches the third stage of intoxication, where
there is decided pressure upon the brain, exists, the result of the arterial
acceleration in the first stage, and of the venous retardation of the
second. To this state in which the sufferer exists, succeeds that of
reaction. It is observable, in all the diseases to which man is liable, that
there is an attempt of nature to produce reaction, causing those different
stages in which the more acute diseases display themselves; in many of
them there is a crisis, or that violent effort which seems to be the most
determined struggle of the vis medicatrix for relief from the fearful state
in which she has been thrown. During this, there is no organ which
does not seem to be called into action for self-relief. This crisis more
engaged the attention of the physicians of antiquity than those of the
present day, as disease was allowed to take more of its own course,
as well from the difficulty of finding those who were capable of treating
it from its onset, as from the greater neglect of those habits of life now
so thoroughly understood. During this crisis there is, as in ordinary
insanity, a sudden change for the better where relief is obtained; but
Avliere it has not been watched and prepared for, there is a violent
paroxysm, Avliose intensity bears proportion to the previous depression.
This action and reaction, so strongly marked in intermittent fever,
affecting that portion of the nervous system which is contained within
the vertebral column, producing the phenomena, in its greatest extent,
of universal tremor, acting upon the brain, evidently causes a large
portion of that which is displayed in the insane, under the guise of
alternate depression and excitement. The sudden crisis which leads
to impulsive acts in the insane that had previously exhibited the form
only of imbecility and stupidity, most probably depends upon some
altered state of the arterial circulation, some momentary determination
to the brain; and, were Ave followers of the doctrines of Gall and of
Spurzheim to their fullest extent, Ave should naturally be led to inquire
whether the organ upon which they assert that homicide depends, was
r r 2
G04 ON HALLUCINATIONS.
tlie seat of some instantaneous action. When we find that there exists
in nature vegetable substances which produce this effect, or which sud-
denly call into action the desire for spilling blood, we must grant that,
to some condition of the brain, produced by a physical agent, this is
owing. It is not brandy alone that Avill in some constitutions cause
a fearful ferocity, but there is a vegetable, a species of mushroom, called
arnanita musccirict, whose effects are of the most striking character.
Some of the Cossack tribes never go to battle without adding a portion
to the spirituous liquors which they take, and they become inspired
with a blood-thirstiness which nothing can resist: even the cannabis
indica has been known to inspire even a reflecting and humane in-
dividual with a desire for destruction; it often fills the mind with an
impulse that cannot be resisted. On one occasion, when Dr. Moreau had
himself taken it, by way of experiment, lie piteously entreated that the
window should be immediately shut, as he felt coming over him an
irresistible propensity to throw himself out.
The frequent recurrence of the idea, such as is detailed by Esquirol,
shows that there are occasional crises; one of these instances has been
quoted by Dr. Prichard, in his " Yiew of the different forms of insanity."
A lad, aged twenty-one, always of sombre and surly disposition, had
lost his father at the age of fourteen, and had never exhibited much
affection towards his mother. At the age of eighteen his defection in-
creased; he shunned society, yet worked industriously at a manufactory,
neither displaying in words nor actions any signs of insanity, but de-
clared that he felt a strong inclination to commit murder, that there
were moments when he felt that he could feel pleasure in killing his
mother. When the horrible nature of these suggestions was set before
him, and the punishments due to such an act, he exclaimed, " I am no
longer master of myself." On several occasions, after having embraced
his mother, his face became red, his eyes sparkled, and he cried out,
" Mother, take care of yourself?I am forced to kill you." He very
soon became calm, and shed tears. One day he met in the street a
Swiss soldier, who was quite a stranger to him, seized his sword, and
made a sudden effort to take it from him and stab him. On another
occasion he drew his mother into the cellar, and attempted to kill her
with a bottle. For six months this youth was agitated by this horrible
impulse; he slept little, complained of his head, kept himself in soli-
tude, and was insensible to the grief of his family, but exhibited no
sign of mental aberration in his discourse. When brought to Charen-
ton, he admitted with sang froid that he had been five or six times on
the point of killing his mother and sister, and that he bore them no ill
will, and had no fixed ideas. After ten months passed under Esquirol's
care, this youth became perfectly recovered, and afterwards continued to
be an affectionate son and an intelligent and industrious manufacturer.
As the individual who has a fixed idea, which remains known only
to himself, makes no complaint, nor reveals the internal struggles which
harass and destroy him, it is only when the madness bursts out with
uncontrollable vehemence that it is known. The suicide has long
fought within himself, before he has rushed to the fatal extreme; the
homicidal monomaniac conceals for an immense length of time the
ON HALLUCINATIONS. 005
liorrors by which he is pursued, and it is only when at length he can
bear his fate no longer, that he divulges his long-kept secret. The fol-
lowing case, which has been pronounced by one of our greatest autho-
rities as the most curious exemplification of homicidal monomania, will
be read with interest; it is a proces verbal of a French medical man,
which will explain itself: " I, the undersigned, Guillaume Calmeilles,
officier de sante, inhabiting and being domiciled in the chief town of
Cazals, Lot, certify to those it may concern, that, upon the requisition
of the mayor of the Commune of Marminiat, I went this day to the
village of Brunet, in the said commune of Marminiat, to testify as to
the state of mind of John Glenadel, a farmer, domiciled in the said
village of Brunet. I found Glenadel seated upon his bed, having a cord
round his neck fixed by one end to the foot of his bed; he had his arms
fastened together at the wrists by another cord. To give my report faith-
fully, I do not think that I can do better than give the conversation
which passed between us in the presence of his brother, his wife, and
his sister-in-law. 'Are you ill V ' I am very well?my health is almost
too good.' ' What is your name V ' John Glenadel.' ' What age are you V
'Forty-three ; I was born in '96?see if that is not correct.' ' Is it by
force, or at your own wish, that you are thus tied up.' ' It is by my own
consent, and indeed at my own wish.' ' Why is that V ' To prevent me
from the commission of a crime of which I have the utmost horror, and
which I am impelled to commit in spite of myself.' ' What, then, is the
crime V ' I have an idea which attacks me, and relative to which I am
no longer master of myself?I must kill my sister-in-law, and I shall do
it if I am not prevented.' ? How long have you had that idea V ' It is
about six or seven years.' ' But have you anything to complain of your
sister-in-law1?' 'Not at all, sir ; it is an unfortunate idea which I have,
and I feel that I must carry it into execution.' ' Have you never had an
idea of killing any other person than your sister-in-law V 'I had for-
merly the thought of killing my mother ; that took me when I was
about the age of sixteen or seventeen, when I began to be a man, in
1812 ; I remember it very well. Since that time I have never had an
hour's happiness, and I have been the most miserable of men.' 'You got
over that first thought V 'In 1822, I could no longer resist; I was then
between twenty-five and twenty-six years of age. To take this unfor-
tunate idea out of my head I entered the army as a substitute. I was
two years in Spain with my regiment, then I returned to France, but
this fixed idea followed me everywhere. More than once I was tempted
to desert, that I might return to kill my mother. In 1826, I received
an unlimited leave of absence, which I had not asked for, and I returned
to my father's house ; my dreadful idea returned with me. I passed
four years with my mother, having an irresistible desire to destroy her.'
What did you do, then V ' Then, sir, seeing that I should infallibly com-
mit a crime which alarmed me and filled me with horror, not to give
Way to the temptation I entered again as a substitute in the army. It
was in the year 1830 that for the second time I left my father's roof;
but the idea still pursued me, and at length I was decided to desert, to
go and kill my mother.' ' You had, then, something to complain of with
regard to your mother V 'No, sir, I loved her very much ; indeed, bo
GOO ON HALLUCINATIONS.
fore leaving I said to myself, Wliat! go and kill your mother, who so
tenderly watched over your infancy, who loves you so much, in spite of
all the melancholy idea which you nourish against her. No ! never
will I be guilty of it; but still you must kill some one. And then it
Avas that the idea came into my head to kill my sister-in-law. I remem-
ber it very well?it was at Daix ; it was in the year 1832. It was an-
nounced to me by mistake that my sister-in-law was dead; it was ano-
ther of my relations who died. I then accepted the leave of absence
which was given to me, but which I should not have done, had I not
believed that she was no longer living ? then, as soon as I arrived at
home, and learnt that she was not dead, I felt a sudden seizure, a drag
at my heart, which did me considerable injury, and my idea took its
course.' ' What is the instrument with which you desire to kill your
sister-in-law V Here Glenadel melted away, his eyes were bathed in
tears, he looked at his sister-in-law, and said, ? The instrument! the
gentlest; but, whatever it is, once begun it must be finished ; I know
that I must see her dead?that is as certain as that God is God.' ' Are
you not afraid to plunge your brother and your little nephews in misery
and in despair V ' That idea comes to me a little, but I shall be killed,
and then I shall not see them. Such a monster as I am will be got rid
of?I shall cease to live. I wish for no other happiness.' I then re-
collected that M. Grandsault de Salviat, my colleague and my friend,
who is at the present moment in Paris, had spoken to me, about a year
before, of a young man who, some years ago, had come to him, accom-
panied by his mother, to consult him upon a similar case, and, as such
instances are exceedingly rare, I thought that it might have been
Glenadel himself; I therefore asked him if it was he that had con-
sulted my colleague, and he answered in the affirmative. ' What advice
did M. Grandsault give you V ' He gave me some excellent opinions,
and afterwards bled me.' ' Were you at all relieved by the bleeding V
' I did not find the least benefit from the bleeding; the idea still followed
me with the same force.' ' I am about to give my report upon the state
of your mind, and it will follow that you will be shut up in an asylum,
where most probably you will be cured of your madness.' ' To cure me
is impossible ; but make your report as quickly as you can?that is of
the greatest consequence. I cannot longer control myself.' ' Your
parents must have given you good principles of morality, and good
examples; and you must also have had an honest mind to have been
enabled so long to resist so terrible a temptation.' Here Glenadel was
again very much affected. He shed tears, and answered, ' Sir, you
guess that; but that resistance is more painful than death. I see that
I can no longer exist; I shall certainly kill my sister-in-law unless 1
am prevented,?that is as certain as God is God.' ' Glenadel,' I said,
? before I leave you, I request one favour : resist a few days longer;
you will not much longer see your sister-in-law; Ave are about to re-
move you from hence, as you desire it so much.' ' Sir, I thank you ;
I Avill do my best to obey your recommendations.' I left the house,
and as I Avent to mount my horse to take my departure, Glenadel
desired that I should be called back; and, on my return, he said, ' Tell
the gentlemen that I beg of them to place me Avhere there is not the
ON HALLUCINATIONS. G07
slightest chance of my escape, for I shall make every attempt to do so;
and if I can escape, he assured that immediately my sister-in-law will he
dead. I shall only escape to kill her. I beg you to tell the gentlemen
so.' I assured him that I would do so ; but as I saw that he was in a
state of high excitement, I asked him whether the cord that bound his
arms was sufficiently tight, and if he did not feel that lie had sufficient
strength to release himself. He made an attempt, and said that he
feared he had. 'But if I find you something which will keep your
arms more strongly bound, will you accept it?' ' With gratitude, sir.'
? In that case, I will ask the brigadier of the gens-d'armes to lend me
that which he makes use of to tie the hands of prisoners, and I will send
it to you.' ?You will very much oblige me.' I purposed going fre-
quently to Glenadel to assure myself of the state of his mind; but after
the long and painful conversation which I had held with him, and after
that which had been said to me by my colleague, M. Grandsault, and
likewise after that which his brother and sister-in-law reported to me,
who are deeply affected in consequence of the melancholy condition of
Glenadel, without repeating my visits, I am perfectly convinced that
John Glenadel is afflicted with delirious monomania, characterized in
him by an irresistible propensity to murder,?a monomania by which
Papavoine and others have been afflicted, fortunately but few in number.
In faith of which, I hereunto affix my name, &c." Here, then, was a
desire for murder existing for twenty-six years, during which period the
individual was perfectly capable of following all his avocations, but was
haunted by furies worse than those which rendered the being of Orestes
wretched, in consequence of the death of his mother, Clytemnestra,
considered by the ancients an example of the greatest endurance to
which human nature could be submitted.
The following case is given as one of equal interest, showing that an
individual may have for a considerable length of time a fixed idea, with-
out any other intellectual disorder, and may preserve in the eyes of every
one an appearance of the soundest state of mind :?Augusta Wilhelmina
Strolim, of thirty years of age, without having given any previous sign
of melancholy, and without any appreciable motive, killed with a blow
of a hatchet one of her friends, whom she had invited to see her. She
went immediately and delivered herself up into the hands of the police.
Whilst she was very young, Augusta Strolim had been present at the
execution of a person of the name of Schaeffe, who was condemned to
death for a murder. The care that had been taken to prepare this woman
for death, her walk to the scaffold, had produced such an impression
upon Augusta, that from that moment she looked upon that mode of
termination of existence as a blessing,?that is to say, to be prepared for
death, and to make such a religious end as the condemned. This thought
never left her; but her moral principles for a long time carried on a
struggle within her, until within about six weeks of the time when she
murdered licr friend. A man of the name of Kultafen was executed at
Dresden. This second execution, by the circumstances Avitli which it
was accompanied, made a still stronger impression upon her mind, and
served still further to excite her to carry out the first idea, and to urge
her on to murder. Strolim was in her earliest youth when this first
608 ON HALLUCINATIONS.
impression was made upon her imagination, and fifteen years elapsed
before she carried into effect her latent madness. All that time she
showed no extraordinary symptoms, but appeared perfectly rational, and
no one had the slightest idea that there was within her any stmggles.
This may be ascribed to that love of imitation which exists in so extraor-
dinary and unaccountable a degree in females, which is exhibited in so
many various diseases?in hysteria, in epilepsy, in convulsions, and in
every nervous state. When Harriet Cornier's case was the subject of
so much interest, numerous similar examples occurred. Esquirol was
frequently consulted. One lady heard a voice commanding her to kill
her eldest boy. For a month she was pursued by an internal voice and
an unceasing desire to strangle him. So frequently was she harassed
by this fearful state, that she determined on and attempted suicide. A
lady who read in a newspaper the condemnation of a criminal was so
overcome by the impression that she saw before her constantly a bloody
head, separated from the trunk, covered with a black crape. She ex-
perienced such a dreadful sensation from the ghastly sight which perpe-
tually haunted her, that she made several attempts at suicide. Such
cases, however, are more to be referred to diseases of imagination than
impulsive insanity; they are rather hallucinations, dependent upon
diseased emotions, than that irresistible feeling urging on to the com-
mission of crime independent of any exciting cause. It is to be borne
in mind that all those who have fixed ideas do not destroy themselves
or injure others; they bear their maladies without any betrayal of the
sad feeling which possesses them, and carry their silent sorrows to the
grave. Disease will sometimes give origin to the fixed idea in those who
previously were apparently in a sound state ; but if their history be duly
inquired into, it will be found that madness has been at some time or
other developed in some branch of the family, and that it partakes of
the nature of hereditary taint. Typhus fever has been known to gene-
rate this state, where it may have been previously latent; it is like a
dream, and the idea is somewhat similar to one which remains after a
dream has passed away. With regard to that monomania which is ex-
hibited in females after childbirth, and which consists in a desire to
destroy their offspring, that demands an investigation which has as yet
been little thought of. That cerebral fever which terminates in partial
delirium has doubtless often been the cause of child-murder, for which
the unfortunate mother has been condemned to death; whilst, as far as
regards the culpability which springs from consciousness of crime, and
the power of distinguishing between right and wrong, she was innocent.
These questions are yet to be agitated for the benefit of society, and to
relieve the judgment-scat from the condemnation of those whose mad-
ness is their only crime.
