The Periodoscope
==================

with its Application to Obstetric Calculations, and
the Periodicities of the Sex. By W. Tyler Smith, M.B. Lond.,
Obstetric Lecturer in the Hunterian School of Medicine. London.
Churchill, Princes-street, Soho.

We received our copy of this work at too late a period to notice it in
that portion of our Journal appropriated to miscellaneous reviews; but
we cannot go to press without directing the attention of the profession
to this important and valuable contribution to obstetric literature. The
object of the essay is to elucidate the "periodicities of the female sex,"
and the periodoscope is constructed with the view of enabling the prac-
titioner to calculate, with almost unerring accuracy, these epochs in the
female economy. The obstetric calendar is most ingeniously ar-
ranged, and will be found of essential service in elucidating all ques-
tions having reference to the duration of pregnancy, and other natural
and morbid phenomena peculiar to women. The psychological phy-
sician, engaged in the treatment of insanity, can appreciate the value of
a guide which will enable him to ascertain, with even an approach to
correctness, the normal and disordered condition of the catamenial
secretions. How much of the insanity of females is dependent upon or
associated with the state of this important function 1 As the author of
this essay observes, " in cases of prolonged puerperal mania, accompanied
by suppression of the lochia and catamenia, it is of considerable value
to attend, to the ovarian periods following parturition. In these dis-
tressing cases, when the ovarian nisus comes round without being
attended by the uterine secretion, there is generally a furious exacerba-
tion of the malady. The treatment of these periods is often the most
important part of the treatment of the whole disease.'"?(p. 40.) In
mania, connected with uterine derangement, it is important for the phy-
sician to be able to reckon the respective catamenial periods with accu-
racy ? by the aid of Dr Tyler Smith's periodoscope this desirable object
will be obtained, and it is on this ground principally (for into the other
merits of the invention it would be irrelevant for us to enter) that we
earnestly recommend those connected with the treatment of the insane
to avail themselves of this valuable means of ascertaining the precise
state of a function which more or less gives a character to all the diseases
peculiar to women.
