On The Causes, Symptoms, And Treatment Of Puerperal Insanity
=============================================================

:Author: JAMES REID, M.D.
PHYSICIAN TO THE GENERAL LYING-IN HOSPITAL, ETC.
The term, puerperal insanity, is not only understood to imply aberra-
tion of the mind, or derangement of the cerebral functions in the puer-
peral state itself, but to include those attacks which occur sometimes
during the period of gestation, as well as those which we more frequently
meet with some months after parturition, whilst the patient is suckling
her infant.


From the period of conception, during the whole term of gestation,
and up to the termination of suckling, there is an amount of nervous
irritability and excitement in the system, which strongly predisposes to
any cerebral affection; but the two principal epochs at which this excit-
ability becomes the most dangerous are immediately after parturition,
and at a later period, when the system is exhausted by a too long-conti-
nued application of the infants to the breast. We find cases recorded
in which cerebral disorder has commenced immediately after conception,
and which has ceased at the period of quickening: others, again, have
persisted throughout the whole term of gestation, but terminated on de-
livery taking place; whilst more rare cases have still continued until lac-
tation was relinquished.

The whole cerebro-spinal system is much excited during pregnancy,
and more especially in the puerperal state; the senses are often ex-
tremely vivid, and the slightest impressions agitate the mind, which is
thus ready to receive any false impressions which may be brought out
by a sudden shock, or unexpected and exciting cause: thus the powerful
influence of fright, surprise, or other strong emotions, in this condition
of the nervous system acting on a mind already disposed to mania by
some hereditary influence.

It fortunately happens, that it is not often we have the opportunity
of observing in private practice this distressing malady; even in the
public lying-in establishments of this country, the complaint is much
more rarely noticed than it would appear to be in the hospitals of France;
and considering that physical and moral causes of disturbance are so rife
during pregnancy and labour, it is surprising that the proportion of such
cases should be so small.


There are very few works devoted solely to tliis form of the disease in
our own language, but there are several excellent descriptions of it in
some of the treatises on mental alienation in general: perhaps the best
of these is one by the late Dr. Goocli, in a chapter " On the Disorders
of the Mind in Lying-in Women," contained in his valuable work " On
the most important Diseases peculiar to Women," 1829, written in that
clear practical style for which he was always remarkable.

The chapter, " De l'Alienation mentale des nouvelles Aecouchees et
des Nourrices" in the work on insanity of Esquirol, is well worth an at-
tentive perusal by those who are interested in the subject.
Any serious disturbance in the uterine functions speedily affects the
brain; and to those conversant with the peculiar diseases of females,
numerous instances of corresponding cerebral complaints following such
disturbance, will at once be in their remembrance. The uterus and
ovaries seem to exert the strongest sympathetic action upon this distant
organ; and should even the usual monthly function be irregular, im-
peded, or altogether checked for a time, the cerebral tissues appear to
share immediately in the disorder, as evidenced by headaches, giddiness,
depression of spirits, or sometimes by great excitability, the whole system
at length becoming likewise affected, and requiring judicious medical
treatment. In some cases, this state alone has even been sufficient to
cause an attack of insanity.

One epoch of life, at which females are peculiarly liable to this com-
plaint, is that which is usually denominated the critical period, when the
monthly function ceases altogether. In the Hanwell Reports for the
last eight years, there are eight cases given as proceeding from this
cause. With those who have been previously affected with mental aber-
ration, great care and preventive measures will be especially required to
guard against a return at this age.
In younger patients, suffering from mania and melancholia, I have
known more than one instance of recovery following the re-appearance
of the catamenial discharge, which had heretofore been suspended. It
may, however, be a question, is this cause or effect ^ Monsieur Yoisin, in
a prize essay on the question, ' Is irregular menstruation to be regarded
as one of the most frequent physical causes of mental alienation]" &c.,
maintains, that it is the result of the affection of the brain, and that
whilst this remains in its active state, no return of the menstrual function
takes place. Now this is a statement certainly not borne out by facts;
for though the impeded or irregular function very frequently accom-
panies attacks of insanity in females, still I have known several cases in
which menstruation went on regularly during such illness. In some
others it has been more profuse than usual. A case occurred during the
last month, in which a young female, who was received into the infirmary
of St. Giles, labouring under an attack of mania, was suffering at the
same time from menorrhagia. In the case of a lady aged 36, whom I
visited in consultation with Dr. Allan of Islington, on more than one
occasion, attacks of insanity have occurred, frequently attended with
most severe pain, principally seated in the left brow and parietal region,
with a sensation as if some one were constantly hammering at the parts;
the pulse was not much affected, ranging from 80 to 85 in the minute;
NO. I. k
130 PUERPERAL INSANITY.
tinnitus aurium?insomnia?clean tongue: the catamenial discharge is
most profuse at each period, lasting from ten to fourteen days, and, on its
disappearance, it is succeeded in the intervals by a leucorrheal discharge.
The attacks are of so serious a nature that great care is required to pre-
vent self-injury, or violence towards her child, which she has threatened
whilst thus affected.

An instance is related by Mons. Marc (Consultation Medico-legale) of
a young female aged twenty-seven, whose bodily functions were perfect,
but still at each approach of the catamenial period, a degree of excita-
bility appeared, Avhich became dangerous to those about her, she at these
times being attacked by a desire to stab with a knife. Having on one
occasion carried this threat into execution, she was consigned to a lunatic
asylum.

In the case of a young lady, for which I was consulted about two
years since, caused by her lover deserting her, and marrying her
sister, although there was a very irritable state of the uterus, yet the
monthly function occurred regularly throughout a long period.
_ Suppression of the menses, however, will alone act as the exciting
cause of insanity in some cases, in young delicate females, and espe-
cially when combined with great irritability of the uterine organs.
Hysteria is often an effect of this, and sometimes epilepsy.*

In the Hanwell Reports, out of 703 female cases of insanity, ten are
noted as arising from suppressed menstruation, and nine from uterine
excitement.

Of 361 cases in the Salpetriere, arising from physical causes, there
were fifty-five originating from " irregularity of menstruation," and
twenty-seven occurring at the critical period.

Dr. Conolly has well remarked?" The state of the uterus in the un-
married, and in women recently confined, is often the cause of mental
disturbance of a most formidable aspect; and if the cause is overlooked,
the patient will generally be treated unsuccessfully." (Indications of
Insanity, 1830.)

HYSTERICAL MANIA
----------------

There is a species of aberration of the intellect occurring in young
females, which evidently is complicated with hysteria; the peace of a
whole family is for the time totally destroyed by the whims, extrava-
gancies, perverseness of temper, and violence of the patient: some of
these cases border closely on insanity, but others, Avhen protracted
beyond a certain period, gradually merge either into mania or melan-
cholia, and it then becomes absolutely requisite to remove them from
the society of their friends, and to place them under the charge of some
practitioner who is experienced in the treatment of such cases.
They are often termed nervous disorders, but these, unless closely
watched, and carefully treated, are prone to degenerate into more fixed
and permanent affections of the brain. The following may be taken as
one of the above description of cases. Miss  , aged fifteen, of tall,
* Tlie suppression of the catamenial discharge is not unfrequently attended by
costiveness and torpidity of the liver; in such cases, alteratives, emmenagogues, and
the application of a few leeches to the feet, or to the vulva, will be the most likely
means of restoring the healthy secretions, and of relieving the cerebral irritability.

PUERPERAL INSANITY
------------------
robust frame, menstruating irregularly, liad laboured under various forms
of hysteria for a short time past, and complained of violent pain in the
uterine region, tympanitic distension of the abdomen, torpid bowels,
headache, sense of suffocation, and of such a constant feeling of restless-
ness, that it was difficult to keep her in the room: she gradually became
exceedingly violent?and her long-continued fits of screaming often
alarmed the whole neighbourhood: on two occasions it was found re-
quisite to put her under restraint. The medical attendant was nearly
worn out by the constant attendances required day and night to intro-
duce the catheter, &c., but he almost invariably found that the bladder
contained little or 110 urine, although the attendants asserted positively
that none had been passed naturally. When I saw her I felt convinced
that such must have been the case; her pulse was natural, her strength
good, and there were no symptoms which must have existed had the
assertion been true : the greatest distress was occasioned in the family
by the state of the patient during two months of violence, as they were
unwilling that she should be separated from them ; at the end of this
period a sort of stupor came on, and continued for a week, on recovering
from which, the catamenial function continued regularly, symptoms of
mental recovery became stronger, and for some years past there has
not been the slightest appearance of a similar attack. I should add,
that on very close watching, it was discovered that the patient had regu-
larly passed urine, but had contrived to avoid the notice of the nurse for
some days at such times.


INSANITY DURING PREGNANCY
--------------------------
We have already seen that deranged uterine function, especially when
accompanied by great local excitability, is sufficient of itself in some
cases to cause insanity ; we are therefore prepared to understand that
in such a disturbed and excited state of the uterine system, as is the
result of pregnancy, and more especially of the parturient period,
coupled too, as they are with great mental excitement and physical
shock to the whole frame, there must be a still greater liability to in-
sanity present. In some cases of pregnancy, a curious change relative
to the cerebral functions has been noticed as occurring; viz., one faculty
being suspended whilst another is substituted in its place. Thus in
Groubelli's case, a female during the term of her gestation lost her
memory, which at other times was extremely tenacious, and in its place
a sound judgment, which she was otherwise not remarkable for, was
substituted : after her delivery, the judgment again became obtuse,
whilst her memory returned ! It is well known to all those who are
conversant with the treatment of pregnant females, that this state is
not unfrequently attended by a remarkable change in the temper and
habits. Conception itself is sometimes speedily notified by an unusual
degree of mental and bodily excitement, the imagination becomes
exalted, impressions are more lively, and there is an abnormal condition
of the whole nervous system : unusual feelings and desires (especially in
articles of diet) are noticed, as well as eccentricities and caprices, and
sometimes a latent talent for poetry, music, or conversation, is called
forth during this period, which had not previously been known to exist.
k 2
182 PUERPERAL INSANITY.
Amongst these eccentricities, a great relish for every article which could
be secretly purloined from others has been noticed by Baudelocque and
several other writers : some other equally awkward propensities have
been recorded also. Now, all due allowance is generally made for inno-
cent whims and caprices during the term of gestation, for the longings,
&c. whilst they are kept within bounds, as not being altogether unna-
tural, but when any one or more of these eccentricities assume a mag-
nified importance in the brain of the patient, and a power which the
mind is unable properly to control, they may at length lead to sudden
impulses, which, if not dangerous, still may be of that serious character,
as to require much watching and management on the part of her friends.
Dr. Forbes Winslow has lately drawn the attention of the profession
more forcibly to the " incubation of insanity," in an interesting paper.
Some of the foregoing symptoms form part of those noticed as pre-
cursory ones during this incubation: it is sometimes detected by various
physical, and especially by moral symptoms?headache, malaise, irrita-
bility, restlessness of manner, uneven spirits, love of change, want of
sleep or frightful dreams, remarkable modification of character, either
the usual one exaggerated, or of a different nature. Anxiety, distrust,
suspicion, melancholy, fear of the future, may separately or conjointly
assume a prominent importance, and at length a slight hallucination
may even appear in relation to one particular subject; such, for instance,
as that a particular friend has offered some imaginary insult or annoyance,
and this feeling, which at first is looked upon as a mistaken sensitive-
ness only, is gradually recognised as the effect of morbid imagination,
and a more full explanation is perhaps speedily afforded by a sudden
explosion of maniacal violence, or by a settled melancholy.

The caprices or casual dislikes soon ripen into morbid fantasies and
inveterate antipathies, until some one idea gradually appears to rise out
of all the other phantasmagoric illusions, and to fix itself indelibly on
the mind, assuming an ideal importance, and a total control over it. It
is haunted constantly by this fixed idea (monomania), and cannot ab-
stract itself from it, as it seems to mingle with every occupation and
pursuit.

The cases of insanity which arise during pregnancy are much smaller
in number than those which follow it, and the majority of the former
terminate with the occurrence of labour. They are more apt to occur
in the later months of pregnancy than in the earlier ones; although
Esquirol mentions the case of a female who was attacked, on two
different occasions, by insanity immediately after conception, each attack
lasting for a period of fifteen days. A female was received into the
Betlmal-green Asylum who had been attacked by melancholia imme-
diately after quickening, with a strong desire to destroy herself and her
three children; it continued during the remainder of pregnancy, and
became worse after delivery.

In another case of the same asylum, strangeness of conduct was ob-
served a month before her confinement, perfect incoherence and great
depression continuing afterwards.

This description of case, however, is not, I believe, frequently to be
met with in public asylums.


It occasionally lias happened that pregnancy, taking place in females
who were insane already, has completely restored them during the period
of gestation.

Insanity is sometimes produced during pregnancy by sudden fright.
Boivin relates the case of a young woman, in her sixth month of preg-
nancy, who from this cause became idiotic, lost her voice, and was so
hideous in appearance, that the other patients in the asylum to which
she was removed called her " the vampire." Notwithstanding this
extreme state, gestation progressed favourably, and by judicious treat-
ment she recovered in three weeks, and went on to her full time, without
any return of the complaint.

It is sometimes the case, that although the female herself may escape
insanity from severe mental shocks, still her offspring unfortunately
does not, and congenital insanity is its lot. Three such cases are men-
tioned in the Hanwell reports. One case has fallen under my notice,
in which the mother was suddenly terrified by a fatal accident occurring
to one of her children, during the time she was pregnant with another;
and the latter, now of adult age, though not aftlicted by insanity, is at
all times of so extremely nervous a temperament as to be unfitted for
any of the active duties of life. Females who, from hereditary or other
causes, have a peculiar predisposition to insanity, appear to be much
more susceptible, as to its attacks, during pregnancy, or soon after its
termination.

INSANITY OCCURRING AFTER LABOUR
-------------------------------

There are two forms of delirium, occurring during labour and after it,
which have by some authors been included under the denomination of
puerperal insanity, but, I think, without reason. The one is that passing
delirium, the result of intense temporary pain and excitement in labour,
or which attends the febrile action so common about the fourth or fifth
day after this, when the secretion of milk is fully established; the other
is the delirium which is not unfrequent in fatal cases of puerperal fever,
and in which, from ample opportunities of observation in the lying-in
wards and fever wards of St. Giles's Infirmary for some years past, I
have never been able to detect any difference in their nature from that
so common in typhus. I do not allude to the low, muttering delirium,
but to those sudden attacks of cerebral excitement which may take
place in either of these two species of fever, so as to require restraint for
hours together, and even for days in some cases. The excitement in
either fever is not always one of violence, however; for I have seen in
both forms the greatest gaiety and vivacity, as evidenced by singing,
joking, and laughing, a few hours previous to death, but this more
especially in puerperal fever. In both diseases some metastasis appears
to occur, and most probably by means of the alteration which takes
place in the condition of the blood. There is, however, one important
difference between the two diseases when this symptom appears, as to
prognosis; it is generally a fatal one in puerperal fever, but not so in
common typhus. In the delirium and temporary mania both of typhus
and puerperal fever, there is not always total derangement of all the
intellectual faculties; the patient can frequently be roused out of this
134 PUERPERAL INSANITY.
state, by speaking in a loud tone, and for a short time is able to retain
the power of answering questions, but soon subsides into the rambling
incoherence of ideas.
Puerperal insanity seldom appears sooner than the third day after
labour (about the time when the secretion of milk is fully established),
or later than the fourteenth day, when the discontinuance of the locliial
discharge usually occurs. The shock and excitement, both physical and
mental, which attend the act of parturition, leave the cerebro-spinal
system in a morbidly susceptible state, attended by great exhaustion
of the vis vita?.

Now, we well know that exhaustion and irritability combined, when
following great excitement, long continued and kept up by the free use
of stimulants, will produce precisely a similar effect upon the brain, as
evidenced in cases of delirium tremens; so that there is a strong analogy
between the two diseases, although arising from different causes. This
subject more especially requires our attention in considering the treat-
ment of puerperal mania.

The attack is often preceded by several premonitory symptoms, or
may suddenly take place without them. In the former case, some
eccentricity of manner is not unfrequently noticed, even before the
occurrence of labour,?such as great susceptibility, unusual display of
suspicion as to those around, an irritable oddity of manner, &c. In the
case of a lady whom I attended some time since, she had surprised her
friends on more than one occasion, during the latter period of her
pregnancy, by taking offence suddenly at some of them for looking
rudely at her.

In other cases, there is a sudden excitability of the sensorial functions
observed a few days after parturition; an unusual flow of spirits, great
volubility of language, a crowding in of thoughts and images upon the
mind, so that the patient confesses that she is incapable of thinking or
reasoning calmly; a little incoherence is then observed, uncontrollable
mirth and laughter at trifles, restlessness, inability to sleep or even to
compose herself, the thoughts wander and are embarrassed, and the brain
appears to gradually lose its power of control: the insomnia soon be-
comes a prominent symptom, lasting for several nights together, and in
some cases, anodynes appear to exert no beneficial influence, but rather
to increase the irritability and watchfulness. At length a sudden
paroxysm of maniacal violence explodes, or the patient subsides into a
taciturn state of melancholy, from which it is impossible to arouse her.
The patient is sometimes able at the commencement of the complaint
to recognise the occasional aberrations of her mind, or the latter appears
to be sensible of its errors, and strives to avoid or subdue them, but in
vain.

As the affection of the brain progresses, all the former symptoms be-
come, as it were, exaggerated; the talking becomes almost incessant, and
generally on one particular subject, such as imaginary wrongs done to
her by her dearest friends; a total negligence of, and often strong
aversion to her child and husband are evinced; explosions of anger occur,
with vociferations and violent gesticulations; and although the patient
may have been remarkable previously for her correct, modest demeanour,


and attention to lier religious duties, most awful oaths and imprecations
are now uttered, and language used which astonishes her friends. The
eye is wandering and unsteady, the hearing most acute, and the whispered
observations of the attendants distinctly heard and commented on, but
vaguely and incoherently: there is often, too, a somewhat acute though
incorrect mode of arguing on the false idea which may predominate in
her mind. The patient's indignation is sometimes directed against some
imaginary person, or roused by some ideal obstacle raised to her wishes.
A restlessness and anxiety to go to some other place, without giving
any reason, or, in fact, knowing why. Illusions succeed each other in
quick succession, or settle into one fixed 'monomania. The most usual
one which I have observed in females, is that connected with religion,
such as the idea of having committed some unpardonable sin, &c. Fear
of poison in the food haunts the mind, or, as in one unfortunate case
under my care, the idea that murder was constantly going on around
her, and that every person whom she saw, and all the food brought to
her, was covered with blood, for a long time prevented her taking any
nourishment. A frequent delusion is that of hearing voices speaking
to her; and in some unfortunate cases the supposed directions of such
hidden powers, as to the commission of suicide, have been too implicitly
obeyed. This suicidal tendency is not uncommon, especially in the
cases of melancholia; and it is important always to recollect the fact in
the treatment of such patients. In 111 cases of puerperal insanity at
Bethlehem Hospital, thirty-two were affected by it.

As in other forms of mania, whilst the mother is urged on by some
unaccountable impulse to commit violence on herself or on her offspring,
she is at the same time impressed with horror and aversion at the
crime. The infant is usually the object of it in puerperal insanity; an im-
pulse to destroy, haunts the mind continually, and struggles with ma-
ternal tenderness, which as strongly checks the act. The sufferer, in '
some cases, implores that the infant may be removed from her, lest she
should altogether lose her self-control, and is heard praying to Heaven to
prevent her from yielding to the temptation. In one of the lying-in
hospitals of London, not long since, the mother did actually destroy her
child during one of her paroxysms.

In some cases, the patient suddenly exhibits the maniacal symptoms,
without any antecedent ones. On awaking out of an apparently quiet
slumber, she slirieks out, and exclaims that her infant is dead, or that it
has been taken from her. Nothing can persuade her to the contrary,
not even the sight of the child itself in some cases.

The physical symptoms are not invariably the same; the secretion of
milk is generally, but not always diminished; headache, and a peculiar
feeling of discomfort and pain in the head, are described by the patient
in her lucid intervals; the bowels are constipated, the tongue white and
coated, skin sometimes hot, and pulse rather quick, but weak.

As in all other puerperal complaints, the quick pulse is the symp-
tom which causes most anxiety to the obstetric practitioner, as experience
has taught us, that this is a symptom which denotes more accurately the
approach of danger than any other sign, and it may be laid down as an
axiom, "that whilst the pulse remains above 100 in the minute, in any
136 PUERPERAL INSANITY.
case after labour, it must always be regarded as a sign of approaching
evil."

Dr. William Hunter and Gooch have particularly adverted to the
state of the pulse, as indicative of a dangerous form, if it is rapid; the
other and milder form of the complaint is accompanied by a very mo-
derate disturbance of the circulation. The latter cases are the most
numerous, and likely to be cured; the former generally die.
Febrile symptoms are, then, not necessarily present in puerperal
mania. The digestive organs are more frequently in fault; but this
would naturally be expected when there is great excitability of brain,
and is likely effect and not cause. Dark offensive dejections are often
passed; the breath is likewise offensive, and the lips and teeth are some-
times coated with sordes.

The patient appears to be little affected by cold, and it not unfre-
quently happens that she endeavours to divest herself of her clothing,
and to walk about uncovered.

The constant state of excitement soon affects the general health. Ema-
ciation is a frequent effect; a pallid, jaundiced look, with sunken eyes, is
observed, and great prostration of strength succeeds, if the attack is
long continued.
Period of attach?Of ninety-two cases at Salpetriere, sixteen com-
menced before the fourth day after accouchement, twenty-one before the
fifteenth, seventeen before the sixtieth, nineteen in the twelve months
after, and nineteen immediately after weaning.*

M. Esquirol draws the conclusions?

1. That insanity is more likely to occur after labour, than at a later period.
2. That the danger of an attack diminishes as the period is more distant from the labour.

Hereditary tendency is one cause of puerperal insanity, and in many
cases of the complaint we feel assured that it would not have occurred
at all, were there not already in the patients a peculiar pre-aptitude
for its aggression.

In the 111 cases in Bethlehem, there were forty-five in whom an
hereditary tendency was ascertained.t

There is one form of madness, or raving, which sometimes, though
very rarely, attacks puerperal patients, so different in its cause from
common mania, and requiring such totally different treatment, that it
deserves especial notice.

I allude to Phrenitis, or inflammatory affection of the brain and its
membranes.
This form generally appears at an earlier period after labour than
mania, and is a most dangerous malady. As in other serious puerperal
diseases, the pulse is hard and very quick from the commencement; it

* Esquirol, p. 234.
+ For an excellent abstract of the cases occurring in the Bethlehem Lunatic Hos-
pital, during the last five years, I am indebted to the kindness of my friend, Dr. Jobn
Webster.

often sets in with a rigor, and a distressing headache, vertigo, pyrexia,
great heat of scalp, dry skin, scanty secretion of urine, throbbing in the
temples, flushed cheeks, ringing in the ears, intolerance of light, total
want of sleep; the vessels of the conjunctiva are injected, painfully acute
hearing, hurried manner, confusion of thought, the ideas are incoherent,
and the patient cannot pursue any chain of reasoning, even on false
data; she becomes unconscious often of surrounding objects, and it is
succeeded at length by furious mania. Here, then, is inflammatory
action going on, with strong determination of blood to the cerebral
vessels, which must be speedily subdued, or no chance exists as to the
safety of the patient; if not so, the usual effects of inflammation soon
supervene?viz., effusion on the brain, paralysis, coma, convulsions, and
death.
The fatal termination often takes place by the fourth day, and almost
always within a week from the commencement of the attack, and is
heralded by the shrunk features, cold clammy sweats, glazed eye, cold
extremities, and laborious respiration. If there is to be a favourable
termination, it is notified by a speedy decline of the inflammatory
symptoms, and the delirium gradually becomes milder, and is at length
subdued.
Collins mentions a case which occurred in the Dublin Lying-in
Hospital, twenty-eight hours after delivery, and notwithstanding most
active treatment, she died comatose fifty-five hours after the com-
mencement of the attack. On a post-mortem examination, the serous
covering of the brain exhibited, in some places, an opaque and thickened
appearance, the ventricles being distended, and containing fluid to the
amount of four tablespoonfuls.?(Practical Treatise on Midwifery.)
One principal diagnostic mark will be, the appearance of febrile and
inflammatory cerebral symptoms, alone at first, Avhicli are followed by
mental aberration.
W. Hunter attributed his fatal cases with quick pulse to para-
phrenias, but Gooch was of opinion that they rather depended on
" exhausting excitation of the nervous system."
INSANITY FROM UNDUE OR PROTRACTED LACTATION.
If there is any doubt in the minds of practitioners as to whether
mania depends upon inflammatory congestion, or mere excitability,
there is, at least, little in this form of the complaint, which evidently
owes its origin to the exhaustion of sensorial power. In all cases we find
an adynamic state of the system, or great depression of the vital powers.
Several premonitory symptoms serve to usher in this malady in the
majority of cases, but not invariably, as in exceptional cases the attack
comes on without any previous warning. Anxiety of mind without
apparent cause, sleeplessness, alteration of temper and habits, great
depression of spirits, peevishness, listlessness, loss of memory, giddiness,
headache, and confusion of intellect, generally herald in the approach of
this form of insanity j and the patient herself expresses a feeling that
something is going wrong as to her brain. Patients thus attacked are
observed to be generally emaciated, with an anaemic, pale appearance, to
138 PUERPERAL INSANITY.
have lost their appetite, complaining of a dragging, sinking sensation
from the epigastrium to the spine always after suckling the infant, and
showing every symptom of great exhaustion and debility. It is, in
fact, a state of excitability combined with great loss of power.*
There are many cases to be met with in private practice in which
mothers who have injudiciously persisted in suckling their infants, when
it was evident that their strength was becoming materially impaired, as
proved by loss of flesh, Aveak pulse, loss of appetite, and languor,
have at length been affected by a distressing lowness of spirits, and
dejection of mind, with some undefined fear as to themselves or their
infants. Now these, I have no doubt, would speedily have merged into
melancholia, had not decisive steps been taken to counteract its progress,
by insisting upon weaning, by the use of tonics, fresh air, generous diet,
and perfect quietude for a time. Should there, however, have been an
hereditary taint in the system, or some great moral excitement at such
a period, the attack will most likely not be prevented.
The only incurable case of this form of insanity which has occurred
in my own practice arose from these causes:?A lady who, it was after-
wards recollected, had evinced great oddity of manner during the latter
period of her first pregnancy, had suckled her infant for ten months,
when, unfortunately, her husband was attacked by an acute disease, and
fell a victim to it within two or three days. Great strangeness of
manner immediately was again apparent in the patient. Her bodily
strength was much reduced, hallucinations came over the mind, the
principal one being that her husband was still alive in his grave; and
violent mania, succeeded by melancholy, was the result. Although four
years have now elapsed since this attack, no evident change for the
better has taken place.
In another case which has come within my knowledge, the lady,
(mother of several children,) within four months of her last confinement,
had complained of an undefined dread of something about to happen to
* A. C., set. 40, married eighteen years, and the mother of three children, was con-
fined with her last child on June 22nd, 1840. She is of fair complexion, and much
emaciated. About two months since, the first symptoms of mental derangement evinced
themselves, by her talking incoherently on religious matters, and by her attempting
suicide. As her debility was extreme, her infant was taken from her, more especially
as she had taken a great aversion to it. Since this period, she has been alternately better
and worse, but for the last three weeks has at times been quite violent and unmanage-
able, and shown strong dislike to her children, although naturally a very fond mother.
I first saw her on February 28tli, 1847, in the lunatic ward, when she replied sensibly
to most of the questions put to her. Her children, however, she enumerated byname to a
very large number, and this daily increased, I found on questioning her, on the same sub
ject; it, in fact, became the test as to her sanity, as she frequently for hours together was
quite calm, and showed no aberration of mind on other points. She is occasionally
seized with fits of violent trembling, and then talks violently and incoherently, fancying
herself on the point of dissolution, wishing to see her husband, but never expressing
the same desire as to her children. As she presented every symptom of physical ex-
haustion, good nourishment, tonics, and opium were administered whilst staying with
us, and I believe the same mode of treatment was adopted at Hoxton, to which asylum
she was transmitted on March 12th. On one of my periodical visits to our patients at
that establishment, I was pleased to observe that on asking the usual question as to her
number of children, she laughed (evidently remembering her former answers), but now
answered correctly. She was very soon after discharged quite cured, on September
27th last.
PUERPERAL INSANITY.
139
her, and though in a debilitated state, would persevere in suckling her
infant. At this juncture, unfortunately, a sudden death occurred in her
house, which much shocked and distressed her. An attack of mania,
accompanied by great violence of manner, suddenly supervened, and
during her illness she Avas not able to recognise her husband and
child. By weaning immediately, giving tonics, nutritious diet, keeping
the patient perfectly quiet, and not allowing her to see her husband or
children, reason was perfectly restored within three months, the cata-
menial discharge having previously recurred.*
Like the other forms of insanity, there is frequently observed a
difference as to the mode of its aggression; it may sometimes suddenly
break out, without the slightest previous suspicion on the part of the
friends; but more commonly, there is an unusual and gradually increasing
disturbance in the balance of self-control over the mental powers, which
is even appreciable by the patient herself, until all guidance is lost, re-
straint gives way, and insanity appears in its full form.
The more usual form in which this appears, when dependent upon
over-nursing, is that of melancholia, but not ahvays so. I have seen
several cases in which it assumed either the form of mania simply, or
what is more common, a combination of melancholia with paroxysms
of mania.
A case of this description occurred in my own private practice a few
years since. Symptoms of phthisis having evinced themselves a few
months after parturition in a young married lady, it was thought expe-
dient that the opinion of an eminent physician should likewise be taken
on the case. Owing to the fright and mental emotion caused by the
anticipated examination, the night was passed without sleep. The ex-
citement continued after the consultation, and speedily merged into
melancholia, interrupted by occasional paroxysms of violent mania. In
a few weeks, the symptoms gave way, and the patient recovered from
the mental attack; but died, after some months, of the pulmonary
disease.
From such opportunities as I have had for forming an opinion on
* C. V., set. 24, of a calm temperament and liappy disposition, sallow com-
plexion and black liair, was confined with her first child eight months since. Her
health has been good, but she has had great anxiety, owing to her husband having
embarked in business, and lost all his property within the last few months. On his
reaching home three days since, he found her singing hymns, and talking to herself
on religious subjects, and she has since that time been almost incessantly occupied in
a similar manner. She was brought into the female lunatic ward of the infirmary on
October 12. There is no violence in her manner, but she speaks almost continuously
in a low, soft voice, quoting Scripture very correctly, and is evidently very conversant
with it, and with the church service. This is varied occasionally by singing psalms and
praying. She accuses berself of murder, of denying her Saviour, and of various other
crimes, but has a placid expression of countenance, and does not appear unhappy. The
tongue is white but not coated, pulse weak, skin cool, and her features pale and ema-
ciated. Sleeps very little, but is not violent; perspires much. Bowels relieved properly,
and urine likewise passes freely. There is a quiet, continuous lamentation in well-
expressed language, and the case evidently is one proceeding from exhaustion combined
with distress of mind, which has been inwardly preying on her, but which she has
hitherto concealed from her husband, by his account. As the law is now imperative on
the point, she was removed after a few days to the lunatic asylum at Bethnal-green, but
it is a case which no doubt, with quiet and generous living, will ultimately do well.
140 PUERPERAL INSANITY.
the subject, it appears that insanity dependent upon over-nursing is
more common amongst the poorer classes than in those who are provided
with all the necessary comforts; for in the former, there is not only the
drain upon the system by suckling, but this is often combined with a
very insufficient supply of food, owing to their poverty, whilst, added to
it, is the continued daily bodily exertion which is as constantly requisite,
that they may exist. If I remember aright, however, this is contrary
to the experience of Esquirol.
It was the opinion of Puzos, Levret, and some other writers on this
subject, that a transition of milk to the brain was the cause of this
form of the disease; but few, if any, medical practitioners of the present
day will subscribe to this view. Esquirol mentions that nurses (especially
among the poor) are more liable to suffer from this complaint after
weaning than whilst nursing; but it is a question whether the fact of
weaning itself was not in these cases found to be absolutely requisite,
owing to the debilitated state of the system. Weaning suddenly, with-
out any precautions or care, is stated on good authority to have some-
times brought on an attack of insanity. Esquirol mentions nineteen
such cases as having occurred in his practice, and first appearing a few
days after weaning.
It is a well known fact that some other great and continued debi-
litating causes, such as uterine hemorrhage, for instance, acting on the
system, will produce insanity, and several such cases are recorded.
It will not unlikely be found, however, on minute inquiry, that in all
such cases as those now referred to, from whatever debilitating cause they
may partly arise, that some moral shock or grief has also preceded the
attack.
PROPORTION OF CASES OF INSANITY ARISING FROM PUERPERAL CAUSES.
There is one point which requires explanation?viz., to account for the
fact, that in the large lunatic hospitals a considerable proportion of the
female cases admitted have arisen either after childbirth, or during
suckling; and yet, on looking over the registers of extensive lying-in
hospitals, it is surprising to find how rarely a case of insanity occurs in
them: in the latter respect, the results of private practice will show the
same result.
Thus, by EsquiroVs statements, there were 1119 females admitted
insane into the Salpetriere at Paris during four years, of whom ninety-
two were affected after childbirth; and in the higher classes of society
the proportion was much larger, as in 144 cases, twenty-one had been
thus affected either soon after childbirth, or during the period of suckling.
The yearly admissions into the hospital of such cases is about one-
twelfth of the total number received, and in some years one-tenth. In
EsquiroVs private practice, such cases form about one-seventh of the
whole.
In the tables of 256 cases, of a higher order in society, admitted
into Charenton, ten cases are recorded only as arising in consequence of
parturition. (Annales d'Hygiene Publique, &c.)
Dr. Haslam, in a former report of cases in Bethlehem Lunatic Hospital,
gives the proportion of puerperal ones as 84 in 1644.
rUEKPEIUL INSANITY.
14 J
Of the 899 females admitted into Bethlehem during the last five years,
those labouring under puerperal insanity were 111?or 12-34; being
one-eighth of the total number.
In the Philadelphia Lunatic Asylum, Dr. Push has given the pro-
portion as 5 in 70.
In the Bethnal Green Asylum, Mr. Phillips has been kind enough to
examine the registers for the last three years, and finds, that out of 386
female patients, three only were the result of puerperal causes.
In the Grove House Asylum at Bow, Dr. Palmer, with the same kind
feeling, has forwarded to me the results of 467 cases, of whom nineteen
were thus affected, as seen in the accompanying table :?
During
Pregnancy.
Immedi-
ately after
Delivery.
During
Lactation.
12
Form of
Disorders.
Results.
Mania . 15
Melancholia, 4
Recovered . 14
Recovering . 2
Removed, proba-
bly recovered, 1
Recnrrt.Mania, 1
Hopeless De
\ metitia. . 1
Average dura-
tion of treat-
ment in the
cases cured.
4 months.
Of the nineteen cases, three had had previous attacks of insanity un-
connected with pregnancy, and two had before been affected by puerperal
mania. In eight cases, an hereditary tendency to cerebral affections
existed.
I have been unable to obtain any statement as to St. Luke's.
The following is an abstract which I have made from the reports of
703 female cases admitted into the Hanwell Asylum, within the last
eight years :?
Puerperal
In pregnancy
Whilst nursing .
After miscarriage
Suppression of milk
Hysteria
Suppressed menstruation
Critical period
Uterine excitement
26
4
7
2
6
7
10
Total . . 79
Of 805 cases examined by Dr. Conolly in 1839, he found only one
case of puerperal mania remaining there.
Again in 1845, on examining the female cases, there were two of
puerperal mania only.
In the York Retreat, out of 246 cases, there were from
Puerperal disorders .... 9
Undue lactation ..... 2
Irregular catamenia . . . .10
Hvsteria ...... 3
. 11
. 13
(Thurnam.)
142 PUERPERAL INSANITY.
I liave thought it might, perhaps, be interesting to obtain a return
of cases of insanity depending on the simple puerperal state, from some
of the larger lying-in institutions of this metropolis, and the following
is the result:?
In the General Lying-in Hospital, Westminster, in which the patients
remain for three weeks after labour, out of the last 3-500 cases delivered
there, nine were affected with insanity. One apparently arose from a
moral cause, after seeing her friends, but she recovered within four
months : another was very slightly affected, and speedily was restored.*
In the British Lying-in Hospital, Dr. Henry Davies informs me that
" within the last few years, there have been several cases of modified
puerperal insanity, but no violent or acute ones ; they have been
despondent or melancholy, and all recovered before leaving the hospital."
To Mr. Gream I am indebted for a detailed account of the statistics
of 2000 cases, which have been delivered in the Queen Charlotte's Lying-
in Hospital. Of this number there were eight cases of mania, and three
combined with acute inflammation of the brain, excluding those cases in
which delirium supervenes upon other diseases.
The number of insane cases here is larger in proportion than that of
other similar institutions, but Mr. Gream accounts for it by the fact,
that in this hospital the proportion of unmarried females is one-half of
the total; many of these are already in a depressed condition, owing to
anticipated destitution, and others become maniacal in consequence of
the neglect of their friends or seducers.
Thus of the eleven cases, three were married, and eight unmarried.
I have confined myself to the returns of the in-patients of these hos-
pitals, as, although the out-patients are more numerous, still there is less
probability of arriving at a correct knowledge of them.
In the Lying-in Wards of St. Giles's Infirmary, amongst the last 950
cases, there was not one case of puerperal insanity, although a large
proportion of the patients were single women; and of 1888 out cases,
of which Ave there obtain immediate and accurate returns also, only one
case of mania occurred, which was of short duration.
As to the usual age of patients thus attacked, the following table of
M. Esquirol will, perhaps, afford the best answer.
In the 92 cases admitted into the Salpetriere,?
22 were from
41 ?
10
11
2 ?
92
20 to 25
25 to 30
30 to 35
35 to 40
43
Now, this result appears simply to accord with the ages of women
relative to fecundity; and as the greatest proportion of these will be
found from twenty to thirty, the cases of puerperal insanity will be
somewhat in the ratio as to the proportional number confined at each
period of life stated, or not far from it.
* Three were acute cases, and proved fatal; one from phrenitis and coma ; another
followed an attack of puerperal convulsions.
PUERPERAL INSANITY. 143
Thus, in one of tlie tables which I published formerly, and which con-
tained the ages of the patients, the latter will be found in the following
proportion in 1771 cases:?


Age when confined 
under 20
Between 20 and 30
30 and 40
40 and 45
45 and 50
69
1100
542
54
6
Total . . . 1771

ON THE CAUSES OF PUERPERAL INSANITY
-----------------------------------

In considering this subject, even as connected with general insanity,
the fixing on any determinate physical cause is attended with the greatest
difficulty. Various appearances have been described as presenting them-
selves, on post-mortem examination of the brains of those who have
died whilst labouring under this disease; but independently of there
being no peculiar and constant pathological lesions, we are also unable
to decide whether the appearances which are described have been cause
or effect.

There are, however, several causes combined in the pregnant and
puerperal states, which may give rise to the disease now under considera-
tion. It has already been shown that any unusual excitement or irrita-
bility of the uterine organs, when long continued, may alone produce
symptoms of insanity: such, for instance, as suppression of the men-
strual function; the act of conception; pregnancy; the suppressed or dis-
ordered lacteal secretion, or lochial discharges, which have all in turn
occasionally furnished cases for the lunatic asylum. Sympathy of the
brain with the disordered state of the functions of the uterus, especially
if combined with those of the other abdominal organs, is here the appa-
rent cause.

Those who are more particularly conversant with the treatment of
female complaints, are well aware to what an extent disturbance of the
cerebral organs will proceed from any derangement of the uterine func-
tions, as evidenced by headache, giddiness, loss of memory, confusion of
thought, throbbing in the temples, depression of spirits, &c. But when
we find that, combined with the vast changes which occur in the uterine
organs during pregnancy, and more rapidly immediately after parturition,
there is superadded an acknowledged state of great nervous excitability,
a change even in the physical characters of the circulating fluid, and
above all, the influence of moral causes to so great an amount, (causes
which, according to Pinel, Esquirol,* and others, much more frequently
produce insanity than do the physical,) Ave can scarcely feel surprised
at its aggression under such disadvantageous circumstances, but rather
that it is not much more frequently observed.

The great exhaustion after labour, the anxiety as to suckling, sleep-
less nights caused by the infant, excitement often from friends in-
judiciously calling and conversing with the patient, followed by the
* Esquivol computes that cases of insanity originating from moral causes are as
four to one of those which are produced by physical.? Memoire, 1818.

physical excitement usually attendant upon the establishment of the
proper secretion of milk,?all conduce to place her in such a state, that
her mind is more accessible to an attack of puerperal mania. A case,
some time since, came under my notice, in which it Avas caused by an
alarm resulting from the entrance of a sheriff's officer to seize upon the
goods.
Puerperal mania appears to be the effect, not of inflammatory action,
nor even of congestion of the brain, but to depend more upon intense
irritability. The treatment, when successful, is sufficient alone to prove
this fact, for it will be seen that depletion by bloodletting in these cases
is very seldom advantageous, but generally extremely prejudicial;
nutritious food is required in almost every case, and even stimulants
judiciously applied; whilst the few cases which prove fatal in acute
mania will usually be found to sink principally from exhaustion.

Puerperal insanity may, then, be regarded as originating from excessive
| irritability of the whole cerebro-spinal system, combined with great de-
) pression or exhaustion. By this may be explained the fact that so little
I assistance has been afforded us by pathological anatomy, as no alteration
of structure in the brain would be naturally expected to follow simple
derangement of the functions, and the greater number of cases which
have afforded opportunities for examination have been chronic ones of
some standing, in Avhich paralysis or slow chronic inflammation of the
membranes have at length been superinduced.

Guislain remarks on " a sanguineous orgasm or erethism,"* a sudden
injection of the cerebral vessels, in common mania, which does not amount
to inflammation, but seems closely allied to irritability.

The dissections by Pinel, Esquirol, Georget, Greding, Haslam, and
many other competent authorities, lead to the conviction, that in both
general and puerperal insanity, " nothing decisive can be obtained in
reference to it from any variations of appearance that have been hitherto
detected."
Esquirol " has found nothing particular to point out the seat of
disease in the brain." In some cases, the cerebral vessels were found
quite emptied, and this fact, in accordance with similar cases by Goocli
and others, shows the usually anaemic state of such patients.
Organic lesions of the brain certainly do not appear to be a
common effect even of puerperal mania, for, like convulsions under
similar circumstances, when either attendant upon or following parturi-
tion with a fatal termination, few, if any, traces are found in the
enceplialon.
i The same cause will occasionally produce both puerperal convulsions
and 'puerperal mania. A case of this description was received into the
female lunatic ward of St. Giles' Infirmary, about three years since.
The patient, aged twenty-two, eight months advanced in pregnancy with
her first child, was very much alarmed by a fire which broke out in a
house opposite to her own. Convulsions attacked her, and Mr. Eobarts,
of Great Coram Street, who attended the case, thought it advisable to
forward the labour as much as possible, by dilating the os uteri, and
* " Traite de l'Alienation Mentale."
PUERPERAL INSANITY.
J 4.5
perforating tlie cranium of the fetus. Two or three convulsive attacks
came on even after the labour was terminated, accompanied by great
stupor, on recovering from which, mania evidenced itself fully. I was re-
quested to visit the patient, and she was, after being removed to the
infirmary for a few days, sent to a lunatic asylum, from which ehe
returned completely cured in about four months from the time of
the attack. She has since that time borne twins on two separate
occasions, Mr. Robarts informs me, without any return of a similar
attack.
f Another point of connexion between the two complaints is, " that each
of them is more liable to attack the female in her first accouchement
{than in after ones.
The similarity of condition in the nervous system, as existing between
delirium tremens and puerperal mania, lias already been adverted to,
both exhibiting great exhaustion of vital power, with much excitability.
Amongst the lower class of females who apply for entrance at the
expected period of accouchement into parochial infirmaries, a large pro-
portion of them are addicted to the daily use of ardent spirits; and, from
some inquiries which I have instituted during the last three years, I
have found that the habitual consumption of opium amongst the same
class is to a far greater extent than is generally supposed by the public.
I have been surprised at discovering how universal the practice has be-
come, and to what an extent in some cases this drug is taken by them
with impunity, or rather, without immediate fatal effects. It is not at
all an uncommon circumstance in the infirmary for the head nurse to
discover under the pillows of the patients a phial of laudanum or a box
of opium pills, secretly put there for daily use ; and several young girls
even have stated, 011 being questioned, that independently of the use of
spirituous liquors, they are in the habit of purchasing daily their penny-
worth, or more, of laudanum as a dram, and that there are favourite
druggists' shops, at which they get better measure than elsewhere. It
might naturally be expected, that at the period of labour, with the re-
moval of such accustomed stimulus, and its usual consequences, we should
find cases of puerperal mania much more frequent in this class, but the
tabular statement already given does not bear out the fact. I may
be allowed, however, to state, that in the last eighteen years, during
which period I have had to sign the certificates of all those who are
received as insane into the infirmary, previously to their being transmitted
to the various lunatic asylums in the county, I have frequently of late
been struck with the increase in number of cases of general insanity,
which is certainly disproportionate to the annual increase of population;
the habitual use of opium amongst this class may perhaps explain the
fact.
In the pure puerperal mania, the disturbance of the system arising
from the sometimes sudden suppression of the lochial discharge and the
full advent of the lacteal secretion, is one of the principal and imme-
diate exciting causes of the complaint, and, at all events, places the cere-
bral organs in such a condition that any great moral shock, or previous
hereditary tendency, has then full opportunity of producing derange-
ment of function to a greater or less extent. In the comparatively lew
NO. I. L
146 PUERPERAL INSANITY.
cases wliicli liave fallen under my own notice in private practice or in
consultation, the patients had all been previously remarkable for their
excitable temperament or eccentricity of manner. Taking cold soon
after confinement is another cause, acting, as it does often, in arresting
the secretion of milk, the lochial discharge, and producing the consequent
fever; the re-establisliment of these secretions in a regular healthy con-
dition is often the commencement of the recovery.
Morbid irritation of the gastric and hepatic organs will likewise be
intimately connected with the appearance of this complaint, whether as
cause or effect is I think doubtful, but it is quite certain that on a copious
evacuation of dark vitiated secretions from the bowels, in some cases,
an immediate amendment has been observable. The sympathy between
the healthy and disordered function of the liver, and the condition of the
cerebral organs, is too well known to all practitioners to require com-
ment.
That moral causes have a most powerful influence in the production
of puerperal mania, is a fact believed by most authors; and it may be
further asserted, that it is a much more frequent cause of bringing out
the symptoms of it, in constitutions already predisposed, than the phy-
sical. This is perhaps shown by the much larger number of cases which
occur in unmarried women than in the married, as is also the case in
general insanity. Thus, in the Hanwell report of cases, of 415 females
there were 122 married, 263 unmarried, and 30 widows. In Sal-
pet riere, of 1726 cases admitted, 397 were married, 980 unmarried,
and 291 widows.
In the German reports, the proportion was still larger, according to
Dr. Jacobi in his Statistik?viz., in 835 females 599 were unmarried,
80 widows, and only 156 married.
As a further proof that the same fact holds good as to puerperal
mania, I may instance the statistical returns of those large lying-in in-
stitutions of London which have been given in these pages.
In the Queen Charlotte's Hospital, the proportion of insane cases is
much larger than in the other two alluded to, and this return is very
justly supposed to depend on the fact, that one half of the patients there
admitted are single women. Of the eleven cases, three were married,
and eight unmarried. It not unfrequently happens that young females
of a superior class, who are deserted by their friends, are obliged to
apply for admission into such an institution, to hide their shame, and
for want of means; and of five fatal cases out of the eleven, one only
was married. Two were of the class just described, highly educated, of
sensitive dispositions, and compelled by the cruel desertion of their
seducers, and neglect of their friends, to seek for admission into a public
hospital.
It was supposed formerly that all puerperal diseases were the effect of
the suppressed secretion and metastasis of the milk: thus, there was the
milk abscess, the oedema lactea, the mania lactea, &c. Levret, in fact,
asserted, that after the latter disease proving fatal, he had found milk
within the cranium; but this was no doubt simply an albuminous
effusion.
PUERPERAL INSANITY. 147
In conclusion, we may divide the causes of this complaint into predis-
posing and immediate.
The former will include, 1. Previous attack; 2. Hereditary predispo-
sition; 3. Great mental shocks, as by fright, &c.; 4. Great natural ex-
citability.
The immediate causes may be checked perspiration, and sudden sup-
pression of the lacteal or lochial discharge.
PROGNOSIS OF PUERPERAL INSANITY.
There are two points to be considered under this head?1. The
duration of the malady; 2. Fatal termination.
DURATION.
In cases of insanity which occur during pregnancy, it is not uncom-
mon to find that a cure takes place before the end of the term, without a
recurrence in the puerperal state: several such cases are in the registers
of lunatic asylums, I find. Much care, however, is required after labour
in these cases, and additional reasons exist for avoiding all probable
causes of mental excitement, as there is a chance of recurrent mania
again attacking the patient. Thus, in the daily journals of 1841, a case
was mentioned as discharged from St. Luke's, cured as it was thought;
but soon after, having received a fright as to the child, she again became
subject to the complaint, and in one of the paroxysms she destroyed
both her infant and herself.
If the cases occurring during pregnancy are principally dependent on
functional derangement, they will in general cease when such function is
again properly re-established.
In the Hanwell report of 1841, a case is given as occurring during
pregnancy in a girl of eighteen, who did not recover until fifteen months
after the attack. Sir W. Ellis, however, gives it as the result of his ex-
perience, that such cases " generally improved as the term of gestation
drew nigh, and all entirely recovered a few weeks after delivery."?
(Treatise on Insanity.)
" A patient received into Hanwell had become insane three months
after pregnancy had commenced, and laboured under complete melan-
cholia. She Avas confined about two months after her admission, and
the pains of childbirth at once aroused all her dormant feelings. The
child Avas still-born, but all the secretions coming on in their natural
course, she quickly recovered."?(Ellis.)
Sir W. Ellis says also, " If the treatment be commenced in the early
stage of the disease, and there is no hereditary predisposition or poAverful
moral cause to keep up diseased action in the brain, it is one of the most
curable forms of insanity."?(P. 242, op. cit.)
With regard to the probable duration of insanity in puerperal cases,
most authors are agreed that they are more likely to recover sjieedily
than in the other forms of the disease, and that permanent insanity is
very rare Avhen it arises from such causes.
Denman has remarked, that " this disorder, in some instances, ceases
in tAventy-four hours; in others, it continues only for a few days; in
l 2
148 PUERPERAL INSANITY.
some, a few weeks, and in others, for several months; but the instances
of its continuing more than six months are very rare, and there is
scarcely one to be found who did not ultimately recover, if there was no
previous disposition."?(Vol. ii. p. 510.)
Burns gives a similar opinion:?" In some instances, the patient re-
covers in a few hours; in others, the mania remains for several weeks, or
even some months; but I believe it never becomes permanent, nor does it
prove fatal, unless dependent on plirenitis."?(Principles of Midwifery,
p. 544.)
Dr. Gooch says?" Of the many patients about whom I have been
consulted, I know only two who are still, after many years, disordered in
mind, and of these, one had already been so before her marriage."?
(Op. ext.)
Esquirol, too?" Les alienations mentales a la suite des couches,
guerissent generalement, s'il n'y a pas de predispositions trop energiques!"
but immediately weakens the assertion by adding?" II en guerit plus
de la moitie," and giving fifty-five cases only out of ninety-two as
cured.
Haslam returns fifty recoveries out of eighty-four puerperal cases, and
Burrows thirty-five in fifty-seven.
The experience of practitioners, as to their individual patients,
appears to be much more favourable than would be proved by the
returns of different asylums. In some of these, however, it must be
remembered that the cases, previous to their admission, have been
treated elsewhere, and sent on account of the obstinate continuance of
the complaint.
The duration of the malady will always be influenced by the previous
melancholic or excitable temperament of the patient, or by an hereditary
tendency, and the prognosis, therefore, will be more unfavourable, if any
near relative has already become insane, and more so, should the
patient herself have been previously attacked. It may, too, I think, be
laid down as a general rule, " that those cases of puerperal insanity
which do not recover within six months from the time of the attack, are
very likely to become tedious and unsatisfactory, though eventually
curable. As a general axiom, cases of melancholia will be longer in re-
covering than those of mania.
The time elapsing before recovery must, of course, in each case, be
uncertain, and will depend upon various circumstances. Thus, in the
Hanwell report for 1840, a female aged twenty-two, attacked by mania
after parturition, was ill for six months, whilst another patient, aged
forty-four, with a similar attack, remained for eighteen months; a third
case, aged twenty-eight, whose insanity originated from undue lactation,
coupled with domestic unhappiness, had two separate attacks of mania,
her illness lasting altogether for three years. In the report of 1841,
however, there is a case mentioned, aged thirty-one, and returned as
cured after six years and a half; whilst another, aged forty-two, arising
from fright and child-birth, was cured after five years' illness.
In 111 cases admitted into Bethlehem during five vears, ending
Oct. 31, 1847?
PUERPERAL INSANITY. 149
Discharged, cured 69
Removed, or not cured 24
Died 5
Still under treatment 13
111
Of the thirty-seven recoveries in Dr. Burrows' table, twenty-eight
were cured within the first six months.
A fair opinion may be formed in future as to the duration of illness
in pauper lunatics, as the parochial authorities are obliged, by a late act
of parliament, to report any such case to the magistrates within three
days, and it is then immediately transferred to a lunatic asylum.
Formerly, " very few of the cases of puerperal insanity, after delivery,
were brought to the asylum at Hanwell, until after the lapse of many
weeks or months," according to Sir W. Ellis; and this admission of
chronic cases will, perhaps, explain the unsatisfactory result, as obtained
from the tables of some asylums, as to the proportion of cures effected.
The following is a tabular statement of the duration of disease in
the sixty-nine puerperal patients cured in Bethlehem:?
Under 2 months 2
3 ?  4
4 ?  15
5 ?  6
6  9
7 ?  6
Under 8 months 7
? 9   4
? 12 ?  3
Above this 7
The original reports being defec-
tive, duration not ascertained in 6
In the Salpetriere, of 55 cases cured?
4 were in the ] st month.
7 ? 2nd ?
6 ? 3rd ?
7 ? 4th ?
5 ? 5th ?
9 ? 6th ?
15 in the following months.
2 after 2 years.
55?or about two-thirds within the first 6 months. (Esquirol.)

FATAL TERMINATION.
-----------------

If we include the cases of phrenitis which have been already alluded
to, as occasionally though rarely attacking the puerperal patient, the
prognosis in such cases will be always most unfavourable. Their rare
occurrence, however, is best shown by taking a table, such as that of
Dr. Collins, in which, out of 16,414 cases delivered in the Dublin
Lying-in Hospital, three only died of phrenitis.

In what is termed acute mania, it may perhaps be doubtful if there is
not a subacute inflammatory action of the brain mixed up with the other
common symptoms of mania. The complication of such a state, directly
after childbirth, with depressed vital powers, not only must excite alarm
in the mind of the medical practitioner, but renders the treatment ex-
ceedingly difficult in steering between the depletive and supporting
remedies which may be here required. It is this description of case
which Gooch described as so dangerous, with the quick pulse and
febrile symptoms. In proportion as cases approximate to the form
of plirenitis, so much the more dangerous do they become.

Exhaustion appears to be the principal source of danger; the want of
sleep, intense excitement, and monotonous self-fatigue, all combine to
increase it, and it is often a matter of surprise to us, for what an extent
of time the human frame can withstand their effects.
Should even the mental symptoms somewhat improve, yet if the
insomnia still continues, with a quick weak pulse, and other increasing
symptoms of bodily debility, the termination of the case is to be looked
to with apprehension.

In instances of simple puerperal mania or melancholia, the great
majority may be considered as likely to recover eventually: many prac-
titioners whom I have questioned on the subject have never met with a
fatal case amongst their private patients, and I may state this as my own
experience likewise. If we consider puerperal mania to be produced by
functional derangement of the brain, and not from organic disease, it
will explain the favourable anticipations as to the result of such cases.
More danger seems to be attached to cases of single women after con-
finement, when attacked by mania, than in the married, especially if their
minds are susceptible of the grief, shame, remorse, effect of neglect, and
destitution, so likely to overwhelm them at such a time. It will be re-
marked, that out of the five fatal cases already mentioned as occurring
in a lying-in hospital, from mania, one only was married.

In the'report of the 111 cases at Bethlehem, which Dr. Webster has
forwarded to me, five only proved fatal, and these all had commenced
within fourteen days after delivery?the earliest, four days after, the
latest, fourteen. Thus, one commenced four days after first confinement,
insane fifteen days; one five days after third confinement, insane three
months; one eight days after first confinement, insane thirteen days;
one ten days after sixth confinement, insane ten weeks; one fourteen
days after seventh confinement, insane four months.

Of the ninety-two puerperal cases in Salpetriere six proved fatal ;
one in six months after labour; one after one year; two after a year and
a half; one after three years; one after five years.

Esquirol, in giving this statement, asks why it is that the abdo-
minal affections after accouchement are so fatal in comparison with
the cerebral 1 The question is easily answered. In the former, they
depend upon inflammatory action pervading the serous coverings of
a large surface, and that action, too, often of an erysipelatous typhoid
character. In the latter, it is simply a derangement of function when
simple mania; but when inflammatory action does attack the brain, then
the mortality is as great as that caused by the abdominal disease.
In Dr. Burrows' table of fifty-seven cases, ten died, or about one in six.
From all the inquiries which I have been enabled to make on the
different points connected with puerperal insanity, it would appear as
a result, "that the great majority of such cases, whether occurring from
pregnancy, parturition, or from undue lactation, recover, and that the
mortality is comparatively very small."

STATE OF THE LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN IRELAND. 151
LIABILITY TO AFTER ATTACKS.
This is by no means so great as we should at first be inclined to sus-
pect ? for although Esquirol mentions one case of mania after the first
labour, in which the female was successively attacked in a similar manner
after each of her eleven succeeding ones, each attack lasting about a
month or six weeks; and likewise a second case in which mania appeared
after Jive labours successively, yet numerous instances occur, in which no
return takes place, though strong exciting causes may have existed, such
as great misfortunes, domestic chagrins, &c. I have myself mentioned
one, in which the patient bore twins twice, without any similar attack.
In speaking as to this liability on future similar occasions, Esquirol
naively observes, " On previent les acces, en evitant la grossesse."
The patients mentioned by Gooch had no return in their subsequent
confinements, with one exception.

One of the Bethnal-green patients, already alluded to, was attacked
after her first labour, recovered in three months, and although she has
since had several other children, there has been no recurrence of the
mania.

Still a judicious practitioner will, on a succeeding confinement, em-
ploy every precaution to prevent any undue excitement taking place.
We now proceed to consider the treatment of puerperal insanity.
(To be continued.')
