Insanity in Switzerland
=========================

Art. IX.
Ueber das offentliche Irrenwesen in der Schweiz (.Mit einem
Antrag an die llauptversammlung der Schiveiz gemeinniitzigen Gefell-
scliaft vom September, 184G, eingereiclit in Namen der DireJctions-
Tcommission der St. Gallisch-Appmzell. Section derselben von deren
Vorstand.) J. M. Hungerbuhler, Kegierungsrath. St. Gallen und
Bern. 1846.

On the State of the Insane and of Lunatic Asylums in Switzerland, & c.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Author: JM Hungerbuhler  (St. Gall and Bern. 1846)
At the meeting of Swiss naturalists in 1830, the deplorable condition
of the unfortunate individuals afflicted with cretinismus was fully dis-
cussed, and since that time Dr. Troxler, in his classical work on " Cretin-
ismus, as endemic in Switzerland," has thrown fresh light upon the
peculiarities attending this disease. The institution founded by Dr.
Guggenbiilil for the treatment of cretinismus in Switzerland, has like-
wise, in a scientific-medical point of view, been of practical importance.
In classifying the diseases of the mind psychologically and pathologically,
it will be readily admitted that cretinismus, occupying as it does a very
low position among these diseases, has in Switzerland attracted to itself
a considerable degree of attention, while the other affections of this class
have, in many of the cantons at least, been almost totally overlooked
and neglected. It has been asserted, that the state of mental cultivation
arrived at among any people may be safely deduced from a considera-
tion of the attention bestowed upon the treatment of mental disorders.
Should this assertion hold good, and we are inclined to a certain extent
to support it, this state of mental cultivation, in some of tlie so-called
free cantons, must be very low indeed; and in tlie course of tliis paper
we shall avail ourselves of the opportunity of pointing out the difference
of system employed in these different cantons in the treatment of the
insane, from which a comparison may be drawn of the actual condition
of this, in many respects, important European republic. Deficient as
is still the treatment of the unfortunate lunatic in many cantons, the
time is, however, fortunately long ago passed by, when, as a criminal, he
was exposed to punishment, or as bewitched, or in communication with
the Evil One, he was sentenced to torture and death; when, instead of
being an object of compassion and pity, he was looked upon with horror
and dismay. In the year 1484, Pope Innocent VIII. empowered by the
Bull " Summis desiderantes affectibus," the author of the celebrated
work, " Malleus maleficarum," to act as Plenipotentiary, Inquisitor, and
Judge for the extinction of witchcraft, heresy, and lunacy; in accordance
with which commission, within a very few years in the bislioprick of
Trier alone, more than 6000 unfortunates were tortured and burnt.
This curious work, now become very rare, ought to be considered as a
satire upon the understanding of man. Printed first in Cologne in 1489,
it likewise contains the " Tenor bullae Apostolicae cum approbatione Doc-
torum almse Universitatis Coloniensis." As a portion of the papal bull
just mentioned, we cannot refrain from quoting a portion indicative of
the gross ignorance of the age. We read thus?" Sane nuper ad nos-
trum non sine ingenti molestia pervenit auditum, quod in nonnullis
partibus Alemanke superioris, nec non in Maguntinensibus, Coloniensibus,
Treverensibus, Salzburgen, sibus et Bremensibus provinciis, civitatibus,
terris, locis et diocecibus complures utriusque sexus personse proprise
salutis immemores et a fide Catholica deviantes cum dcemonibus incubis
et succubis abuti, ac suis incantationibus, carminibus et conjurationibus
aliisque nefandis superstitiis, et sortilegiis excessibus criminalibus et
delictis, mulierum partus, animalium foetus, terra) fruges, vinearum uvas
et arborum fructus, mulieres, pecora, pecudes et alia diversorum generum
animalia, vineas quoque, pomeria, prata, pascua, blada, frumenta, et alia
terne legumina perire, suffocare et extingui facere et procurare, ipsosque
homines, mulieres, jumenta, pecora pecudes et animalia diris tam in-
trinsecis quam extrinsecis doloribus et turmentis afficere et excruciare
ac eosdem homines ne gignere et mulieres ne viris actus conjugales red-
dere valeant impedire." From the days of Innocent VIII. to Pius IX.,
what a contrast! From the bigotry, superstition, and cruelty of the
former, to the mild and noble virtues of the latter, what a change !
From the horrid treatment of the unfortunate insane, legalized in the
times of the former, to the gentle kindness, so characteristic of the latter,
in the treatment of this miserable portion of our fellow-men in the be-
nevolent institutions of the papal states ! How great an alteration from
the dungeons for the insane in Zurich, in 1721, to the excellent hospital
for those persons existing in the same town at present ! It is the pro-
gress of the age, of the human mind, of Christianity, and may it go on
ever progressing! Corresponding to the change in the times are the
publications of the different authors of these eras; and the writings of
the learned jurisconsults of that day?of Bollwer, Lampert, Torreblanca,
94 INSANITY IN SWITZERLAND.
Glanville, Beaumont, and Carpzov, differ greatly from the late produc-
tions of Feuerbach, Mittermaier, Wachter, Heftier, Bentham, and Rossi.
Great as has been the progress made, there is, nevertheless, much reason
to suppose that the science of criminal legislation, connected as it un-
doubtedly is with mental disturbances, is still in its infancy.

Before proceeding to describe the present state of the insane in Switzer-
land, let us take a rapid glance over that in several other civilized
countries, in order that a comparison may be the more easily drawn.
Our readers are too well acquainted with the general condition of the
insane in this country to render it necessary for us to dwell more than
a moment upon the state of our own lunatic asylums. The former
neglect and barbarity of treatment have been superseded by thorough
reforms, and Christian as well as scientific care. Suffice it here to
observe, that in 1844, to a population upwards of 16,000,000 in England
and Wales, the number of insane was more than 20,000, two-thirds of
whom were maintained at the expense of the public. In Scotland there
were seven, and in Ireland eleven county asylums, supported at great
cost. The establishments of St. Luke, Bethlehem, Han well, Wakefield,
and Lincoln, the asylums at York, Gloucester, Lancaster, Northampton,
and Nottingham, and the excellent private institutions in the country,
are too well known to be here more than referred to.
Passing from Great Britain to France, we see, that even among the
horrors of the great revolution, (verifying in so high a degree the saying
of Schiller, that " the most fearful of fearful things is man in his rage,")
?even in those terrible days, a ray of pity and of hope penetrated into
the prisons of the insane, and led on by that noble man, Pinel, a new
land of promise was held forth to the despairing view of the insane.
Esquirol followed in the footsteps of his great master; and at length we
see that all asylums, whether public or private, have been placed under
the inspection of the government. In 1841, the number of insane
in France was not far from 20,000, three fourths of whom were in dif-
ferent public and private asylums. It is curious to observe that Napo-
leon's " code penal" places the insane under the same head as mad dogs and
other animals: " Ceux qui laisseront divaguer des insenses ou furieux,
ou animaux malfaisans ou feroces; ceux qui auront excite ou n'auront
pas retenu leurs cliiens, lorsqu'ils attaquent ou poursuivent les passans,
quand meme il n'en serait resulte aucun mal, ni dommage, seront
punis, &c." On the other hand, the laws for the protection of the in-
sane, passed in the year 1838, will ever remain as a noble proof to pos-
terity of the attention bestowed by the French administration upon this
important subject. The great hospitals of the Saltpetriere and Bicetre
are of European celebrity, and in quitting a hurried survey over the
state of insanity in France, we remark with sincere pleasure the forma-
tion of the philanthropic " Societe de Patronage" in Paris, with the useful
co-operation of the " dames patronessesIn the seven provinces of
Belgium, we find thirty-seven asylums, all under the inspection of the
government. In Holland, in the year 1840, in thirty-seven asylums
the number of insane was but 826. In Austria, in 1837, there were
but thirty-eight asylums, with 4696 insane patients; and, with the ex-
ception of those of Halle and of Prague, the greater part of the Austrian
asylums were in a miserable condition. Among the States of tlie
German Confederation, we find Baden with its asylum of Illenau, under
Dr. Roller; Wirtemberg with the two establishments of Zwiefalten and
Vinnenthal, the last under the care of Dr. Zeller; in Saxony, the long
known institutions of Sonnenstein, near Pirna, and of Coldiz. In
Bavaria, are the asylums of Baireutli, Bamberg, Wiirzburg, Frankenthal,
Giessing, and the new one at Erlangen. In Nassau, that of Schuberg,
and in Saxe Weimar, that of Jena; in Mecklenburg-Schwerin, that at
Sachsenberg; and in Hanover, that of Hildesheim. In Hesgen may be
mentioned the establishments at Hayna and Merrhausen; in Brunswick,
that of the same name; in Frankfort, the ancient asylum of the city,
capable of great reform; and in Hamburg, the intended foundation of a
large asylum for 400 insane, has only been for the moment laid aside by
the great conflagration of that city, a few years back. In Prussia, the
so necessary reforms commenced by Langerman and Reil have been ably
followed up by Damerow. In the Rhenish provinces of Prussia may be
enumerated the institution of St. Thomas, at Andernach, and those of
Dusseldorf, Trier, Aachen, and Cologne. Three large asylums are about
being completed in the provinces of Saxony, East and West Prussia; in
the Brandenburg province, besides the old asylums of Neu-Ruppin and
Soraw, a new institution for the insane from Berlin and Potsdam is to
be built. A new establishment for the insane has likewise been founded
at Halle, and contains about 400 patients. In Silesia, honourable men-
tion is made of the asylums at Leubus, and at Plagwiz and Brieg. In
the Great Duchy of Posen is found the asylums of Owinsk; and in West-
phalia, that of Marsberg. The Danish asylum at Bistrup is capable of
receiving great alteration for the better; and in Norway and Sweden,
their active and intelligent ruler, Oscar, has already commenced the
necessary changes in the legislation for the insane, as well as that for
criminals. In Russia, the present Emperor Nicholas has ordered several
institutions to be built: those at St. Petersburg, and at Helsingfors,
in Finland, are best known. In Italy, the progress of psychology
has corresponded with that of the most advanced countries; and in
Upper Italy, we call attention to the institutions of Turin and Reggio;
and in Lower Italy, to that of Aversa, near Naples, and of Palermo. In
Portugal, Spain, Greece, and Turkey, the state of the unfortunate in-
sane is much the same as it was centuries ago. In Portugal, a certain
number of lunatics are admitted into the hospital of St. Jose; and in
Constantinople we find one asylum for Mahometans, and several for
Greeks, Armenians, and Franks. In Egypt, the insane are imprisoned
in a portion of the hospital Mohristan, at Grand Cairo. From the dark
and dreary scenes of some of these old and decaying countries, let us
turn towards the United States of America, Avhere the philanthropist
meets with fresh encouragement in the institutions erected for the in-
sane, as well as for the purposes of criminal legislation. While in the
latter part of the eighteenth century there existed but three ill-supported
and miserably maintained asylums for the insane in the States, there
are now found upward of twenty new institutions in excellent order,
and others are in a state of preparation. South America and Mexico
may be considered to stand in much the same relation to the United

States as the institutions of Spain to those of England.
--------------------------------------------------------
 A portion of
the hospital in the city of Mexico is set aside for the reception of the
insane, and in the Brazils there exists one establishment in Rio Janeiro.
Having now cursorily glanced over the different institutions for the
insane in various countries, let us return to Switzerland, where we find
our author adopting the words of Professor Schroder, at Utrecht, when
speaking of the deplorable condition of the insane in Holland:?" Si
vero jam ad patriam oculos advertimus, nescimus utrum nos gravius
majrore commoveri an pudore suffundi sentiamus." In order to arrive
at a clear idea of the state of psychology in the different cantons, our
author divides them into five series. In the first or lowest, where these
unfortunate beings are entirely disregarded by the government and
police, he places the cantons of Lucerne, Freiburg, Uri, Schwytz, TJn-
terwalden, Zug, Glarus, Appenzell, Schaffhausen, Ticino, and Wallis,?
eleven cantons, with about a third of the population of the whole re-
public, or above 600,000 inhabitants.
With regard to Lucerne, the first and most important of these cantons,
we see that throughout their whole legislative code mention is made of
the insane but in one paragraph of the police regulations, which says,
as late as 1836, that " in cases of lunacy, such people are to be watched
and provided for by their friends, or the persons with whom they live,
under penalty of a fine varying from two to sixteen francs." In the
second canton of importance in this series, Freiburg, the great council
have come to the determination to build an hospital, attached to which
is to be an asylum specially intended for the treatment of those suffering
under mental diseases. In Schwytz and Glarus, no movement in favour
of reform in this respect has taken place. In Unterwalden, the insane
are sometimes, by the desire of their family, shut up in the prisons or
houses of correction. In a few of these cantons, those afflicted with
mental disease among the poorer classes are sent to the pooi'houses or
unions, and among the richer classes they are generally sent to the
asylums of the neighbouring countries.
In the second series, may be placed the cantons of Solothurn, Baselland,
and Graubiinden, with a population of nearly 200,000, or about one-
eleventh of the inhabitants of the whole country. Solothurn possesses one
cantonal establishment, and another in St. Catliarina for the city. These
two asylums are, upon the whole, tolerably well conducted, but are much
too limited for the population, which amounts to 60,000 souls, with an
average of from sixty to seventy lunatics. Dr. Ziegler-Oberli has distin-
guished himself by his endeavours to better the condition of these esta-
blishments. Baseband has an asylum for the insane connected with the
poorhouse. In GraubUnden, the worst classes of lunatics are sent to the
house of correction at Furstenau; but through the generosity of Herrvon
Tschappina, Avlio has by will left a considerable sum of money towards
the erection of a proper asylum, it is hoped that the condition of the
mad in this canton will soon be materially improved.
In tlie third series, in which we find the insane no longer placed in
poorhouses or prisons, but in hospitals, may be reckoned the cantons of
Zurich, Bern, Aargau, Thurgau, and Vaadt, with a population of
almost 1,100,000, or about one-half of that of Switzerland.
INSANITY IN SWITZERLAND. 97
That portion of the hospital at Zurich allotted to the insane contains
about twenty considered as capable of being restored, and 100 incurables.
There are, besides, several private asylums under the care of Drs. Herzer,
Fehr, and Schmied.
The Bern hospital contained in 1840, of insane patients remaining
from 1839, males, 24; females, 24?in the whole, 48. Received in 1840
17 male and female patients; the aggregate 34. Subjected to treatment
in 1840 an equal number, making 82. Cured in the time 26; 12 males,
14 females. Five were sent out uncured?2 males, and 3 females; re-
maining in the establishment 1. Deaths, 3; 1 male and 2 females.
Remaining in 1840, 47 patients?25 males and 22 females.
In 1843 there were eighty-two individuals treated in this hospital,
eleven of whom were cured, and four died. Dr. Lehman is the physician
to the hospital, which is old, and by no means corresponding with the
wealth and high position assumed by the canton of Bern. Among the
private asylums may be mentioned that of Dr. Tribolst, near the city of
Bern. In A argau the old cloister of Konigsfelden has been converted into
a hospital, with a portion of it devoted to the treatment of mental
diseases, and containing forty-four cells for such cases. There were in
the year 1844 here treated thirty-seven males and forty females, or in
all seventy-seven, of whom three were cured, three considerably improved
in health, and seven died?leaving, on the 1st of January, 1845, sixty-
four in the hospital. Dr. Siebold has the care of these patients.
The people of Thurgau have in like manner availed themselves of an
ancient cloister in which to establish a hospital, with a lunatic asylum,
under the care of Dr. Merk.
Already, as early as 1810, the canton Vaadt founded a hospital,
with a division thereof devoted to the treatment of insane, and it was
decreed that " Dans la maison des alienes sont recus les alienes des deux
sexes dont l'existence dans leurs families et dans la societe devient penible
et dangereuse, ou qui laissent un espoir probable de guerison." The
government or council has lately voted a considerable sum of money for
the improvement of the condition of the insane in this canton.
In the fourth series, distinguished by the absolute separation of the
institutions for the treatment and cure of recent cases, and the asylums
for the reception of those considered as incurable, Mr. Hungerbiihler
cannot admit any of the Swiss cantons; but in the fifth or last series,
where the separation may be said to be relative between the two classes
just mentioned of institutions for the insane, he places the city portion
of the canton of Basel?Genf or Geneva, Neuenburg and St. Gall en,
containing together 300,000 inhabitants, or about one-seventh of the
whole population of the country. The institution for the insane in
Basel contains about seventy patients. That in Genf or Geneva, built
according to the plan of our Tuke, the founder of the asylum at Wake-
field, contains about sixty-six patients. The name of Coindet is well
known in connexion with this establishment. According to him?
NO. I.
98 INSANITY IN SWITZERLAND.
Patients in the
Asylum of
Geneva,
1st January.
1834
1835
183G
1837
1838
Number admitted.
?
47
Female.
o OS
\0J "
K
113; Former occu-
pants, 51; Total, 164.
44 20 10 32
^ ^
106; Remaining,
58; Total, 164.
Classified as
76
Total, 164.
Duration of
Treatment.
Days.
10,334
9,045
10,119
9,878
39,376
P*
8,418
8,996
11,099
10,769
39,282
From this table we see thus, that of 164 patients 44 were cured (or
27 per cent.); 20 sent out improved in condition (or 12 per cent.);
and 32 died (or 20 per cent.) Of the 164 patients, 105, or two-tliirds,
were unmarried. The mean age of the patients upon entrance was 35
to 36 years. Two-thirds were supported at the public expense. Average
daily cost of each patient was 92 centimes; and the mean duration of
those cured was 107 days.
In the following table follows an analysis of the different mental
diseases in the institution of Geneva during four years:?
Name ofDisease.
1834.
1835.
1836.
1837. Total.
Mania . .
Monomania . .
Demeutia . . .
Idiotismus . .
Epilepsia, with j
complications 3
Total . . .
19
04
20
35
27
15
70
42
39
5
11
134
08
74
32
26
42
35
39
38 40 45
40
49
107
107
334
The institution for the insane at Vernet contained on the first of
January, 1845, 31 male and 51 female patients, or together, 82. During
the year, 45 fresh cases were entered and 37 sent out. There were 12
cured, 7 improved, 7 unimproved, and 9 deaths. At the end of December,
INSANITY IN SWITZERLAND. 99
1845, of 90 patients, 78 were considered as incurable, and 12 were
hopeful cases. The number of females was much greater than of males.
These institutions are under the care of government.
At St. Pirminsberg, the canton of St. Galle possesses an excellent and
well conducted institution for 108 insane, those admitted being chiefly
cases of mania. In the following table Ave furnish a concentrated view
over the statistics of mental disease in this canton:?
Tabular View over Mental Diseases in St. Galle, in the year 1838.
Male. . .
Female . .
Not known .
Total .
Dementia-
Idiotismus.
76
84
137
297
Mania.
38
40
10
94
Melan-
cholia.
15
33
17
G5
Epilepsia
and
Complica-
tions.
28
20
22
70
Total of
Mental
Disease.
526
Average to
population
of
1000 souls.
3-311
Of the 297 cases of dementia and idiotismus 143 were paupers, and
154 non-paupers; of the 94 cases of mania 52 were paupers, and 42
non-paupers; of the 65 cases of melancholia 18 were paupers, and 47
non-paupers; and of the 70 cases of epilepsia, &c., 29 were paupers, and
41 non-paupers. In improving the condition of the insane in this canton
Dr. Rheiner has been among the foremost.
In iioav taking leave of Mr. Hungerbuhler's work, Ave cannot refrain
from observing the difference in the treatment of the insane existing in
the tAvo divisions of the cantons. While in the so-called liberal or
radical cantons much attention has, time after time, been bestoAved upon
the state of these miserable beings, the treatment of them by the primi-
tive or conservative cantons has continued primitive indeed. Late im-
portant events have directed the eyes of Europe toAvards SAvitzerland,
and it is earnestly to be desired that the primitive cantons, brought into
more immediate contact Avith the others, may copy the progress made
by them in the study of psychology. To remain in their present unen-
lightened condition Avould be at once a blot upon the name of a people
claiming to rank among civilized nations, and a disgrace to the age in
which Ave live.
h 2
