Correspondence From Paris
===========================

The causes which I assigned in my last letter for the meagre details
which I could offer of the state of psychological science unfortunately
still exist. Not only here has the contemplation of the works of nature
ceased, but in Italy and in Germany. At the commencement of the
present year, the formation of a Society Medico Psychologique was an-
nounced. On Saturday, the 18tli of December, 1847, the institution
was constituted, its laws formed, and the catalogue of psychologists, of
moralists, of philosophers, of jurisconsults, who had determined to join
it, was ready for publication; but such, alas ! has been the melancholy
condition of the country, that for the present the idea is completely
abandoned, and one of the best means for the study of men in this
moral and intellectual state is postponed for an unlimited period. Such,
also, has been the impossibility of pursuing the usual track, that the
number of "Annates Medico Psychologiques," which should have been
brought out in May last, has but very lately appeared, and this, pro-
bably, is the last time that we shall glance over its valuable pages, from
which we have gleaned so much useful and important information. The
present state of affairs sufficiently accounts for its possessing less valuable
matter than on former occasions; and though it never can cease to be
interesting, it has less variety than usual: the most important article is
that on Paralysis Pellagrosa, by Dr Baillarger, which appeared in the
last number of your Journal. There is a case, by Dr Poilhoux, of Cas-
tellane, in the Lower Alps, that has already been the subject of much
excitement in the part of France in which it occurred; but it is related
with so much clearness and judgment, that it has received additional
value. It is of some consequence in legal medicine. Two families,
composed of fifteen individuals, suddenly rushed from their houses, in a
state of nudity, to the parish church, during divine service; they exhi-
bited themselves in the most indecent manner, and were guilty of acts
incomprehensible in a well-regulated state of society, and of which the
good taste of English medical literature forbids even the description.
The following day, they renewed the same disgusting scene, with the
exception that, instead of being in a state of perfect nudity, they were
covered with some small quantity of linen; they ran through the
streets to the public place, vociferating, singing, shouting psalms to the
praise of St. Francis. Two days before this strange spectacle, the father
of one of the families had been suddenly struck with a disease of a
singular character, and was thought to be in a state of complete agony;
his body was stiff', his legs and arms contracted, his head fixed immov-
able on the bed, to which he declared he was bound by a supernatural
power. The clergyman of the parish was sent for to give him the last
consolations of religion, but he loaded him with reproaches, accusing
him of giving him a five-franc piece on which Avas an effigy of the Re-
public, and to this he ascribed all his sufferings. After the departure
of the clergyman, the sick man was again distressed by the apparition
of an insect of a black colour, covered with horns, larger than a scor-
pion, from whose annoyances he could not escape without burning the
bed, the furniture, and every article where the insect could hide itself.
The police hearing of the singular occurrence, committed to prison the
two fathers and the two mothers, with the elder children. The defence
set up was, that at the moment they committed the acts ascribed to
them, they were in a state of madness, that they suddenly obeyed an
irresistible power within, which completely controlled their movements
and urged them 011, without their own consent, to commit the indecent
acts for which they were reproached. A consultation of medical men
was called, who gave it as tlieir unanimous opinion, after frequent ex-
amination of the inculpated parties, that they were in a state of mental
health ; they stated that it could not have been from witchcraft, as these
persons alleged that they were thus seized, as, owing to the enlightened
state of mankind, it was impossible that such a belief could exist; that
it could not have been from the sudden outbreak of an epidemic disease,
as individuals living close to them had undergone no similar seizure ;
that 110 symptoms of any drug having been taken existed; that the
reason would not suddenly yield to the simulation of madness so
indecently exhibited in young persons was the only admissible plea
for supposing that they were insane; but under the circumstance of
their having selected Sunday to give the greater publicity to their ex-
travagant conduct, and their apparently obeying certain orders which
emanated from one of the party, which would not have been the case
in a hand of lunatics; therefore, under all the circumstances, they
concluded that the madness was feigned, that the heads of the families
had concerted the scheme, and that the younger branches had most pro-
bably been induced to obey by menaces. These conclusions were con-
firmed by the tribunal at Castellane, after a long inquiry and a careful
examination of witnesses. From their evidence, it was shown that the
poor children had been drilled previously; that they had exclaimed that
if they did not obey their parents they would be beat; that the indivi-
dual who had feigned madness was in dread of a trial in which he had
a personal interest. The tribunal condemned the parents to imprison-
ment, and the Court of Appeal confirmed the sentence.

Scarcely do the volumes of the Causes Celebres contain a more singular
series of extraordinary facts than come out; the editorial observations
are generally well written; and the allusions to the many instances
which have occurred of epidemic madness exhibit the reading and in-
formation necessary for the conduct of such a journal. There is the
report of the trial of a woman, named Maria Madeleine Langlors, who
poisoned a young girl with a cake of arsenic. She was acquitted on the
ground of insanity. The case affords matter for much reflection, and
shows how much more readily a French court of law listens to a plea of
madness than does an English one. Upon the evidence, as it appears
in the work before us, no English jury would have given a similar
verdict.

No other work has issued from the press upon psychological medicine
since my last, and there have been no papers of any interest connected
with the subject read before any of the learned societies. In the sitting
of the Academie de Medecine, on the 23rd of May, M. Rochoux read,
in his own name and that of M. Falret, a report upon a paper drawn up
by M. Pereire, of Bordeaux, upon Epilepsy, treated by V A rteriotome
epicranienne. It consists of obliterating, by subcutaneous incisions at
their origin, the different arterial branches, from which the ramifications
spread upon the pericranium in numerous capillary vessels, and establish
anastomoses with those of the brain, after having traversed the cranium
and its membranes. This obliteration prevents the blood, not only
from arriving at the encephalon in sufficient quantity to produce con-
gestion, but produces a kind of atrophy which prevents the return of the
fits impossible. This theory appears to M. Rochoux inadmissible; he
does not think that congestion determined to the encephalon is necessary
for the production of epilepsy, nor does he think that the remedy could
be employed to prevent the development of the collateral arteries and
their anastomoses.

M. Belhomme has commenced an interesting inquiry into the in-
fluence of political commotions and public events in the development of
insanity. He has read a memorial, which will, doubtless, in quiet times,
be enlarged; and such are the opportunities which the present period
affords, that there is little hesitation in affirming that the subject will
have more light thrown upon it in six months than it has had in the
last thirty years. I have had illustrations, even in my own limited
circle of seeing the effects, whilst those who have under their control
the great establishments of the country, must daily see instances of the
most distressing character?some arising from sudden fright, others
from loss of fortune, and the overthrow of all their hopes; and it must
be remembered that there are yet calamities in store, for no one who
watches the march of events can conceal from himself that, before
society returns to its wonted state, there must be great individual as
well as public suffering.

Dr Baillarger has commenced a volume entitled, " Recherches sur
l'Anatomie, la Pliysiologie, et la Patliologie du Systeme Nerveux." A
portion has issued from the press, and promises to be, as everything is
that issues from his pen, a valuable contribution to medical science; but,
alas! the fearful times have put a stop to his intentions, and an un-
finished volume is the result; there are some statistical tables on the
hereditary nature of mental disease, which throw a vast quantity of
light upon a subject not yet sufficiently explored. He has also taken
an admirable survey of the means employed to administer by forcible
means nutrition to the insane. There are many of what may be called
sketches of various states and stages of mental aberration, which, when
filled out, will materially add to our stock of knowledge. Indeed, this
indefatigable observer is doing more for science than any one, with the
exception, probably, of Jacobi, the enlightened physician to the Lunatic
Asylum at Siegbourg. This venerable man is the chief of the German
school of psychiatric experience. Arrived at an age when most men
abandon their labours for literary ease, he continues, after a life spent in
doing good, to write and to instruct. His last work, " Die Hauptformen
der Seelenstorungen in ilirem Beziehung zur Heilkunde, nach der Beo-
baclitung gescliildert," which may be translated, " Upon the principal
Forms of Disturbance of the Mind in relation with the Art of curing
them," deserves to be translated into every language. It first appeared
somewhat more than three years since, and a new edition is preparing,
which will contain such improvements as still further experience of the
art of curing suggests; the conclusions that he has arrived at, after com-
paring cases in his own practice with those related by the most eminent
men who have written, are given with great ability, and those which
more embrace his views upon the state of the circulation of the blood,
carry with them intense interest. M. Andrieu, Professor at the School
of Medicine at Amiens, announced, some short time since, that there was
a cataleptic epidemy at the Maison de Refuge de bon Pasteur, in that
city. There are in that establishment 90 penitent recluses, and 12 nuns.

Two sisters and more than 20 penitents have been affected; a memoir
was read before the Academie de Medecin, and M. Andrieu is about to
publish the cases. The singular fact of the remarkable depression of
temperature in men and animals under the influence of ether and chloro-
form is leading to some curious experiments, from which their effects
upon febrile and inflammatory conditions of the system may be ascer-
tained. This depression is evidently much more considerable upon
animals submitted to the vapour of ether than to the inhalation of
chloroform, the effect being precisely the same if introduced by the
rectum as by the lungs: it seems to be established now that chloroform,
in consequence of the rapidity of its action and the variable duration of
the state of anasthesia whicli it produces, should be reserved for opera-
tions of short duration, and that ether should be preferred in cases of
long and serious operation. This opinion, when brought forward by
M. Bouisson, was objected to by Velpeau, whose opinion it was that,
under all circumstances, chloroform should be substituted for ether.
The researches of Roux and of Gerardin are certainly in favour of chlo-
roform. In epilepsy all hopes of its utility seem to be abandoned, since
the cases of Dr Moreau, which seem to prove that it is not altogether
without danger. The hachisch, grown at Algiers, has been the subject
of some experiments.?A paper read by M. de Courtone has attracted
much attention: he has obtained a substance, to which he applies the
name of cannabine, from which he anticipates good results in the relief
of mental disease; he compares it with the cannabis, grown in France,
which gives a resin less active. M. Gastinel, of Cairo, lays claim to the
discovery of this principle, which he says he originally obtained, after a
long chemical analysis.-;?M. Bouillaud has again brought forward his
theory, that the sense of language and the co-ordinate principle of the
movement made to produce speech reside in the anterior lobe of the
brain. Early as 1839, he entertained this opinion, and discussed the
reasons that led him to entertain it, and during the present session he
has again taken up the point. At the discussion, he offered a reward of
five hundred francs to any one who would produce a well-authorized
case, however remote, where there was a deep-seated alteration of struc-
ture of the lobes of the brain without producing a corresponding change
in the articulation of sound. M. Rochoux stated an instance which fell
under the notice of M. Baillarger, where an individual received a wound
in the frontal region, in consequence of the explosion of a mine; there
was a " contusion profonde'' of the two anterior lobes, yet he did not
lose the power of speech, and could, during the two days he lived, give
an account of his state; he also alluded to a case of a talkative barber,
who had met with an accident, which did not prevent his continuing his
babble. The discussion has not terminated to the satisfaction of either
of the parties, both adhering to their own opinion.?M. Poggiale, the
Professor of Chemistry, has announced the discovery of a substance
more powerful than either chloroform or ether, to which he attaches the
name of adelhide. It is obtained by the distillation of sulphuric acid,
water, alcohol, and peroxide of manganese, and rectifying the condensed
liquor with chloride of calcium. Its odour is exceedingly strong, and
this only militates against its frequent employment.?There is expected
to be, shortly, an animated discussion in the Academie, on a paper
which was read last January, on madness observed at Yannes since the
execution of the ministerial ordonnance in 1839, which prescribes abso-
lute silence day and night; the subject was taken up by Ferrus, Bail-
larger, Dubois, Macquart, and Londe, but the further consideration was
deferred until the printing of the report. Happy shall we be when we
can return to our former paths, and find still ardent minds to follow the
beaten track. We have lost several distinguished physicians, who have
chosen the highways of politics, which seldom lead to any but momen-
tary triumph, instead of the bye-paths of science, which most generally
conduct, ultimately, if not to high honours and wealth, to peace of mind
and the tranquillity which renders the last days of man calm and happy,
waiting, with resignation, for rewards elsewhere.
September 20th.
