A Case of Monomania, with Remarks
===================================

A man may receive a blow upon liis lieart or liis imagination as lie
may receive an injury to liis brain, wliicli till, if ever, tlie effects have
passed away, shall determine an eccentricity of conduct in all after-life,
for which he is wholly, or in a considerable degree, irresponsible. Such
a man is pro tanto to be pitied, and, if needful, shut up. If his eccen-
tricity be of dangerous tendency, society is to be protected from him;
he is to be protected from himself. An accidental occurrence im-
pressing its image upon a susceptible imagination may spread a
blight over the mind and cripple its capacities, so that on some one
subject, directly?on others bearing affinity to it, implicatively?its views
shall be far otherwise than sane. Let it be proved that in any man's
case such a condition of mind shall during a great portion of a lifetime
have existed, concealed by the force of a strong will strenuously exerted
with success to conceal it, and such condition consequently have con-
tinued, and a lesson of much moral utility may be learned from it. If,
especially, it were found that, owing to such a condition of mind, a man
had acquired not a bad character only, but a character, bad or good, the
reverse of his real character, it would supply a touching illustration of
the Divine wisdom of the Scriptural injunction to " Judge not at all"
There may have been insanity hiding itself under the mask of vice, the
spectacle of a man deliberately and of set purpose damaging and en-
couraging damage to his own character. There may have been the
affectation of frailties foreign from and abhorrent to his nature: there
may be lost character?ruined fortunes. All may find a climax in a death
resembling that of the Spartan boy who suffered the fox to tear out his
bowels. He may face not only certain adversity here, but foreknown
infamy after death, when but a few words said would clear his reputa-
tion from every cloud. He may have been only a victim and a martyr.
He may have preserved the appearance of sanity at the expense,
perhaps by the total sacrifice, of character. It is, indeed, by no means
uncommon that a man should less like to be thought weak than wicked.
In so far as the mind is sane, this is itself wickedness : it is fearing man
more than God. Upon this point, collective man?society?judging un-
like the Almighty, misjudges. But such is the judgment of man. To
be intellectually weak, if inculpably and unconsciously, may be to be
despised, but it is not to be wicked: it is only moral weakness that is
wickedness. We do not speak here, however, of the errors in morals
of a sane mind, but of a mind which lias sustained some shock which
has crushed or greatly impaired its powers, or some one or more of its
powers. It is true that there are various shades of insanity; that there
are cases in which it lies scarcely within the compass of human judg-
ment to pronounce Avhere moral responsibility ends and moral irre-
sponsibility commences. It is of a case of a sufficiently marked
character that I am about to speak. Yet during the greater part of a
lifetime nothing overt was exhibited by which to discriminate its real
character, and much that was calculated to mask it not from observa-
642 A CASE OF MONOMANIA.
tion only, but from suspicion. Having thus introduced tlie case, on
wliich I set the more value from an impression that it is typical of a
class of cases not in main points dissimilar, I shall draw no forced in-
ferences from it, leaving many of such reflections as will spring natu-
rally from it to occur to the mind of the reader. I only think it neces-
sary here to add that I have the patient's free leave to communicate it
for the benefit of the profession and of society, and his fervent Avishes
that it may tend to the benefit of both. Excepting for the sake of a
decent circumlocution, no technical phrases are used, none being re-
quired.
Some cases are partly or wholly physical, requiring therapeutic treat-
ment : this was wholly mental, requiring psychological treatment. It
received no treatment at all: time and the current of life and of events
cured it, but cured it too slowly and too late. Of the overt in this
person's character and conduct it may be said that he once attempted
self-destruction, but failed: that no jury, had he died, could, according
to evidence adduced, have well brought it in otherwise than as felo-de-se:
that his mental faculties both before and after this appeared sound
and strong; but that evidences of penitence were small, though the
attempt was never repeated: that he filled well situations of high re-
sponsibility, requiring both bodily and mental exertion; but that he
acquired also a reputation for occasional outbursts of profligacy and
debauchery. This ill repute lie, past all question, merited; yet did it
seem as if there were a want of consistency between these vices and
failings and the general tenour of his character; such a want of verisimi-
litude, in short, as we should ill tolerate in a work of fiction. The key
to this mystery remained long in his own sole possession; not for years
was it surrendered to the knowledge and keeping of any second person.
During these long years he was a conscious monomaniac. How much
misery may be told in a few words! The true history of his case may
be briefly narrated as follows:?At the age of about seventeen, a case
of real, or more likely imaginary, impotency came to his knowledge, and
the contempt and ridicule with which it was treated by his informant
shocked him unspeakably. " Certainly," he thought and felt, and it was
the reasoning of a correct mind and the sentiment of an honest heart?
"a man so unfortunately circumstanced should meet with everything
from society, and from his trusted friends especially, that could be com-
pensative to him for a condition so deplorable: we do not mock at the
blind or the deaf?why, then, at him? See, however, how he is treated !
What an aggravation to an already dreadful fate!" He thought and
felt this, but did not say it. " If I utter a syllable in check of this
torrent of ridicule," he thought, " I shall be suspected, as a matter of
course, to be in the same predicament; and to such contumely as that
to which he seems universally obnoxious, death would be preferable."
It did not stop here. " What," he thought, "if I should really be in the
same predicament; perhaps I am? There are doubtless many who are
?why should not I be one of them? See with what advertisements for
the cure of such every newspaper is crowded." The impression that he
might belong to this numerous and unhappy class passed through
various gradations of dread, till a sense of scepticism merged into an
A CASE OF MONOMANIA. 643
almost belief that it was so with him. Such was his horror at the con-
temptuous comments which cases of this nature incurred, that, coupled
with his entertainment of this false and fatal chimera was a vow which
he made and kept, never to make any human being his confidant on
such a subject, but at least to pass through life and perish in silence.
But it was a doubt, and not a certainty?and then to know whether it
was so or not?that was the thing. It might be easily ascertained, and
to live in suspense upon this dreadful point?oh, it was intolerable!
And then there was an assignation, unprompted by sentiment or pas-
sion, but by a horrible dread lest the issue of the experiment should
prove unpropitious, and that issue was what might have been expected:
and there was, to his imagination, the absolute confirmation of his
direst apprehensions. And then, why should he live?who would live?
it would be the kindest thing he could do towards his parents?his
sisters?his family?to put himself out of the way: and he attempted
this, and not half-heartedly, though he failed. And then, recovering,
he still?so cogent was his secret madness?not only still kept his
vow made to himself?but rejoiced at, almost countenanced, surmises
on the part of others of the cause which impelled him to the
attempt which compromised his probity?for such surmises proved that
the truth was not suspected. But though he knew that he was mad,
and not master of himself when he made the attempt upon his life, and
felt that it would be other than fair to accuse himself of it as a crime,
whereas it was the result of involuntary distraction, and overthrow of
reason, he inferred that, the attempt not having succeeded, it was not
the will of God that it should succeed; and resolved?a resolution
which, like the first-mentioned one, he sacredly kept?never to repeat it.
But the supposed cause still existed, and he sought to reconcile himself
to his fate. He never seemed otherwise than sane?the attempt itself
excepted?either before or after: he expressed neither sorrow nor re-
pentance; but he sought no less consolation in religion as the only
source of consolation left to a person in his supposed condition. He
turned to his Bible, and he read in Isaiah?" Let not the eunuch
say I am a dry tree," and " God will be better to him than sons and
daughters." And he perceived that the Almighty did not treat with
contumely persons of this class, and thought that surely then neither
ought man : but then he thought also that whatever man ought to do
as to this, he does not do as he ought, but as he ought not; and he
kept faithfully, therefore, still his own counsel. Rather far than that
the supposed truth should be suspected, he would have suffered himself
to be innocently sentenced to transportation for felony or be hanged for
murder.
All this while?that is, during some years?he was not only, apart from
this weak point in his brain, as " simple as a child," and with "no more
harm in him than a mouse," but competent to the vigorous pursuit of
severe studies, and the efficient fulfilment of arduous duties. He was
accustomed, in his conversations with me, to compare this shock re-
ceived from the spectacle of the person pointed out to him as impotent,
and from the contemptuous manner in which that person was spoken
of?to the effect upon a shoemaker residing opposite the gate to which
644 A CASE OF MONOMANIA.
a nobleman was fixed alive, in '98, by the pikes of the insurgents, from
the spectacle of his assassination, ancl of whom it is recorded that the
horror of the event shocked him into a state of incurable idiocy. Was
there the least foundation other than the shock occasioned by the event
so made known to him for his suspicions of his own condition1? None;
nay, minus none. It was clear and sheer monomania, and nothing else,
even fractionally, was admixed with it. There was nothing of real on
which to base the imaginary. Now, it need not be said that, there being
nothing real in it, this state of things would, life continuing, proceed to
effect of itself some sort of cure. But fresh visions of the same Medusa's
head?of the same horror?at first frequently, long occasionally, occurred.
And there were the appearances in him of fickleness and perfidy towards
the well-charactered of the opposite sex, towards whom he paid atten-
tions, as of profligacy and libertinism towards those of easier virtue.
He could not wholly put out of his sight and memory that horror,
which, having once dethroned his reason, never ceased wholly from
asserting its predominance over it; although it was not eventually in
vain that his strength of will competed with it. But while the contest
lasted, how much of life was wearing away!?what energies were being
wasted!?what chances of fortune thrown away!?what heart-affections
thwarted, in making war upon this shadow!?what sacrifice of character!
?what submission to censures unmerited!?how was disrepute even
courted by him!?how, even yet, through good and ill report, in so far as
he was a free and responsible moral agent, did he act with honour!?how,
reasoning upon false premises, did he nevertheless act as if the purpose
of his life had been to distract and break the hearts of others and his
own ! Well, he has now a group of children round him?as the nurse
in one of Beaumont and Fletcher's plays says, " as like him as if he had
spit themor, as he himself averred, all this Avould have remained
unknown, and he would have died unshriven of the confessions herein
embodied. That his moral sense remains confused in some degree yet,
is certain. Remembering the horrors of the past in his life, he speaks
of communism and socialism, of anything and everything as being pre
ferable to the sufferings he underwent, and then retracts liis words; but
never farther than to own that it is likely that such sufferings should
have left his mind in a state of incapacity to judge of such matters
rightly. There is, in short, a lasting confusion of mind upon this one
topic. One feature is conspicuous, and that is, a boundless charity in
judging either gently or not at all of the conduct of others in all
matters of the heart and passions. There is nothing eccentric, little that
was or is perverse in his temper, or wrong in his conduct, to which
the shock his mind had sustained does not supply the one sole key.
Effects often remain after causes have ceased to operate.
It is that power which a knowledge of the human heart gives, not
craft and cunning, that is requisite in the treatment of the insane. It
is not sufficient to be conversant with the best current professional works
on insanity. The writings of Shakspeare and of Beaumont and Fletcher,
and of our elder English dramatists, should be also studied; even in
studying the latter, we but study nature at second hand ; but in study-
ing them, we do not study pictures copied from pictures, but well-drawn
A CASE OF MONOMANIA. 645
representations of realities,?many of tlieir dramas display an accurate
knowledge of some of the finer sliades of insanity. There are lessons
which we have yet to learn in the moral treatment of the insane, wherein
they may be susceptible of moral treatment, which they are not always.
The foregoing case was one admitting of such treatment, if it had been
accurately fathomed. Years of bootless mental agonies might have been
spared by the confidence of the party having been early obtained by a
professional adviser, worthy of such confidence, capable of administering
kindly and judiciously to the "mind diseased," incapable of abusing the
confidence bestowed. It should be ever held in view as a truth, that
to mental alienation and confusion, as certainly as to toothache, or any
other bodily ailment, we are all alike, as human beings, liable ; that,
otherwise than conventionally, and under the guidance of false estimates
of men and things, no more disgrace is attached to any species of in-
sanity than to an attack of rheumatism or small-pox. It is moral tur-
pitude alone that degrades and disgraces,?not any one form of disease,
mental or bodily, more than any other. To misprisions upon matters
of faith and matters of the heart and passions, all are the more espe-
cially liable, because by these our nature is most moved?in these takes
the deepest interest. It says nothing against religion or love, both of
them features of our nature, and parts of our very being, that this should
be the case. The finest-toned minds are not less prone " to jangle like
sweet bells out of tune," than the coarse, the simple, and the unidead.
Perhaps they are more so, as the most complicated instruments have a
greater number of chords, any of which may be relaxed or over-strung into
discord. Such are, at any rate, the best worth tuning and keeping in tune.
Not the physician's skill only in the discrimination of mental disease, but
the poet's penetration into the mysteries of the human heart, is necessary
to render a man a truly accomplished practitioner. He should be wanting
in no one high quality of the possession of which human nature is
capable. For the absence of these loftier qualities, no aggregate of the
smaller capabilities can compensate. Those capabilities are most little
and low of stature which prompt their possessor to sneer at religion,
because any certain proportion of the insane are Avliat is called religious-
mad. As well might they sneer at that master-passion of our nature,
which, despite all ridicule, will ever co-exist with it. It is rather to be
marvelled at, that considerations of the momentous interests which reli-
gion involves do not invariably?as the rule and not as the exception?
unsteady the strongest minds. The minds of many whom they have
actually unsteadied have been indisputably strong. For men to be only
the safer frorii this species of insanity, in proportion as they are less
capable of religion than others, is no great boast. It is as if the deaf
should glory in their insensibility to the charms of music, or the blind
to the beauties of nature, upon the ground of their insusceptibility to
annoyance from the neighbourhood of discordant sounds, or the pre-
sence of disagreeable sights.
" Should o'er the page inspired too closely pore
The student, smit with love of sacred lore,
Shall we, turned atheists, our creeds unsay,
Because his overwearied brain gives way ?
64G A CASE OF MONOMANIA.
All human hearts must passion cease to move,
Because some maiden drowns herself for love?
All the less scoffed at, as an empty dream,
Shall be for such mishap the engrossing theme."
There is nothing of the knowledge of which?nay, nothing scarcely
of the belief of which?the professional attendant on the insane should
not he capable. In his heart and brain should exist the images of all
that is possible ; for in dealing with the insane he has to deal with
persons in whose hearts and brains are the images of much that is un-
likely. He must comprehend the chaos of the deranged mind, or his
chance of reducing it into order will be small. He must know both
the true and the false, in order to trace the line of demarcation which
divides them. He cannot know too much. He must precursorily know
the true, or he can form no judgment with respect to the false. The
first elements of human nature lie naked and in confusion before him ;
an acquaintance with the superficial, and the merely conventional, will
avail him nothing. He will meet with pretensions to a sort of madness
different from that which prevails within. He Avill have to encounter
anomalies the most startling and incredible,?misprisions, whose very
simplicity, if ascertained, will astonish him. Amid much that is irre-
mediable, he will meet with much that can be remedied. The vista
before him is wide and varied.
I am fully aware of the prominence lately given to spermatorrhea, as
a disease which is the origo mali of much mischief. That it is a com-
plaint, and a curable one, there is no doubt; that the instances of it
are numerous, I have much doubt. As to spermatorrhea in the case
recorded, there was no symptom of it; there were no nocturnal or
otherwise casual involuntary emissions, no urethral discharge, simulating
gleet. As to masturbation ? that or some other ation is pretty
general. I am inclined to think, the less said about it almost the
better. Too much is said of it, when an empirical sway over the ima-
gination and purse is usurped by the pamphleteer or the quack ad-
vertiser, through rhetorical flourishes and exaggerated narratives of cases.
It is against grace to lead a life of fornication and debauchery ; but
there is no disputing that it is against both grace and nature to indulge
in this vicious propensity. Insanity, sometimes the cause, is sometimes
the consequence of it, doubtless; but that there is much of the false
and artful in appeals from quack practitioners to the public, is manifest.
Where there is one case of true spermatorrhea, there are hundreds of
cases of deranged or impaired functions, which neither begin, proceed,
nor end in this evil propensity. I question whether spermatorrhea,
where it exists, has anything to do with masturbation; whether it is
not a complaint per se arising irrespectively of masturbation. In the
only marked case I know thoroughly well, I will venture to assert that
masturbation had nothing to do with it. There is much to be done by
caustic in spermatorrhea ; but in cases of this vice moral suasion and
enlightenment of mind are the only remedies. ' We know that passions
repressed from religious conviction, or from whatever cause, occasion
much trouble; we have read of St. Jerome's tribulation on this account,
and of his wife of snow; we read in Scripture of the existence of a
A CASE OF MONOMANIA. 647
class of persons, of whom St. Paul says, " it is better to marry than to
burn;" we have read the heathen assertion?
" Expellas naturam furca, tamen usque recurrat."
The truth?and all the truth we can come at?will be arrived at through
calculating the mean of a variety of errors. Virtuous efforts to do what
cannot be done may lead to vice ; thus it is that extremes are often
seen to meet. But if we are to judge of human failings leniently, in
proportion to their frequency, and as we should ourselves wish to be
judged, most certainly the errors into which the master-appetites and
passions of our nature betray us should be regarded with more compas-
sion and allowance than any. I make no doubt, that it is in seeking
to be fit company for saints and angels, in aiming at high moral excel-
lence, that many have sunk into evil habits, which have placed them
below the moral level of the beasts that perish. Still, there remain to
be commended high original motives ; there are allowances to be made
for lapses into evil upon the ground of human frailty, and no small
admixture of ignorance. Severe moral conflicts with physical forces,
too strong to compete with, may have preceded and have led to habits
in comparison with which known and overt vice is more respectable.
In reasoning correctly on this subject, we shall always find our-
selves reasoning in a circle whose boundaries we cannot overpass, nor
stray away from.
Shakspeare says that
" Flowers which fester smell far worse than weeds
and, as an assertion in reference to human morals, it is said correctly,
although, as a fact in vegetable physiology, Prout and Liebig might call
it in dispute. Were it not melancholy, it would be ridiculous to follow
the career of a man aiming at the gift of continence as the chief feature
of a virtuous life, then lapsing into the bathos of masturbation, losing
his health or being frightened into suspicions of his virility, and even-
tually at the mercy of the quaek advertiser, and an object of compassion
to the less low-fallen street-walker, seeking to possess himself of the?
gift of incontinence ; presenting the spectacle, not of a ruined frame so
much as of a ruined mind. There are certain conclusions to be drawn,
among which is one in chief?namely, that there are some men, consti-
tutionally speaking, who ought to be married, or even to do Avorse,
rather than do what is worse than that worse. A state of celibacy, after
the age of puberty, is in truth, in all human beings of both sexes, an un-
natural state?it is natural to none ; to many, a pure, and undepraved,
and happy state of celibacy is absolutely an impossibility. To the per-
nicious gratifications of the solitary vice alluded to, the indulgence of
promiscuous sexual intercourse is in the next degree unnatural. There
may be pleasures, but there is not happiness in any other sexual inter-
course than that which is based on individual attachment. As to un-
natural gratifications, they begin, go on, and end in certain unhappiness.
Nature herself resents them ; but they do not necessarily, if at all, and
if ever incidentally, produce true spermatorrhea, which may be cured
by caustic, but which is not necessarily a fair subject for caustic
comments.
G48 A CASE OF MONOMANIA.
That spermatorrhea may exist as a complaint per se I am perfectly
certain, and this to an extent which would render procreation unlikely,
and masturbation itself scarcely practicable, seminal ejaculation taking
place upon such slight provocation as to nullify the practice of either.
When there is an indulgence in masturbation, there is not impotence ;
where it occurs in excess there is a strong argumentum baculinum
against celibacy?there is evidence that the Avar with nature has been
waged too long, and that it is time that there should be an armistice ;
and then there may be unrequited attachments. There may be mental
ailments to which not the dull, and gross, and stupid, but those most
distinguished by sensibility and talent, are most subject, and from
which the latter most suffer, which are " past all surgery," and for
which physic proffers no remedy. The quack indeed proffers it, and
some are found to sell themselves to the devil of empiricism; and well
are their frailties turned to profit, but their cure is to be attained,
" Non tali auxilio nec defensoribus istis."
The patient can no otherwise recover than by returning?whatever be
the path he takes?to the regions of truth, nature, and common sense.
It is " metaphysical aid " that he needs. The complications of disease,
mental and bodily, which afflict man, the most complex of animals,
require the most extensive and profound scholarship to read aright.
It would be as irrational for patients suffering from a wounded mind to
consult the fortune-teller as the quack-salver; those are to be consulted
to most advantage to whom, not the secrets of medicine only, but of
human nature lie open, and to whom just and kindly views of the sub-
ject are familiar?who are capable, not of giving advice only, but of
truly sympathizing with every species of human infirmity and human
affliction.
The effect of quack treatises and advertisements is most pernicious,
most calculated to put unnatural fears into young minds, and to tend
to no end except that which is sought, to extract money from their
purses, and induce them to swallow some pecks of pills and gallons of
liquids, under the name of physic, as filthy, but not as harmless, as so
much liogwash. There can be no return to a healthful and true condi-
tion of mind through such means, under such auspices. It is, in ninety-
nine cases in every hundred, the mind alone which is at fault. There
is a growing want among civilized communities of marked individuality.
We are rather machines than men: the state of society has become too
complex and artificial. The thievish conventionalities of life engulf all
natural goodness, extinguish all natural passion. We are all the victims,
more or less, of a state of systematized unhappiness. We lose the
faculty of seeing things as they are. Unseemly visions of things which
are not group themselves around us. All society is an aggregate of
fallacies. We become accustomed to these, till truth dazzles and pains
us. It is no marvel that the master passion should participate in the
obliquities of this universal malady. Wc make ourselves ill, or submit
to be made ill, in mind and body; we swallow physic; and we call this
civilization. It is truly shocking to think that there are persons be-
sotted enough to believe that swallowing any sort or amount of physic
A CASE OF MONOMANIA. G49
can cure ailments which, in so far as they may be said to exist at all,
are wholly of a metaphysical character. It may be said that a man may
as well perpetrate one sort of folly as another, and it is in the nature of
all follies to aid him in passing away his time; at the same time it must
be allowed, that pliysic-swallowing is a very dirty description of amuse-
ment, and that it would be well for the " dove's wings" of the spirit
" blackened among the advertising apothecaries' pots" to resume the
beauty and purity of their plumage. The outlay in advertisements of
quack treatment and remedies for ailments, for the most part wholly
imaginary, is tremendous; it would not be kept up did it not prove a
lucrative investment of capital, by which multitudes of persons are being
continually fed, and at whose shrine multitudes of victims are continually
immolated. And what is the truth, looking at the subject largely 1 That
John Bull is a born blockhead and congenital hypochondriac, whose mala-
dies, of a sexual kind especially, are assuredly deep-seated enough, but
deep-seated only in his imagination; and that these advertising vagabonds
are making a dupe of him and a market of the infirmities with which
their own writings inoculate his mind; that he is a gentleman, in short,
whose loins, if they have any peculiar failing, labour under the misfor-
tune of being only too prolific. If, among the component atoms of the
said John Bull, there are exceptions, these are few in number: the great
mass of exceptions being made out to be such by commentaries upon
symptoms, most of which, whether in the human or brute creation, are
merely propria quce maribus. What must foreigners, or persons of
other ages and climes, infer from the columns of our daily papers 1 That
we are a nation so imbecile as to be perpetually on the verge of extinc-
tion?that the being and name of Englishman would, in threescore years
and ten, cease from the face of the earth, were it not for the medicines
which Ave are obliged continually to swallow down wholesale, in order to
qualify us for the perpetuation of our species. The inference would not
be an unfair one; the whole question clearly admits of such a reductio
ad absurdum. It would seem as if, in more respects than this now
under discussion, the English were a nation afraid of shadows at home,
and beating everything before them abroad. Seriously speaking, among
all got-up, and encouraged, and extensively prevalent modern delusions,
no monster so demands to be smitten down as this; and that it does
prevail extensively enough to constitute a lucrative object of speculation,
the sums expended in advertisements for the cure of John Bull (poor
man!) of his incapacities pretty clearly evidence. I am quite certain
that the case here reported was not spermatorrhea, nor any species of
bodily disease whatever, but that it was mental, and a case of mono-
mania, generated by circumstance and accident, as operating upon a
sensitive and impressible temperament. It was an extreme case of
mauvaise lionte. the commonest of all English mental maladies. A
famous market is being made of it by a low class of adventurers; and a
most dirty and dishonest source of traffic it is. It is a common spec-
tacle enough to see poor John Bull fallen among thieves, and these
thieves mostly under the garb of good Samaritans.
In recent works, masturbation, venereal excesses, gonorrheal discharges,
and inflamed urethra, have been named as causes,?spermatorrhea, as
NO. iv. u u
650 A CASE OF MONOMANIA.
the effect. This theory has much plausibility and verisimilitude about
it: it is, nevertheless, a not uncommon thing to meet with facts which
go against all likelihood, and with facts which do not concur with likeli-
hood. It is my persuasion that spermatorrhea is, in point of fact, a
disease per se, with which the causes named, as such, have nothing
necessarily to do; that it is characterized by more or less incapacity for
not mutually satisfactory sexual connexion only, but for masturbation.
There shall be an ascertained case of spermatorrhea: well, any man,
patient or not patient, ill or well, when closely questioned, will always
have something genital to confess, if he chooses to confess it; but that
something is not to be rashly set down as the cause of spermatorrhea.
It must be recollected that there is always something that might be
owned respecting passions repressed, encouraged, gratified, or subdued.
There is always something. It would be quitting physiology, and tres-
passing upon the borders of psychology, to remark with what scorn a
strong, especially if a virtuous, individual attachment regards any gra-
tification of the passions, except with the object of such attachment.
Religion and morality may and do supply nobler motives for the sub-
jugation of the passions; but, as human nature is constituted, they
supply none so generally effectual. But it may be said, indeed, with
regard to such an attachment, that religion and morality cannot but
co-exist, and co-operate with its own special and pure impulses. The
victims of quacks and of quack advertisements should know these things
?should act up to them. Theirs are, for the most part, not cases for
swallowing physic, little or much; their complaints are such as rather
require ethical than therapeutic treatment. The success of quack ad-
vertisements of a certain description is no matter of trifling comment?
there is a great deal in it. There are important inferences to be de-
duced from it. Were not the number of those whom such advertise-
ments influence great, the projectors of them could not afford to pay
for their incessant insertion. This leads to a well-founded surmise, that
among minor cases of monomania, that even among promiscuously-
observed cases of absolute alienation of mind, there must be very many
which have, so to speak, a genital origin. It is not inferred that they
originate in genital disease, but in the human structure, in so much and
so far as it is genital. This inference leads to a wide range of investiga-
tion, embracing the points of affinity between what may be termed
genital physiology and psychology; a most difficult and dangerous sub-
ject, on which a word uttered awry might do much moral evil. There
are also minor cases of monomania, arising, not from genital organiza-
tion, but from actual genital disease. A man shall have gonorrhea. If
he be ignorant and timid, he shall think that his very life, or if not his
life, his virile powers, are, in the visible shape of the blenorrheal dis-
charge, actually oozing away. ISTow we all know that the discharge, as
a discharge, forms no appreciable tax upon a good constitution, and
that the constitutional irritation set up is seldom of any serious conse-
quence. We have here the example of a minor'kind of monomania of
frequent occurrence. It is indiscribable what terrible superstructures a
diseased imagination will raise. The reverse of this will sometimes
happen. A man shall have a chancre. He fells no pain worth calling
A CASE OF MONOMANIA. G51
pain: he sees no danger. He neglects himself, and suffers severely
from his temerity and inattention. In the former case of a man terrify-
ing himself into fatuity, or into the grave, with shadows of his own
raising,?what have we to do 1 Certainly to pay such overt attentions
as shall prevent his flying off at a tangent, and getting into worse hands;
but not to attend to this point only, and to the prescription of the
remedies really needed, but also to soothe and to unfrigliten him. We
have to deal with him, not as a sufferer from disease only, but from
monomania; the latter complaint being often the more difficult of treat-
ment of the two, as it is sometimes of the two the more serious.
In conclusion, it is obvious that genital physiology and genital
pathology are nearly allied to psychology. There are few cases of
insanity in which there is not to be remarked simulation and dissimula-
tion. Craft is shown both in concealment and reserve, in affectation
and in some species or other of ostentation. Could we get at the truth,
we should often find the dignity attendant upon devotional mania fade
away from our sight, and mental disease so marked be traced beneath
this surface to some obliquitous direction taken by what has been termed
the master passion. The number of those who approach the vestibule
?who pass the threshold?of insanity, through its labyrinthine windings
is greater than is commonly imagined. There may exist not simulation
and dissimulation so much as blindness and self-delusion on the part of
the victims as to the causa causationis. It is not to be denied that
even a praiseworthy and virtuous repression of the passions may in
some instances generate cerebral disorder and disease, and terminate in
the establishment of insanity. But better that the mind should thus,
before the body dies, pass away " walking in its uprightness," than that
its possessor should lead a lengthened life of intellectual sanity but
moral turpitude, especially considering that not far off from the most
long-lived of our race is that world to come in which all sufferings in a
good cause will be amply compensated, and all wrongs will be for once
and for ever righted. We can take no accurate, no enlarged view of
persons and things which is taken irrespectively of the world to come.
Those who repudiate religion, because cases of religious mania occur,
should, in order to be consistent, consent to a like dereliction of humanity
out of consideration for such cases of insanity as are of a genital origin.
There is a couplet in which it is said of a person whose character is
portrayed?
" Each passion that invades the human breast
Had troubled his brain's clearness and heart's rest."
That is the thing to give a man a knowledge of all sanity and all
insanity. If he knows nothing either of the influences of religion, or of
the passions, he knows little of human nature: if he knows only one of
tlie^ two, he knows but half of what he ought to know. The knowledge
which life and experience supply exceeds in value Avliat can be learned
from books. Too much of such knowledge, a mind too much enlarged,
too well informed,?cannot be possessed by him upon whom devolves
the treatment of the insane. The habitudes and smaller capabilities of
a keeper rendered obtuse to the spectacle of mental alienation, are less
u u 2
052 A CASE OF MONOMANIA.
requisite to the management of tlie insane tlian tlie supervision and
superintendence over all of a liberal and enlightened mind The same
qualities are indeed necessary daily and hourly in the usual routine of
all medical practice. Minds not insane, hut prostrated by disease,
require address and management, and to manage them their condition
must be understood. Enough has been said in the statement of the
foregoing case to show that there are no misprisions imaginable to
which the mind of man is not liable; and that the most favourable
interpretation that can be put upon a doubtful case of human conduct
will in some instances be the most correct.
[The above case is from the pen of a professional gentleman of great
respectability, personally known to us. It is necessary to say that we do
not acquiesce in all the remarks made by the author, particularly in those
portions in which he refers to the ethical question?whether we are not
justified, under certain circumstances, in deviating from what are
considered by the Divine Author of religion as stringent moral obliga-
tions in order to avoid the commission of offences most destructive to
our mental and physical well-being 1 We maintain that there can be no
justification for the violation of the law of God. We are bound to obey
implicitly, and even blindly, the mandate of the Supreme Being, malgre
the consequences. Great apparent suffering may be the result of an
implicit subjection to the literal command; but it is consolatory to reflect,
that He who issues the mandate has promised "to temper the wind to
the shorn lamb." Whilst 011 the subject of spermatorrhoea, it was our
intention to have referred to the interesting work of Lallemand, so ably
translated and edited by G. K. J. Macdougall, Esq. We must defer
this pleasure to another occasion.?Editor.]
