Original Communications, translations, anti JWi'scellantous, On Insanity
=========================================================================

BY THOMAS CATTELL, M.D., M.R.C.S.E., BRAUNSTON.
INSANITY DEMONSTRATED TO BE PURELY PHYSICAL IN ITS CHARACTER.
The danger and importance of a disease is proportionate to the value
of the function, or the rank which the particular organ or structure
affected, holds in the animal economy. In the wide domain of medical
science, there is no subject so profoundly or painfully interesting, or
that demands so searching an investigation, as that which involves the
normal manifestation of the mental attributes. Its phenomena have
been inquired into, and every relation of the subject has received consi-
deration and investigation commensurate only with their importance,
in order that the treatment of a disturbed harmony of the attributes of
mind may be made to rest on a scientific basis. With what results I
shall not here stay to inquire,?suffice it to say, that though much has
been done to prove its nature, and illustrate modes of treatment the
best adapted to its melioration or cure, more yet remains to be accom-
plished.
If the cause of this be traced to its legitimate source, we shall find
that it is to be referred to mistaken and absurdly erroneous views of the
mind, and its relations to the brain. Thus?how can any one, regarding
the mind as material, (the very ex vi termini of which involves a con-
tradiction,) or as existing in the manner believed and inculcated by the
advocates of phrenology, possess those accurate notions which a right
understanding of the subject necessarily involves?
A proper knowledge of insanity must necessarily involve an accurate
knowledge of the mind, apart from, and in relation to cerebx-al physio-
logy and pathology; this, we fear, is not the case with many that we
earnestly wish would examine the doctrines which they conceive to be
true, and which they must have admitted on very slight foundation.
I have, however, no wish to expose to censure any proselyte of these
contradictory and absurd doctrines. My object is the investigation and
substantiation of the truth of the subject, without reservation on the
one hand, or malediction on the other; and, if I refer to any opinion in
connexion with the subject which would be likely to provoke to contro-
versy, I shall not attach the name of its author.
To proceed: I affirm it to be a point essentially involved in this sub-
ject, and not admitting of doubt, that the mind is distinct in its nature
and attributes from the structure and functions of the brain, and that
no other entity but mind can manifest reason and consciousness.
This doctrine is directly antagonistic to that of a late writer on the
subject, and who, from his position, must be well acquainted with every
form in which the mental attributes are implicated by cerebral disease.
Speaking of those distinctions to which we have just referred, he says,
ON INSANITY. 431
" Botli these opinions are extreme, and have their respective evils; if we
acquiesce in the postulate, that nothing other than what is immaterial
can display acts of intelligence, or possess consciousness, then it follows
as a syllogistic necessity, that we must yield to animals the same spiritual
entity which we assign to man, and thus, by distributing it generally,
we apparently lessen its value, rob humanity of its distinguishing cha-
racteristic, and furnish the infidel with matter for triumph. Of these
extreme opinions, the first leads to the fearful theory, that insanity is
spiritual in its character, and is followed by a treatment cruel, inhuman,
and atrocious; the latter overlooks the great power of psychical and
moral influences, and is apt to give rise to the coarse, empirical, and
dangerous practice of excessive bleedings, purgatives, vomitings, con-
tinued douches, and macerations."
Here is a great mistake,?it cannot be an extreme opinion to main-
tain that insanity is entirely physical in its character; it would not only
be an extreme opinion to suppose the spiritual character of insanity,
but the supposition will involve contradictions and absurdities without
end. Besides, such a supposition confounds those radical and eternal
distinctions which are absolutely essential to be made, and which the
very name and nature of the subject presupposes distinct.
As to the various forms of insanity, these are no doubt referrible
to the co-existence of certain modifying conditions of the brain, or
system, other than that which primarily implicates the mental attributes.
We, therefore, unhesitatingly affirm, that intellectual insanity is purely
physical in its character; or, in other words, that the particular impli-
cation of the mental attributes depends solely and altogether on a phy-
sical cause?as to the pathology of that cause, we leave for separate
consideration.
To suppose that intellectual insanity can continue to manifest itself
when the cerebral derangement on which it depends is cured; or, that
this cerebral derangement can exist subsequent to the cure of the intel-
lectual insanity, would be contradictory and absurd: as, in either case
we must suppose that an effect survives the cause on which it depends
for its own existence. But, since these suppositions are contradictory,
and impossible because contradictory?since the certainty that the cure
of intellectual insanity ensures the cure of the cerebral derangement,
and the cure of this derangement ensures the cure of intellectual in-
sanity, the effectuation of this in any instance must be the introduction
of the patient into his original condition, i. e., the healthy relation be-
tween his body and mind.
If the abnormal condition of the mental attributes continue subsequent
to the cure of the cerebral derangement, it is evident that it could not
have been produced by such derangement, because no effect can survive
its cause.
As no other but a physical cause could produce intellectual insanity,
the cure of this cause must necessarily extinguish those immediate and
remote effects which ultimately depend upon it for their existence, and
which can be supported in existence by no other cause. If either the
immediate or remote effects of certain pathological states of the brain
be supposed to continue in the case of those patients which have been
cured, it might be asked on what cause or causes do these effects depend
432 ON INSANITY.
for tlieir existence??It is evident that every effect must have a cause,
not only to produce but to continue it?a cause which is adequate to its
production and continuance, and which must remain in union with the
effect which it produced, and which still continues.
Unless we admit these general propositions, the term cause and effect
become unintelligible and devoid of meaning.
In support of the position which has been taken, as to the purely
physical character of intellectual insanity, we proceed to state that, as
derangement of the brain is the cause of mental aberration, and the
primary cause of all those effects which are included in, and result from
it, whenever the derangement of brain is cured, we recognise the instant
removal of the primary cause on which mental aberration, and all the
consequences of that aberration, depend. Hence, if we admit the
effects of a disease of the brain to continue after its primary cause
shall have been fully removed, we at once break down all connexion
between chyse and effect; and, by so doing, we make an effect which, by
its name, wg acknowledge to be dependent to exist, while we suppose
the cause on' which it depends to be non-existent.
Can an effect continue in existence without a cause? This surely
must be impossible. Can anything result from a cause which is ad-
mitted to be extinct 1 This must be as impossible as the other. Can
anything which has in itself no independent existence derive a con-
tinuance of existence from itself? Neither can this be possible.
In admitting the first of these cases, we must presume what we
have denominated an effect to be an effect, and not an effect, at the same
time, which is an evident contradiction. In admitting the second case,
we must presume that a cause can act after its non-existence, which is
also a contradiction. And in admitting the third case, we must
ascribe independence to an effect which, from its name and nature, must
be destitute of it, which is, in point of fact, denominating it to be inde-
pendent, and not independent at the same time. Consequently, we con-
clude that as nothing in the first case can be an effect without a cause;
and in the second, that no cause can act which is devoid of being; and
that in the third case nothing can derive from itself an independence
which it does not possess?that no such instance can possibly exist.
Besides, it is evident that no contact can exist between an effect which
is in being, and a cause which is not; for if such contact can exist, then
entity must depend on non-entity for the continuance of its existence,
which is a self-evident absurdity.
Further, if the removal of the cause of any given effect produce no
change in the state of that effect, it must be the removal of a cause
which has no necessary connexion with its own effect; but since both
the existence and removal of such a cause imply a contradiction, neither
the existence nor the removal of a cause that produces no change in its
own effect can possibly be admitted.
But if insanity be partly physical and partly spiritual in its character,
then it must have two proximate causes?the one spiritual, the other
physical, which is impossible.
The supposition severs all connexion between cause and effect?i. e., it
perpetuates existence without a cause, it makes entity to result from
ON JNSANITY. 433
non-entity, and that which has only an independent existence is made
to possess an independent one.
Moreover, such a notion lays an interdict on recovery.?How can the
cure of mental aberration be ever effected if it has a proximate physical
and a proximate spiritual cause? The means capable of effecting the
one are directly antagonistic to the other; they are extremes "wide
as the poles asunder," and if we could suppose either proximate cause
the subject of removal, the insanity will be persistent; for it is the re-
moval of a cause which has no necessary connexion with its own effect.
This contradictory supposition does not stop here; it involves con-
siderations of the highest and most momentous importance in insanity
?viz., the mode of its existence! A proximate physical and a proxi-
mate spiritual cause involves, as we have seen, the grossest absurdities,
which another view of the subject will enable us to see more clearly.
It is self-evident that a mere non-entity can never act, which the hypo-
thesis in question supposes different. The existence of insanity must,
therefore, be either real and absolute, or relative and dependent, or a
mere privation; these being the only modes of possible existence of
which we have any conception.
Whether " mental aberration" has a real or only a relative existence, or
whether it is considered in no other light than that of a mere privation,
the reasonings which have been adduced to prove that it must cease to
exist when disease of the brain shall be cured, will equally apply, and
clearly prove in either case, that as disease of the brain is its primary
cause, the bounds of its duration must be limited to the cure of that
morbid condition of the cerebral structure thus implicating the mental
attributes.
That intellectual insanity is but relative, and therefore destitute of all
positive existence, is a matter of absolute certainty. To maintain,
therefore, the purely " spiritual character of insanity," I agree would be
an " extreme opinion."
But we have before proved, that every form of disturbed mental
harmony depends on disease of the brain, consequently insanity, whether
real or relative, or whether only a mere privation, can have no further
existence than the cause, modified or not, on which it depends.
If the existence of intellectual insanity be only relative, and conse-
quently one with which the notion of positive existence can have no
connexion, it will involve a contradiction to suppose that it can survive
the cause which gave it birth, and on which it must be dependent for
its mode of existence.
To presume that intellectual insanity could survive the cause which
produced it, and on which it must continually depend, it will no longer
be a relation, but a positive being. And to suppose anything can have
a positive existence which is admitted to be but a mere relation, is to
suppose that it is a relation, and not a relation at the same time.
But endeavouring to shake these " extreme opinions" respecting the
character of insanity, virtually constitutes it a positive existence; for if
insanity be neither altogether physical nor altogether spiritual in its
character, then by a parity of reason it must be partly the one and partly
the other, which is impossible.
434 ON INSANITY.
As the cause of intellectual insanity in all its important bearings is
to be referred to cerebral disease, it is evident that this disease must be
removed in order to establish the sanity of the mind, and the possibility
of this is placed beyond doubt, as the mental disturbance possesses only
a relative existence.
Whatever results from a relation must, from the circumstances of that
relation, necessarily be in a dependent state; for we can no more con-
ceive that a mere relation can exist abstracted from that subject, from
which it derives its existence, than we can conceive a shadow to exist
when its only occasion is totally destroyed. When, therefore, the phy-
sical causes of intellectual insanity shall be cured, the normal character
of the mind must be restored; and if these causes ceased to be causes,
the normal character of the mental attributes would never be infringed
upon!
The truth of the proposition, that insanity is altogether physical in its
character, will receive additional corroboration if we consider it in the
light of a mere privation. In short, a mere privation, in this view of
the subject, is but a branch of relative existence, and is therefore con-
nected with it. The same observation will apply in both cases, and the
cure of mental aberration, whether considered either as a mere relation
or as a privation of any particular mode of the mind's operations, must be
the cure of this relation or of that privation; and consequently, that which
cures my privation of mental sanity restores me again to absolute mental
sanity, and banishes that privation in which my insanity of mind
consisted.
If a privation of the normal manifestation of the mental attributes
date its origin from any given cause, it is certain, whatever the nature
of the cause may be, that it can only possess a dependent mode of
existence, and that it can continue no longer in existence than it is sup-
ported by the cause on which it depends. And as the cure of the cause
must cure all dependencies, the privation of mental insanity must result;
and consequently where the absence or privation of mental sanity is not
observable, sanity of mind must be in a state of actual existence.
It follows, therefore, that the cure of mental insanity must be a
restoration unto mental sanity, and a restoration of the particular dis-
ease of the cerebral structure on which this mental condition depends.
That insanity is purely physical in its character, will be evident, if
we view it in the light of a mere negation. The removal of a negation
must be the production of positive existence; and it is only by the in-
troduction of the latter, that the former can be effected. The removal
of darkness must be the introduction of light; and we can no more con-
ceive that a medium state can exist between them, in which neither light
nor darkness makes its appearance, and naturally exists, than we can
conceive how any given portion of space can be deprived of existence,
or that matter can exist without figure or extension. As, therefore,
there be no medium between a normal and abnormal state of any given
structure, it follows that the removal of the one must be the introduc-
tion of the other, just as the removal of light must be the introduction
of darkness as an inevitable consequence.
If, then, the negation of mental sanity is the identical cause which
ON INSANITY. 435
introduces mental insanity, so the removal of this negation of mental
sanity must be the removal of mental insanity; and the removal of
mental insanity, must be the identical cause which restores to mental
sanity.
The removal of a negation must be the introduction of the reverse;
without this, no removal of a negation can be supposed. If, then,
mental insanity be a negation of mental sanity, and this negation be
removed, if the removal of this negation be the identical cause which
introduces the reverse, it follows that the removal of mental sanity
is the removal of the absence of sanity, and is consequently the very
cause through which mental sanity must be restored.
Now, since this privation of mental sanity, which exists to a lament-
able extent, must be occasioned by some cause, it must necessarily be
dependent; because it will involve a contradiction to suppose that a
mere negation can exist in any other mode. If, therefore, the privation
of mental insanity be dependent, and dependent on that cause which
called it into existence, the cure of this cause must necessarily occasion
the cure of this privation of mental sanity; and the instant in which it
is effected, it must give place to that mental sanity which is the reverse.
For, since in the consideration now before us, the reverse of mental
sanity must be mental insanity, or the privation of mental sanity,
so the cure of this mental insanity, or privation of mental sanity,
must be the identical cause which restores mental sanity, it fol-
lows, therefore, that when those suffering from mental insanity shall
be delivered from the captivity of the disease of their cerebral structure,
they must exhibit every feature of mental sanity. The cure of intel-
lectual insanity has been shown throughout to be dependent on the
cure of the existing disease of the brain, in contradistinction to those
that would constitute the mental condition (if possible) in part, spiri-
tual in its character; and at the same time to illustrate the value of,
and the necessity of, perseverance in the use of appropriate means of cure.
How necessary, then, is it for us to support, by every argument which
reason can furnish, those principles and distinctions which Nature (or
rather, which God) has presented to our notice; for Seneca says, " What-
ever Nature does, God does."
But the supposition that insanity is partly spiritual in its character,
involves other weighty and important considerations. If the mind be
subject to derangement, it could neither be immaterial nor immortal;
and if it could be deranged independently of the brain, by what method
of treatment would it ever be cured 1 No reasoning, or appeals to the
understanding, would be of service; and besides, in cases where it has been
attempted, injurious results have been the consequence. The phrase,
therefore, " derangement of mind" conveys an erroneous idea; for such
derangement being only a characteristic of a particular disease of the
brain, cannot be referred exclusively to the mind.
To this view of the subject, it is objected, that we " overlook the
great power of psychical and moral influences," which is " apt to
give rise to the coarse, empirical, and dangerous practice of excessive
bleedings, purgatives, vomitings," &c. This is a gratuitous assumption.
Besides, it is absurd to speak of " psychical and moral influences " as
436 ON THE BLOOD IN THE NEUROSES.
militating against the truth of the arguments which have been adduced
in support of the physical character of insanity, when they have really
nothing to do with the point at issue. These " influences" come not
within the circuit of our considerations, unless they take the rank of
exciting or proximate causes to that physical condition of the brain on
which " mental aberration " supervenes.
An " influence," in a medical point of view, is only another word
for a cause ; and it is only by inducing some effect, that we are able to
recognise its character as an influence in any particular relation in which
it is regarded.
Now, if " mental insanity" be not removed, or cease to exist when
disease of the brain is cured, the mind must be detained in this insane
state by some power, or it must not. If by some power or influence,
it is evident that this power or influence must partake of the mental
disturbance, because that which has no connexion with the mental
insanity can never detain the mind in a state of insanity. It therefore
follows, that the instant we suppose the mind to be detained in an in-
sane condition by any active power, we at once attribute the detaining
power to the physical disease, which we have presumed removed, and
suppose a connexion to subsist between that which is, and that which
we admit to have been removed or cured. In short, it is to attribute
the detaining power to disease of the brain, and not to attribute it at
the same time, which is a palpable contradiction. On the contrary, if
the minds of the mentally insane are detained in an insane state by no
power, the argument is defeated, and operates in favour of a restora-
tion?i. e., by the aid of means calculated to remove the physical disease
of the brain?from this mentally insane condition. For, since that
Avliich is divested of power can produce no effects, to suppose that the
restoration of the mentally insane can be prevented through a mere
negation, is to suppose the mind to be detained in an insane state by a
nonentity?i. e., no disease.
We therefore conclude that mental insanity is purely physical in its
character.
Braniiston, Norlliampton shire.
