On Poisons, in Relation to Medical Jurisprudence and Medi-
=========================================================

 Art. V.
:Author: Alfred b. Taylor, i.K.b. (Jhurchiil, io4o. pp. 855.
TAYLOR ON TOISONS.

Toxicology, as a distinct and important branch of medical jurispru-
dence, comes within the scope of the original design of this publication.
Many circumstances contrive to direct attention to the subject. The
great increase of late years in the crime of poisoning, and the fre-
quency with which he is called upon to give his evidence on the point
in a court of justice, not to mention the promptitude with which he is
required to act at the bedside of the patient, render the study of this
branch of science essential to the general practitioner. By those having
the care of the insane also, it should be carefully investigated, as it
affords much curious and useful information bearing upon their parti-
NO. III. F F

cular department. Poisoning among lunatics is rare, but still it is
occasionally one of the forms of suicidal or homicidal mania. The per-
verted ideas and hallucinations respecting it, the dread of poison, and the
belief that it is being constantly administered, are perhaps among the
most common delusions of the alienated. To compare these imaginary
sufferings with the real symptoms of poisoning, and from thence to deduce
a common ailment of the internal organs in both cases?some morbid
change or derangement of the primce vice?is both philosophical and
useful. Toxicology shows us, likewise, the intimate connexion between
mind and matter; that many medicines act exclusively on the nervous
system, through the stomach, and when in deleterious excess, produce
delirium, temporary or permanent mania, convulsions, coma, and para-
lysis. Finally, in proving that symptoms of poisoning result from the
consumption of ordinary articles of food in certain states and condi-
tions, toxicology teaches us the necessity of attending strictly to the diet
of the insane, in order to restore the mens sana in corpore sano.
The progress of collateral sciences, and the rapid accumulation of fresh
facts and observations, render a new work 011 poisons much to be desired.
We are never satisfied unless we have the very latest information for
our guidance. Mr. Taylor's work supplies this desideratum. It is a
complete, and the best class-book on the subject of toxicology. It is
written in a clear and lucid style, with ample reference to the sources of
facts and opinions; moreover, it is an exceedingly amusing volume, and
will be perused with pleasure by the general reader.

Mr. Taylor first treats of the medical evidence in cases of poisoning,
and defines accurately the meaning of the word, " deadly poison," as
distinguished from that which may become " a noxious thing" under
peculiar circumstances. " The term deadly can be used with respect to
those poisons only which may prove speedily fatal in small doses, such
as strychnia, morphia, prussic acid, and arsenic; but that it could not
with any sort of propriety be applied to such substances as sulphate of
copper, of zinc, or spirits of hartshorn." After all, the, word deadly
must be regarded as an unnecessary adjunct?a surplusage. After
classifying the different kinds of poison, he gives us some curious par-
ticulars under the head of animal irritants. Speaking of cheese and
sausages, he says, (page 552,) " These articles of food have frequently
given rise to symptoms of poisoning in Germany, but there is, I believe,
no instance of their having proved fatal in England. The symptoms
produced by cheese have been those of irritant poisoning. The nature
of the poison is unknown. In examining several specimens of decayed
cheese, I have found in them only an acrid oil, and sesquicarbonate of
ammonia. In some cases the poisonous property is undoubtedly due to
a putrefied state of the curd. Again, it has been supposed that the
poison is occasionally derived from certain vegetables on which the cows
feed. The symptoms caused by the sausage poison are very slow in
appearing; sometimes two, three, or four days elapse before they mani-
fest themselves?they partake of the narcotic irritant character. This
poison is of a very formidable kind. In the " Medical Gazette," for
Nov. 1842, there is an account of the cases of three persons who had
died from the effects of liver sausages, which had been made from an
apparently healthy pig, slaughtered only a week before. The inspection
threw no light on the cause of death. The poisonous effect is supposed
to depend on a partial decomposition of tbe fatty parts of the sausages.
It is said, that when extremely putrefied, they possess no poisonous pro-
perties. Does not the same observation hold good with respect to
dissection wounds?

Sometimes fatal effects follow the use of ordinary articles of animal
food in a diseased condition. With regard to putrefaction, Dr. Taylor
says (p. 555,) " it would appear that the flesh of the most healthy
animal is rendered unwholesome by this process; but that the most
severe effects are produced by that flesh which has become only partially
decomposed; when, in short, putrefactive fermentation has been recently
set up. The flesh of animals over driven, as well as newly killed meat
in general, is liable to produce violent gastric irritation, and even
cholera." In confirmation of this opinion, the following circumstance
is stated to have occurred recently in the Grand Duchy of Baden:?"A
roebuck, having been taken in a net, was killed while making violent
efforts to escape, and while in a state of the utmost terror and exhaus-
tion. Nearly all the persons who partook of the flesh of this animal
experienced a violent gastro-intestinal inflammation, with other symptoms
similar to those detailed above; although, in this instance, the flesh was
neither in a putrefying state, nor were any of the cases fatal."
The influence of the mind upon the wholesomeness of the mother's
milk is generally admitted. The following extraordinary instance is
reported:?"A woman while suckling her child, became violently excited
by the loss of some article which had been stolen from her. She
gave her child the breast while in a state of violent passion. The
child at first rejected it, but subsequently took a quantity of milk. Soon
afterwards violent vomiting supervened. In the course of some hours
the child took the other breast, when it was attacked with violent con-
vulsions, and died in spite of medical aid."

On occasions when symptoms of irritation have been observed to
follow the use of cow's milk, it would appear as if the secretion had
really acquired a specific poisonous action. This must be frequently
owing to the food of the animal, for Dr. Taylor observes, (p. 563,) " It
is generally admitted that milk may become poisoned when the cow
feeds upon hyssop, spurge, and other irritant vegetables; and this form
of poisoning is well known to occur in other cases in which the cause is
not so apparent. In the Dictionary of Natural History, a case is
related where a patient was advised by his medical attendant to drink
the milk of a cow fed on hemlock. The animal became emaciated, lost
its milk, and fortunately for the patient, died from the effects of the
poison, or it is not improbable he might have fallen a victim to this
plan of treatment. The secretion easily undergoes changes, according
to the food of the animal. It is rendered bitter when the cow feeds on
wormwood, or sow thistle, the leaves of the artichoke, and its taste is
affected by the cabbage, carrot, and all strong smelling plants. It is
singular that the animal poison of rabies should be sometimes trans-
missible by the milk." We remember that some years back a medical
man wrote a pamphlet to prove that most human ailments were caused
by drinking the milk of cows fed on butter-cups. The absurdity of this
hypothesis is certainly lessened by the above facts.

We now come to hydrophobia, a disease of the nervous system which
is even yet but little understood, but with regard to which there are
strange misconceptions abroad. The following particulars furnished by
Mr. Taylor will be read with interest, although they should be given
in extenso to do the laborious author justice.

It is singular that the dread of water, which is the main pathogno-
monic character of rabies in the human subject, is not met with in the
animals which impart it. Rabid dogs commonly have an irresistible
thirst, and drink water very readily. The danger of allowing dogs to
lick the person is not only a disgusting but a dangerous practice; as it
is impossible to say whether the saliva of an animal be or be not in a
morbid condition. The Hon. Mrs. Duff died of hydrophobia from
allowing a French poodle to lick her face whereon there was an abraded
pimple. Dr. Colles met with the case of a young girl where the con-
tact of the saliva of a rabid dog with the fine skin of the lips, led to a
fatal attack of the disease. The effect of the poison upon the mental
faculties is highly interesting. According to the researches of Mr. Taylor,
the first signs of the disorder are headache, languor, and general lassi-
tude. The senses of the patient are morbidly acute. He dislikes the
smell of any familiar substances, and the reflection of light from
polished surfaces. His pupils are dilated, and his countenance expres-
sive of timidity and great anxiety. Sometimes he has been observed to
shrink under the bed clothes in the most dreadful state of fear. The
first symptom in the Duke of Richmond was, that early in the morning
his valet found him alarmed at the appearance of some trees which were
near to a window of the room where he slept, and which he insisted
were people looking in. The respiration is humid and gasping; there
is a suspicion of those about him, and he feels a sense of oppression at
the epigastrium. With the exception of these signs of nervous excite-
ment there is no other mental disturbance. The patient makes no
attempt to injure those about him. There is no madness, the mind
generally remains clear until the last, and there is very seldom delirium.
We must bring our notice of Mr. Taylor's excellent little volume to
a conclusion, by examining his opinions on the subject of ether vapour,
which, with other agents of a similar character, have been so extensively
used lately for the production of insensibility during surgical operations.
The remarks are so sensible and concise, that we find a difficulty in
curtailing them. He says, p. 736, " It has been long known that the
vapour of ether acted on the system as a powerful narcotic. The poison-
ous effects of the vapour have been known for a long time, although the
attention of the profession has been only of late particularly drawn to
the subject Ether, it is well known, gives off a heavy vapour,
which possesses a strong odour at all temperatures. It is exceedingly
diffusible and volatile, properties which are more favourable for the ope-
ration of this liquid in the state of vapour, than for the action of alcohol.
When the vapour is respired, it enters the blood in the pulmonary
vessels, and the effects are almost immediate. The individual falls into
a lethargic condition, the respiration becomes slow, deep, and loud, the
skin pale and cold, the lips assume a darker hue, the pulse is quickened,
the eye is glassy, and the pupil dilated; the whole body is flabby and
relaxed. A small quantity of ether introduced into the blood through
the lungs, produces these striking symptoms in from two to four minutes;
and if hot air be substituted as soon as unconsciousness begins, they
disappear just as rapidly. In a more advanced stage, the pulse slackens,
and the temperature of the body rapidly falls. Half an ounce of ether,
or even less, inhaled in the form of vapour, would produce a much more
powerful effect on the system, than one or two ounces taken into the
stomach as a liquid. The sudden cessation of the sympathies, and the
restoration of sensibility, are owing to the rapid elimination of the
vapour through the lungs. If the respiration of the vapour be prolonged
for from ten minutes to lialf-an-hour, there is coma, the pulse sinks, and
there is some difficulty in rousing the individual. The after effects are
also more serious: there is exhaustion, a feeling of stupefaction, with
other unpleasant narcotic symptoms; but occasionally the patient has
fallen into a quiet sleep As a general rule, no dangerous effects
appear to have followed the respiration of this vapour for surgical pur-
poses ; but this inference has been chiefly drawn from those cases in which
it had been administered for a very short period; and probably there
was no tendency to congestion of the brain or lungs. In cases of pro-
longed respiration of the vapour, serious symptoms, and even death
have resulted As in the case of all aerial poisons, the pro-
tracted respiration of ether vapour must tend to render recovery difficult,
by thoroughly impregnating the blood with the poison The
cause of death may be assigned partly to the want of aeration of the
blood by oxygen, and its accumulation in this state in the brain; and
partly to a directly poisonous action of the absorbed vapour, only mani-
fested by its employment for a long period. The continual exhibition
of morphia or strychnia, at intervals so short as not to allow of a re-
covery from each successive dose, must cause an accumulation in the
system, and lead to fatal results. It is so with ether vapour, and ex-
perience now points to the propriety of withdrawing its use altogether
in those cases in which the administration of it would require to be
protracted for a long period." After citing several fatal cases of the
administration of ether, the catalogue of which, by the bye, might be
greatly extended, if dead men told tales, Mr. Taylor concludes : " These
facts, then, show that the respiration of the vapour, even for so short a
period as two minutes, may be in some instances attended with fatal
consequences. In any case the inhalation of this vapour must be looked
upon as temporary poisoning, with, cceteris paribus, a better chance of
recovery than exists in most other instances of aerial poisoning."
These remarks of course apply with still greater force to chloroform,
and are well worthy the attentive consideration of operators of surgery,
and obstetric practitioners. They merit also the especial consideration
of those who propose to employ ansesthetic agents in the treatment of
maniacal affections.
