Commission of Lunacy on Two Sisters, Miss Maria Collings and Miss Amelia Maria Hortensia Collings
==================================================================================================

Jftetu'cal gfurisprutrcntt fa relation to Ensamtg.
On 20th December, 1847, at the Roebuck Tavern, Chiswick,
Before Francis Barlow, Esq., Master in Lunacy.

The jury was sworn. Mr. Temple appeared for Mr. and Mrs. Findlater, the petitioners.
Mr. Miller appeared for Maria Collings, (one of the alleged lunatics,) and also for
Sir William Collings, Mrs. Manger Smith Collings, Mrs. Naftee, Mrs. Carre, Mrs.
Lukis, and Mrs. Guerin.

Mr. Temple (for the Commission).?You cannot so appear without the proper
authority.

Commissioner.?You can ouly appear by the authority of the Court of Chancery,
or with tlie authority of Miss Maria, the alleged lunatic. I cannot recognise you for
any other party. If such were not the practice of the Court of Chancery, the estates
of lunatics might soon be swallowed up.

Mr. Miller.?The other parties I appear for reside at Guernsey. Miss Maria was
domiciled at Guernsey; she never lived elsewhere. The Cour Royale at Guernsey had
control over her property. Her trustees reside at Guernsey. The Cour Royale had
appointed an inquiry bearing the name of Un Conseil de famille. The property is
vested in Mr. Joseph Collings, and the committee and guardians of the estate of this
lady. Mr. Collings has placed her in the asylum, where she now is, and has exercised
the"proper control over her; and in order to be properly prepared, I am instructed to
ask your Honour for an adjournment.

Commissioner.?She was placed in the asylum under the usual certificate.
Mr. Temple.?Yes, and it is ouly desired to adjourn, in order to change the proceedings.
COMMISSION OF LUNACY ON TWO SISTERS. 3] 9

Commissioner.?The commission has been issued under the Great Seal, and I
must therefore assume that all has been regular, and consequently, we cannot go into
the question of regularity, as all appears prima facie regular. You, Mr. Miller, say
you appear for certain members of the family whom I cannot recognise. You say a
commission has been issued in Guernsey, which is out of the jurisdiction of the Lord
Chancellor. The court of Guernsey has no jurisdiction here. It is quite clear,
when the commission was issued, that the party was within the jurisdiction of the
Court of Chancery; though if the party were abroad, and had property in this country,
it would be equally regular. The members of the family have no authority to appear
before me. The Chancellor is now ill, but I cannot believe any application to him
would have tbe effect of causing this commission to be set aside on the ground you
urge. The utmost tbe Chancellor could do, would be to allow you to appear before me.
You admit before me that she was of unsound mind, so as to require protection in
Guernsey, and, therefore, that she required protection here. In point of law, we are
not met to decide the question as to the issue of the commission in Guernsey. We
have evidence that she requires protection here.

Mr. Temple.?I appear for the only sister as the sole next of kin, who of course for
form, was joined with her husband, Mr. Findlater, as petitioners. When they arrived
here from Montpellier, in the south of France, where they had been residing, they found
their sister in a lunatic asylum.

Commissioner.?I think it a case for the jury.

Mr. Miller.?I have an application to make on behalf of the lady alone. She
wishes to be allowed an opportunity, I do not care how short, to bring forward evidence
to meet this case. Her notice had been short; it had only been served upon her last
Wednesday, the 14th of December, which makes it but four days. All the friends of
this lady, excepting her sister and husband, reside in Guernsey, from whence she may
have to bring witnesses. For any purpose of that kind, the notice is no doubt too
short.

Commissioner.?The parties are not bound to serve a notice at all.
Mr. Miller.?Either a notice is necessary, or serving one is a perfect farce. No
opportunity of seeing this lady has been afforded to me as her professional adviser.
Commissioner.?Counsel does not necessarily see her. I think the lady has had
sufficient notice; nearly a week is ample time for her to have appeared if she thought
proper. I am not, therefore, disposed to adjourn at this moment, as we are assembled
here at considerable expense to the estate, and I shall propose to go on, with perfect liberty to the learned counsel to apply for an adjournment at a later period of the
day.

Mr. Miller.?I cannot cross-examine the witnesses. I have no means, no materials.
Commissioner.?The lady is in an asylum, by the act of the trustees, your clients.
Mr. Temple.?Yes, she is in an asylum, from which she would, if sane, have been
discharged from confinement by the visiting Commissioners. The application for the
adjournment appears to be made by those who placed her there.

Mr. Miller.?I only apply as a measure of justice, in a very important case.
Commissioner.?At present we do not know what the case is. I will adjourn it at
any period you show me it is a proper case for adjournment. As to cross-examining
the witnesses, you shall have them back at any time.

Mr. Miller.?I have no facts to examine upon.

Mr. Temple.?If in the course of the inquiry you show the least necessity for an
adjournment, I will press for the adjournment rather than object to it.
Commissioner.?If after seeing the alleged lunatic I find it necessary that it should
stand over, I will not of course object.

Mr. Miller.?I am content to allow her to remain where she is for a few days to
meet this case.

Commissioner.?Under restraint, through parties for whom you say you appear;
they are parties who put her there.
Mr. Miller.?We might have gone to the Lord Chancellor in order to have it
adjourned.

Commissioner.?I suppose it is very unimportant as to what period it is carried
back?should it be three or five years. You cannot show that she is in her right mind
now. If you wish it, 1 will go and see her. I should do so if you were not here.
Mr. Miller,?I will put in tlie note sent by Miss Collings objecting to this case
proceeding in haste.

Commissioner.?Is she here?
Mr. Moore (Solicitor).?She is not. She refuses to come. She objects to leave
the asylum.

Mr. Miller.?I object to this matter proceeding in such haste.
Commissioner.?How do you appear? (To Mr. Moore.)
Mr. Moore.?I have received a letter from her. I have not seen her.
Mr. Miller.?I beg the Commissioner to see the lady. She wishes the inquiry to
be adjourned ; and I am not in a situation to examine the witnesses.
Commissioner.?You shall have the witnesses again.
Mr. Miller.?She has been a resident at Guernsey all her life.
Commissioner.?Mr. Temple, do you propose to carry it back to any period of her
residence in Guernsey ?

Mr. Temple.?I do not. I only wish to carry it back to the day of her own documents in England. She has not been latterly domiciled at Guernsey. She has not
lived there for some years. She has, as I understand, lived at Rome, and other places.
Commissioner.?I have received a letter from the alleged lunatics.
Mr. Miller.?And I should like that letter to be read to the Jury.
The Commissioner.?Certainly. I have no objection to do so. " Maria and
Amelia Collings protest against the haste with which the Commission has been
got up, for the purpose of transferring their property into the hands of Mr. and
Mrs. Findlater, and solicit they may have a month's adjournment ere judgment be pronounced."
Mr. Miller.?Well, I think nothing can be more rational.

Commissioner.?Go and see her, if you like, and if you, as her counsel, tell us on
your return that you are of opinion an adjournment is absolutely necessary, it will then
be for me to consider your application.

Mr. Miller.?I must say the Commission appears to have been got up in much
haste, and I beg to remind you of the case in Vesey, in which the Commission was
quashed because au adjournment was refused.

Commissioner.?I am perfectly aware of that case. If she comes here to-day, and
conducts herself rationally, and the jury consider her of sound mind, she ought to be
set at liberty; but it will be for the jury to be guided as to her conduct by her answers
and statement when she appears before them. We had better go on with the case, as
I do not think this a proper time to ask for an adjournment.

A Juryman.?That letter is hardly the act of a lunatic.
Commissioner.? You had better not form any opinion on the letter, as it is not yet
in evidence.

Mr. Miller.?I repeat that she presses very much for an adjournment, and she is
anxious that the Commissioner should go down and see her.

(Mr. Miller with Mr. Moore here left the room and proceeded to the asylum, for
the purpose of seeing Miss Maria Collings. On his return, he stated that the ladies
' would not leave each other, but were desirous, as he before stated, to have an adjournment.)
Commissioner.?We had better get on with the case in order to save expense, and
we may afterwards adjourn if it becomes necessary.

Mr. Temple.?I appear on behalf of the petitioner, Mrs. Findlater, the only member of
the family of the unfortunate lady, and I confess I did not think any difficulty would arise,
as the lady was placed in confmemeut by the very parties who instruct my learned friend.
Her father was a Captain Collings, of the 8th regiment of Native Madras Infantry in
the East Indies, and he was married to the daughter of a Spanish merchant, Assando,
by whom he had four children, Amelia, Maria, and Mrs. Findlater, and a son who died
at the age of about five years. The daughters were sent over many years ago to their
grandfather in this country, became natural subjects, and were entitled to the protection of the law of this country. Mr. and Mrs. Findlater, the sister and brother-iu law
of Miss Maria Collings, had been residing in Montpellier, in the south of France,
and had only lately arrived in England, and when they arrived, they found them in a
lunatic asylum. In the year 1847, Mr. Goodman, clerk to the Lord Mayor of London,
received some letters, which will be put in evidence before you, and in which this lady
states the most extraordinary case. She asserts that she is the heiress to the Spanish
crown: tliat she is a descendant of Ferdinand the Seventh and the Princess Buorbon-de-Bourhon ; that she is entitled to immense revenues, and that her mother
has been assassinated in Guernsey, and that the people of that island are living upon
her property; and praying that the Lord Mayor will apply to the Chancellor of the
Exchequer on her behalf. If, after reading these letters, you have the slightest
doubt of the state of her mind, for God's sake liberate her at once, as this is a proceeding not for the purpose of restraint, but for the object of her comfort and protection.
The Lord Mayor kindly wrote to her relatives at Guernsey, and it was subsequently
found necessary to place the unhappy lady in a private asylum. If you should be of
opinion that commission was not necessary for her comfort and protection, nobody
would rejoice more at such a result than Mr. and Mrs. Findlater, for whom I appear.
I will now read you the letters written by Miss Collings in the order in which they
were sent, as it will be a saving of time, and they may be better understood.
Mr. Miller.?Are you going to prove them ?

Mr. Temple.?I shall read nothing to the jury that I am not going to put in
evidence.

Commissioner.?I presume you are going to call Mr. Goodman to state when he
received them. Is he here ?

Mr. Temple. ?I believe not; but 1 shall prove them to be in Miss Collings' handwriting. The first is dated the 4th of August, and is addressed to Mr. Goodman. It
commences?

" The Princess Bourbon-de-Bourbon was the lawful child and heiress of that prince
of Spain, who was unfairly treated by his parents and others. He resided several
years in Hindostan, where he married a French lady of royal birth. Their daughter,
Euphemia, was born in November 1795, at Pondichery; the prince called himself
'Arsando,' a Spanish captain and merchant. He kept a ship of his own, in which he
sailed about the Indian ocean, and thus returned to Spain. His child was brought up
in India as an orphan, by an English lady, and married in 1812, Lieutenant Collings,
8th Madras infantry. He was ignorant of her rank or fortune, as she was then portionless. He died at Hydrabad, 1818. On the day of his burial, his house and estab lishment were sold for the government, and widow and orphans were turned out destitute, and subsequently in poverty. Thus the widow, unprovided for, accepted a
second marriage with Captain Alexander Thompson: they did not agree, and were
divorced in three months. Our mother was obliged to remain in India, and Captain
Thompson brought over her daughters to England. He died in 1824. Our brother
died in India, aged five years. Our guardian, William Collings, wrote anxiously for
his brother's son to be sent to him, and received answer that he was dead, and our
mother would 'ere long join her children in England.'

" Euphemia De Bourbon, about this time, obtained possession of her inheritance and
rank, and received the testament of the prince, her father. Maternal love induced her
to seek her daughters ere she assumed the princely state.

" On the fourth day of her arrival in Guernsey, she was barbarously assassinated by
blows struck by the stabs of knives ; and a demoniac, named Nicholas Pedvin, asserts he
dashed her to pieces.

" The assassin plot was concerted and executed by a band of smugglers, on account of
the smuggling interests, and fraudulent enrichment of the Guernsey families and
others, though instigated by one who expected secretly to seize the crown of Spain
through a concerted plan. Previous and expectant of the arrival of our mother, they
all feared that this beautiful princess would form another marriage, and the royal heirship pass away to other children. They heeded not her protestation that she
would devote herself to her daughters, but compelled her to sign a will, by which her
property fell under the power of the jurat William Collings, and became divided amongst
his family and others. It was at that trying moment that the cry was overheard, ' O
?,? Saviour, have pity on me !' They then effected to take her to see ' her dear
Maria,' and led her like a lamb to the slaughter, from the house of Mr. Collings, on
t ie^ fourth day of her arrival. '

' A continual mystery, and system of deception, was necessarily kept up around her
c iildren; they heard Sir William Collings declare, ' That he knew very great secrets,
w 11 would take care should never be revealed,' and by degrees the light broke
upon them. The bailiff, royal court, and colleagues, decided they should be stigmalze as deranged, if they at all deranged their concerns; it becoming an evident
anangement of the cautious plans and proceedings of the past twenty years, and the
NO. U. Y
knowledge they have gained from our stolen letters has enabled them to anticipate
our measures.

" August, 1847." " Heirs De Bourbon."

You will find, gentlemen, that Mr. Goodman, by direction of the Lord Mayor, communicated with Mr. Collings, of Guernsey, who came over, and having obtained this
certificate, placed the unfortunate lady in a private asylum. (A number of other letters,
full of delusions, and extremely incoherent, were put in and read. All the letters contained conclusive evidence of her melancholy state of mind.) After this, Mr. and Mrs.
Findlater came to England, and having taken the opinion of several eminent medical
gentlemen as to her state of mind, this commission of inquiry was asked for and obtained.
Mr. Miller again asked for an adjournment. This is the first we have heard of
these letters, and for aught we know to the contrary, she may turn out to be related to
the parties she refers to.

Commissioner.?I presume they will show she is not related. The letters may be
very true for what I know, but they have not been proved yet.

MEDICAL EVIDENCE.
Dr. Forbes Winslow examined.?I am proprietor of Sussex House Asylum, Hammersmith. Have had considerable experience in the treatment of the insane for many
years, having had two establishments under my care for a long period. On the 8th
of December last, I attended at the asylum, by direction of Mr. Rymer and Mr. Findlater, for the purpose of examining Miss Maria Collings. I referred to her property,
when she told me she had large possessions. I asked her who had left them, and she
said her mother. I asked her how she knew it, and she said she understood that large
property had been left to her. I then asked her who had possession of it, and she said
it had been taken possession of by Sir William Collings. She could not tell me the
amount of her property, but she led me to suppose it was something very great. I then
referred to her rank and position in life, and she said her mother was related to the
Bourbon family. Upon being asked how she knew it, she said that it was her impression and belief, and that it was generally known to all parties in the Island of Guernsey; and that Lord Palmerston, and General Napier, the governor of the island, had
proofs of her connexion with the royal family of Spain, and of her rights. On being
asked if she had communicated this fact to any parties, she said she had written
repeatedly to the Lord Chancellor on the subject; and referring to her mother, she represented that she had been cruelly murdered in the Island of Guernsey, in 1828. She
said that her mother was taken to the retired part of the island, and there assassinated.
On being asked how she became acquainted with the fact, she said it was generally
believed by the whole Island of Guernsey; and on being asked who the parties were
that were implicated in the murder, she said Sir William and Joseph Collings. That
they instigated the murder, with the view of getting possession of her mother's property; and that previously to her mother's assassination, Sir William and Joseph Collings made her transfer all her property to them. From representations made to me as
to her rank, I should consider she was labouring under delusions, and unfit to take
care of herself. She was not violent. Assuming that she is not related to the family
of Spain, and that she does not possess the property she represents herself to have, I
consider her of unsound mind.

Cross-examined by Mr. Miller.
------------------------------

Dr. Winslow.?It is common for persons having delusions of a certain character to
manage their persons and property. I did not enter into an examination of Miss
Collings' views upon general points. I am not aware that the lady entertains any
particular notions upon religious matters. Her answers were connected; and there was
not anything in her manner peculiar, but the apparent truthfulness and earnestness
with which she made her statements, and which left an impression on my mind that
she believed they were true.

Mr. Miller.?If she were related to a grandee of Spain, and that led to the impression
that she was connected with the royal family of Spain,iwould you consider that to be
a delusion ?

Dr. Winslow.?She might have been wrongly informed; and if she believed it, and
had good evidence for the belief, that would be no delusion. In order that you may
understand me, I will put a case. If A believes that she is entitled to a reasonable
amount of property, to the extent of 10,000/. or 20,000/., that might arise from misinformation, and I should not consider it a delusion; but if A believes that she is entitled
to a very large amount, sucli as 100,000?. or 200,000/., or any other large sum, beyond
the range of reason and probability, I should (in the absence of good evidence) entertain
grave doubts as to the sanity of the person's mind.

Mr. Milled.?I understood you to say that she did not state the amount of her property ??No, she did not.
In reply to other questions, Dr. Winslow said that insanity and unsoundness of
mind often consisted in the exaggeration of a fact; and it was no logical inference of
the mind being in a sound state, because there existed some degree of evidence for what
is pronounced to be an insane belief.

Mr. Miller.?You say this lady fancies herself to be related to the royal family of
Spain. If she were related, would you still be of the same opinion ?
Dr. Winslow.?Under these circumstances it would be a fact, not a delusion.
Mr. Miller.?Apart from these delusions, you consider her competent to take care
of herself?

Dr. Winslow.?I have no evidence to the contrary.
Mr. Miller.?Persons with delusions manage themselves and property ?
Dr. Winslow.?I have no doubt they do.

Re-examined by Mr. Temple I consider a delusion to be an unsound deduction
from inadequate premises. I should say, the letters I have heard read are most conclusive evidence of very extensive unsoundness of mind. I consider her belief, as to the
assassination of her mother, to be a very strong delusion.

Mr, Bowling examined I am a surgeon at Hammersmith, and have had twentyfive years' experience in cases of insanity. I accompanied Dr. Winslow to the asylum,
on the 8th December, and saw Miss Collings there.

Mr. Temple.?I suppose it will not be necessary to go through all this again ?
Mr. Miller.?Oh, certainly not. You have heard Dr. Winslow's statement; do you
concur in his evidence ??Yes, I have no doubt she is of unsound mind.
Commissioner.?And unable to manage herself and her property??Oh, yes, of course.
Cross-examined by Mr. Miller.?I have heard that the lady's property is 5000/.,
but she says she has got more than 100,000/. I think Dr. Winslow put the question
to her. My belief of the unsoundness of lier mind is formed from the lady having
overstated her property. If she is entitled to very large property, then of course
there is no delusion. I formed my opinion from the improbable nature of what she
stated as facts.

Dr. Thomas IIodgkin, of Brooke-street, Grosvenor-square, examined by Mr. Temple-?I saw her a few days before she came into the asylum, the latter end of August.
I have seen her repeatedly. She says her affairs are well known to Lord Palmerston,
Lord John Russell, and other high personages, and that her connexion with the House
of Spain is a matter of notoriety. I am not aware whether Maria gave herself any
name. I believe her to be a person of unsound mind, and incapable of taking care of
herself and her property. I have no doubt, not the smallest, that the letters are genuine.
I have attended her in the house, as I have my other patients, three or four in number.
I am not the regular attendant at the asylum. The letters were admitted by one of the
sisters to be genuine Those letters show delusions. The case is a very remarkable one. I never before knew two lunatics to agree in the same delusions. Maria
says she is entitled to the whole of Guernsey. I do not think any harm could arise from
the jury seeing her.

Mr. Mark Dewsnap, surgeon, examined by Mr. Temple.?I am regular medical
attendant at the asylum. Miss Maria Collings came to the asylum on the 4th September
last. ^ I first saw her on the following day, and the last time on Saturday last. Her
delusions are as to conspiracies to defraud her of her property, which she considers
to be of large amount. She stated that her mother was the Princess of Spain, and went
on to say that Louis Philippe had used her money to portion the Duke of Montpensier.
ie told me her sister was in communication with Lord John Russell, Lord Palmerston,
an the Lord Mayor, all of whom she said were perfectly acquainted with her case.
ie said she considered herself under the protection of the premier, Lord Joliu Russell,
an that connected with her affairs at Guernsey, were Sir William Collings, and Mr.
Joseph Collings.

a Juror.?They are perfectly rational on all other subjects except their delusions.
? r' _?emple.?Di\ Winslow is desirous of correcting his evidence.
. r" ?1nslow.?I find, upon reference to my notes, that she said 100,000/. were due
0 iei *10m the traders of Guernsey, as well as to her sister.
Y 2
Mr. Miller.?She did not say more than 100,000/. ?
Dr. Winslow.?No; she mentioned 100,000/. 1 made my note at the moment in
the room.

EXAMINATION OF RELATIVES.
--------------------------

Mr. Findlater examined.?All letters produced are in the handwriting of Miss
Maria Collings. I received them from Mr. Currie. I married the sister of Maria
Collings. The family consists of my wife and her two sisters. My wife's father was
Captain Elias Collings, of the Indian army. Her mother was the daughter of a captain of his own vessel; his name was Arsando. Her mother died before my marriage,
I believe in the year 1826 (it was in 1828). After her first husband's death, she was
married to Captain Thompson, and she died at Madras. I never heard any imputation
against any person that she was murdered. She was not related to the royal family of
Spain, or to the Bourbon family. It is, perhaps, about six years and a half ago since
Miss Collings left Guernsey. She afterwards came to Montpellier, and subsequently
went to Rome, Switzerland, and other places on the continent; and in the spring of
1847 they came to Montpellier. They only came on the last occasion to visit us, and
after a short stay, they set off to go to London. My wife was in the constant habit of
corresponding with them, and we first heard of the state of her mind in the beginning of
September. When we came to England, we found them in an asylum. When we first
saw them, they held these delusions, but asserted they had proofs. Miss Maria
Collings had 50/. per year in the Bank of England, besides a pension of COL from the
Madras Orphan Military Asylum. Her property is in the hands of trustees. It
altogether amounted to 109/. 16s. 2d. per year, besides some household property, &c.
The property left to the three sisters was equally divided, and I can tell you what
my wife's property is, but I cannot say what Miss Collings' may be, as I do not know
what she may have disposed of- The property of my wife consists of 50/. 5s. 3d. per
year in the Bank of England; 83/. 2s. 6d. in the French funds; 56/. in the Russian
funds; and 10/. 8s. 5d. in the Neapolitan. She also has one-third of a house St.
James's-street, Guernsey, one-third of thirty-five United States Bank shares, besides
some rents. I believe Amelia, after she left Montpellier, went to Guernsey, to collect
some evidence against her uncles.

Cross-examined by Mr. Miller.?The property they have is in the hands of trustees,
who are resident at Guernsey.

I believe they entertain very peculiar notions on religious subjects??They are what
is called Swedenborgians.

Are you a licensed preacher??No, I am not.

Now, Mr. Findlater,do you mean to say you have not preached in the open air??
Yes, I have preached in the open air.

Both in London and Guernsey ??Yes.
Are you not an Irvingite ??I do not acknowledge the word.
Do you not profess the unknown tongues ??What do you mean by the unknown
tongues ?

Have you not several times impressed upon them the religious principles of Mr.
Irving ??Those principles were taught them by their uncles and aunts long before I
knew them.

Will you state what those principles are ??Yes; if you will listen to me for half an
hour, I have no objection to preach to you. (A laugh.)
Mr. Temple objected to this line of examination, and the learned commissioner
decided that it should not be farther pursued.

[An extract of the registry of the East India House was here put in evidence, showing that Euphemia Thompson, the mother of Miss Maria Collings, died at Madras,
and not in Guernsey, as insisted upon by Miss Collings, and that she had no property
in Spain.]

I believe there has been some dispute about the property ??Sir William Collings
required a release from my wife, without accounting for the property they were entitled to.
And was there not some mystery about the mother's death??She wrote from Madras,
stating that she wished to join her children; and it is strange she did not come, for
she was a fond and affectionate mother. It is supposed that Sir W. Collings prevented
her coming from India.

So that all these circumstances might give rise to these peculiar delusions ??Yes.
What is your opinion as to the competency of this lady to manage herself and her
affairs ?

Mr. Temple.?I object to that question. The witness is called to speak to certain
facts, and not to give his opinion. It will be for the jury to form an opinion upon the
medical testimony.

Mr. Miller.?I believe you are a medical man ??No ; I am only studying medicine.
Re-examined by Mr. Temple.?I graduated at Cambridge, and was private tutor to
Sir Charles Burrell's son, and the son of Mr. Commissioner Shepherd. Myself and
wife have always been 011 the very best of terms with both these ladies. When they
took their leave of us at Montpellier, the greatest friendship existed between us.
By the Commissioner.?If Miss Maria Collings believes she has large wealth, that
is not founded on fact. I have no reason whatever for believing that her mother died
in Guernsey, or that she did not die a natural death. I never made any claim on the
part of my wife for any money due to her in Spain. I might have done so had 1 believed she was entitled to any Spanish property. 1 have 110 reason to believe that she
was connected with a grandee of Spain, or tbat she was in any way connected with any
prince or princess of Spain, or in any way related to the Bourbon family.
The Commissioner.?What has she said to you about the death of her mother??
She told me her mother came over to Guernsey, and four days afterwards was murdered ; a cousin of hers heard her shrieks ; and I believe the substance of her words
was, that her uncle had immense sums belonging to her.
Mr. Temple now put in an additional letter, dated the 2nd of September, and addressed to the premier, Lord John Russell, commended to the care of Mr. Goodman.
The letter in question afforded ample proof of Miss Collings' state of mind, and was
signed " Maria Hortensia de Bourbon."

Mr. Temple.?I have another letter which has not been opened, and, as it is addressed to the Lord Chancellor, I do not like to take upon myself the responsibility of
opening it.

Commissioner.?Oh, give me the letter, as it is for the Chancellor, and I will open
it, and share the responsibility with you.

1 he letter was then put in evidence. It was signed, Heirs De Bourbon, and identified
as being in the handwriting of Miss Maria Collings.

EXAMINATION OF THE LUNATIC.

The learned commissioner, with the counsel and jury, now proceeded to the asylum,
for the purpose of examining Miss Maria Collings.

Commissioner.?I am afraid you think us rude, Miss Collings, so many gentlemen
coming to see you, but we have come by direction of the Lord Chancellor, to ask you
a few questions respecting your property. If there iu anybody present you object to,
they shall leave the room.

Miss Collings shook her head, and replied in the negative.

Commissioner.?Pray may I ask, Miss Collings, what property you have??It is
already taken care of by Sir William Collings and Mr. Joseph Collings.
What is the amount of your property ??You must ask my trustees who have had the
management of it.

Do you know from whom you derived your property ??It came from my ancestors
the Collingses, as far as I am informed.

Bo you know what has become of your mother ??I believe she died in Guernsey.
So the living witnesses say; but we are not responsible for their statements. We
endeavoured to find out the truth of the reports, and were shut up on so doing.
I have a certificate that she died in India. Here it is (producing the register).?
This document I believe is forged. Any one can get such a piece of paper as that. I
believe Joseph Collings saw her in Guernsey. She left India in 1828, and was not
heard of after, but I do not see that this has anything to do with the state of my mind,
and that I should be shut up.

Do you know the amount of your property ??I believe 5000Z. was settled on each of
us; and when we asked for an account from our guardians we were shut up. I don't
see why Mr. Findlater should exercise a guardianship over us, when I am the elder
sister.

In writing your letters, why do yon sign yourself Heirs de Bourbon ??I wrote to the
Lord Chancellor. I knew of no other way to justify ourselves. I have been told that
we are related to the family of Bourbon. You can go to the Governor, Napier, of
Guernsey, or to the premier, Lord John Russell, or to Lord Palmerston, and ask them.
Ihey will state to you what is right. But what is the use of a lunatic, in a lunatic
asylum, stating her impressions ? Every one, I believe, is at liberty to tliink ; it is a
right we all have ; and supposing that was our impression, we have lost our liberty for it.
But perhaps you can tell us??You will wait, sir, and see what events take place.
You will hear all about it if you write to the Premier, or if you wish to satisfy yourself,
you can go to the offices of Lord Palmerston and Lord John Russell. Of course,
whatever I say is insanity.

Perhaps they would think me rude??That is no affair of mine. I tell you where
you can satisfy yourself, and why trouble me ? There is nothing so extraordinary in
my thinking myself connected with the princess of Spain. You can inquire for yourself ; it is of no use minding what I say, it is merely the evidence of a lunatic, as it is
alleged. I suppose I am at liberty to think I belong to the royal family of Spain?
Had you not an impression that there was a conspiracy against you in Guernsey??
I had an impression that it was very rude towards my sister, when she was inquiring
about the death of my mother, and had obtained the contents of two documents, for the
people of the island to behave as they did to her. They sent her a summons to appear
at the Royal Court of Guernsey; and an appeal was made to the Governor, who sent
her a guard to protect her for one day, and she afterwards left the island.
And do you believe then, Miss Collings, that you are related to the Bourbon family?
?I believe liberty of thought is allowed in England. We had a right to inquire
further into our affairs, I suppose? We did not go running about the world, spreading
these reports, without satisfying?

Then you did sign yourself, " Heirs de Bourbon ?"?Yes; a sum of money got
settled on the Montpensier family, and we used that signature to obtain particulars.
Was your father related to a Spanish grandee ??My father was an exile in India.
He was a navigator, but a person of rank, who had been sent out of his own country.
Do you wish us to adjourn this case ? If we do so, do you think you could prove
what you have stated ??I think there has been much haste; 1 believe a month is
generally allowed.

The commissioner, counsel, and jury then adjourned to the Roebuck Tavern.
Commission adjourned to February 1st.

Adjourned Proceedings.

Mr. Temple, on the part of the Commission, called Dr. Winslow, of Sussex House,
Hammersmith.

Mr. Temple.?On the former occasion you stated your opinion of the state of this
young lady's mind. Have you seen her recently ??I saw her on Friday last, the 28th
of January, and she remained in the same state of mind in which she was when I saw
her before. I was with her about three quarters of an hour, and had a very long conversation with her. In the course of the conversation, she spoke in reference to Mr.
and Mrs. Findlater in angry terms; and, in answer to my questions, she said that they
had placed her in confinement, and wished to keep her so. I tried to explain; and,
upon my stating to her that they had nothing to do with her present place of abode,
she replied they had, for Mr. and Mrs. Findlater had placed her in confinement. I endeavoured to impress upon her mind that they had nothing to do with her confinement;
but she seemed to be positive about it. She did not say upon whose representation it
was that she arrived at these conclusions. She spoke of the murder of her mother, the
same as she had done before; of her connexion with the Bourbon family, and of her
immense wealth. She imagined that she was worth more than 100,000/., and she said
she was connected with the royal family of Spain; her mother had been cruelly
murdered at the instigation of Sir William Collings, in order to get her money; that
she was under the protection of the prime minister, the lord mayor, and Parliament. I
was with her nearly three quarters of an hour before she would admit any of these delusions ; and she told me that I had no business to ask her questions. I told her that. I
came with authority to communicate with her, and it was necessary for her to state
what her belief was : and then she admitted all these delusions. It was at least half
an hour before she would admit anything at all. I stated that I came by the authority
of the chancellor. She did not refer with any degree of bitterness to the issuing out
of this commission against her.

Commissioner.?Did you see her between the last time we met here and the 28th ?
?I have seen her once, and that was the 28th of last month.

Mr. Temple.?Did you apply to see her at any other time ??I applied to see her
before, but could not see her. An appointment was made, and I was to have met MrCOMMISSION OF LUNACY ON TWO SISTERS. 327
Bowling, but be did not come. She referred to Mr. and Mrs. Findlater, and I stated to
her that they had not placed her in confinement; when she said that she knew they had,
because she had been informed so.

Mr. Miller.?Are you sure she used the words, " under the protection of Parliament ?"??Quite.
Mr. Miller.?Did she say that she was " under the protection of the prime minister ?"?Yes, sbe did. I am quite certain of her having used the words.
Commissioner.?Did she say tbat her property was under the protection of the
premier ??No ; she said that she herself was under the protection of the premier.

Mr. Temple Have you any doubt as to her state of mind ??I have not the remotest doubt as to her being of unsound mind. In speaking of some of her relatives,
and in reference to Sir William Collings being connected with the murder of her mother,
she said that Sir William Collings and others were cheats and impostors.

Mr. Temple.?Is it a common feeling for persons in an unsound state of mind, to
have bitter feelings against their most dear and near friends ??It is; those that they
formerly most tenderly loved they often hate the most when the mind becomes deranged.
Mr. Miller.?Particularly if they are the parties who have taken out a commission
against them. (Laughter.)

Commissioner.?Is that a common feeling in lunacy?a feeling of dislike to those
that they naturally love ??It is a very common feature. I see it manifested in patients
almost every day.

Mr. John Bowling.?I saw Miss Maria Collings on Sunday last, the day before
yesterday; and perhaps I ought to state that I saw the two sisters together; and by my
evidence you will find that they chimed in together in everything that was said.
Amelia was excessively loquacious ; and she answered those questions that were put to
Maria; and, therefore, I was obliged to apply to Maria to know if they were correct.
I saw nothing but what would confirm my previous opinion. I think Maria was rather
more excited than she was on the previous occasion?that I attributed to the presence
of her sister.

Mr. Temple.?Did she say anything about the parties who had placed her at the
asylum ??She did, and alluded to her relatives in bitter terms ;?for instance, Amelia
said that George Collings was a forger and a swindler.

Mr. Temple.?This was said in the presence of Maria, I suppose ??It was, and I
asked Maria if it was quite true, and she said it was.

Mr. Miller.?Did you observe anything that would make you doubt what she
stated before ?

Mr. Bowling.?'Nothing at all. What I saw only tended to confirm me in my opinion
of her state of mind. 1 put this question to her (Maria). I first said to her?" You
promised to write me a letter, but you have never done so." She said that she recollected that promise. 1 then told Maria of the 100,000/., and Amelia said that she was
entitled to more than a million. I turned to Maria, and asked her the question ; and
she stated that what her sister had said was quite correct.?There appears to be a strong
attachment between the two sisters. Amelia is a person very easily excited. Maria is
not so much so; she is more cautious and more capable of guard than the other one.
Maria told me that more information upon the subject was to be obtained elsewhere. She
stated, if the chancellor was not satisfied, he could apply to the premier and to Lord
Palmerston, and they could give him the information. There were no delusions except
on those points. She also said that her mother was the heiress of Charles IV.?the
same delusion to which Dr. Winslow referred.

Mr. Temple then read several letters written by Maria Collings.

Dr. Hodgkin examined.
Mr. Temple.?When did you see Miss Maria Collings last, Dr. Hodgkin ??I saw
her on Saturday last. I continue in the same opinion, that she remains under the same
delusions, and still believe her, in fact, to be incapable of taking care of herself.
Mr. Temple.?Has the result of your observations been of such a character as to
confirm your former opinion now, or to make you doubt it in any way ??I am quite
confirmed in my opinion of her state of mind. I think her remaining in a state of
insanity. I talked to her upon some subjects, and heard her say things that convinced
ine that she was in an unsound state of mind. The last time that I saw her, she considered herself no subject of the crown of England, but thought that she was a foreigner
of some superior right. I spoke to her closely about her affairs, and she said it was
nothing to do with her, she was no. subject of the crown, but she was connected with
328 SUICIDE LIFE ASSURANCE.

some higli family abroad. The sisters appeared to be very much attached to each
other ; in fact, so much so, that I thought it was advisable that they should remain
together, although I had formerly considered this undesirable, with regard to their
delusions.

Commissioner.?You say you think this lady is subject to delusions, and that she
is not in her right mind. Now, do you think tbat the effect produced upon the mind
of Maria, may be from the alleged insanity of the other ??I have no doubt but that it
is the case; and with a feeling to improve their state of mind, they mutually keep up
these delusions: they disease each other.
Commissioner.?If Maria were separated from her sister, could she manage her
affairs ??1 cannot say. I should think her a very unlikely person to manage her own
affairs.

The Jury.?Do you consider persons who are labouring under delusions capable of
taking care of their own affairs ??There are some persons who take care of their own
affairs while labouring under some delusions, but 1 cannot say that the delusions are
so strong as they are in the present case.

Mr. Miller.?Now, suppose a person believed that any one under the influence of
Mesmerism could read a book in the next room, what would you call that? Should
you think it a delusion ??Yes, I should. I do not think this lady is a fit person to be
left without control.

Mr. Miller addressed the Court at some length, after which the Commissioner went
carefully through the evidence.

After twenty minutes' deliberation, the jury pronounced the following as the verdict:?
" We, the undersigned jurymen, are unanimously of opinion that Miss Maria Collings is of sound mind, and perfectly capable of taking care of herself and her property.
"Mr. Thomas Cock. Mr. Samuel Spencer.

William Smith. William Newcomr.
Thomas Parvell. James Gale.
David Fitzgerald. Charles Whittingham.
Henry Whitlock. John Dyper.
Samuel Mercer. Charles Edgmon."
George Forster.
Six gentlemen on the panel were dissentients to the verdict. The report of tbe
Commission on Miss Amelia Collings (who labours under the same delusions) will
appear in our next number.
