Miscellaneous
================

Frequent occurrence of Gangrene op the Lungs among the
Insane.?In the course of six years, 1840?1845, there were examined
in the Pathological Theatre at Prague, 3437 bodies, of which 3102 were
from the hospital, and 335 from the asylum for lunatics. Among the
former, gangrene of the lungs occurred fifty-five times?viz., in 1-6 per
cent, of the cases; in the latter, twenty-five times?viz., 7'4 per cent.
This proportion is the more to he relied on, from its being very nearly
the same in each of the six years referred to.?Prciger Vierteljalirschrift,
1847.
470 MISCELLANEOUS.
Demonomania.?Demonomania seldom occurs in early life, and It is
seldom cured; recovery, however, does sometimes take place, as in an
instance of late occurrence ? a young woman, aged twenty-one, in
whom a fright brought on religious despondency, succeeded by de-
monomania. She conceived that " five or six devils had entered into
her, and caused her to renounce the Lord?that she was possessed by
Satan, and was the devil." She would stand for hours together looking
at her nails, occasionally objected to take her food, and had a disposition
to put an end to herself. By the employment of laxative medicines and
the douche (the affusion of cold water upon her head when in the warm
bath) she was, at the end of ten months, completely restored to reason.
Demonomaniacs are in general emaciated?have an expression of great
distress?love solitude?sleep little, and occasionally attempt to commit
suicide. They are sometimes very insensible to bodily suffering?they
can bear to have pins thrust into them without appearing to feel them.
Females are more frequently the subjects of religious insanity than males:
it is in general difficult of cure.?Morison's Physiognomy of Mental
Diseases.
Monomania with Fear.?Fear forms the characteristic feature of a
variety of partial insanity of frequent occurrence. Those avIio labour under
it are afraid of one or more objects, or they have a dread of everything,
in which case the term panaphobia is employed to denote the disorder.
In some cases there is a vague and undefined terror; frequently delu-
sions or erroneous ideas of objects and sounds occur. These delusions
probably have a relation to ideas with which they had previously been
familiar; for instance, the occurrence of fires has given rise to insanity,
with excessive dread of being burnt: a lady of fortune used to spend the
night in being driven in her carriage through the streets of London,
afraid lest her house might take fire. The fear of damnation has often
been the leading feature of insanity in persons of a religious turn of
mind; fear of poverty occurs in some who have, by industry, accumu-
lated a good fortune. Among the objects of fear in the insane, are
poison, robbers, prison, and the police ; persons in this complaint are
inclined to interpret everything to their own disadvantage, to exaggerate
their feelings, and sometimes to ascribe imaginary crimes to themselves.
In consequence of the irritation under which they continually labour,
they are generally emaciated and feeble; from their fear of doing wrong,
they are undecided and restless, and cannot make up their minds to do
the most common acts of life?repeated attempts are made before they
accomplish those of eating, drinking, relieving nature, going to bed or
rising up?occasionally attempts are made to commit suicide, but these
generally fail, on account of their fear and indecision. Of the causes
which produce this variety, the emotion of fear itself sometimes gives
rise to the disorder; it, however, occurs in insanity originating from other
sources: females and young persons are most liable to it.?Ibid.
Causes of Insanity.?Insanity (says Dr. Male, in his " Epitome of
Juridical Medicine") may arise from various causes, as blows or injuries
inflicted on the head or brain; excessive indulgence of the passions of
lust, anger, and revenge; intemperance; repelled discharges; fanaticism;
MISCELLANEOUS. 471
intense study; mortified pride, and disappointed ambition. Grief and
despair, arising from supposed irretrievable misfortunes, frequently occa-
sion this calamity. It is well known, indeed, tliat the number of insane
persons was greatly increased in France by the horrors and misery
induced by the Revolution. I believe (says Dr. M.) a frequent cause
of madness is suffering the mind to dwell too long on one particular
train of thought, whether the subject be real or imaginary. The ideal
lucubrations with which many, particularly young persons, allow their
minds to be amused, and stray in the regions of fancy, called castle-
building, or day-dreaming, I conceive weakens the mind, and, abstracting
it from real and useful objects, absorbs its energies in fanciful and futile
speculations, which often lead to insanity. Dr. J. Johnstone, in his
work on Madness, also says, " It may readily be supposed that a pecu-
liar structure of the brain disposes to madness; but what that peculiar
structure is, has never been demonstrated: it may also be readily pre-
sumed, that a peculiar structure of the brain may be generated, as well
as of feature and limb." Again, the same author remarks, " Of all the
hereditary diseases, madness is supposed to be the most constant and
persevering; for, even if one generation escape, the taint is presumed to
cling to the succeeding branches, till, either by admixture with a purer
stock, or by education or management, it is neutralized or drained
away."
Case of a Remarkable Failure of Memory.?The following .
extraordinary case was published in an American work many years ago.
The patient was a clergyman, about thirty years of age; a man of learn-
ing and acquirements, who, at the termination of a severe illness, was
found to have lost the recollection of everything, even the names of the
most common objects. His health being restored, he began to acquire
knowledge just as a child does. After learning the names of objects, he
was taught to read, and after this, began to learn the Latin language.
He had made considerable progress when, one day in reading his lesson
with his brother, who was his teacher, he suddenly stopped, and put his
hand to his head. Being asked why he did so, he replied, " I feel a
peculiar sensation in my head; and now it appears to me that I knew
all this before." From that time he rapidly recovered his faculties. A
state of the mental faculties somewhat analogous occasionally occurs in
diseases of simple exhaustion. Many years ago (says Dr. Abercrombie)
I attended a lady who, from a severe and neglected diarrhoea, was re-
duced to a state of great weakness, with remarkable failure of her
memory. She had lost the recollection of a particular period, of about
ten or twelve years. She had formerly lived in another city, and the
period of which she had lost the recollection was that during which she
had lived in Edinburgh. Her ideas were consistent with each other, but
they referred to things as they stood before her removal. She recovered
her health after a considerable time, but remained in a state of imbecility
resembling the dotage of old age.
Lunacy.?It often happens that persons may converse for some time
with a lunatic, and find him apparently composed and rational; he will
discuss the floating topics of the day as another man; accord with the
472 MISCELLANEOUS.
most enlightened on the general principles of morals, and correctly esti-
mate the light and shadow of human conduct. If the observer should
here retire, he might be convinced of his sanity; but let him protract the
discourse?let him touch the fatal string which throws his mind into
discord?let him draw the hair-trigger which inflames the combustible
materials of his disease, and he will be surprised, if not alarmed, at the
explosion. The sweeping tyranny of madness scorns the demarcation
which limits the sober mind; and it should likewise be taken into
account, that the subjects which constitute the insanity of a person, are
the prominent features of his mind, and are more frequently recurred to
than any other. It is true we may discuss ordinary topics like other
men; but this to him is a species of by-play, and he soon reverts to the
interest or catastrophe of his drama. Whatever may be the subject of
discourse, and however rationally he may appear to treat it, the expe-
rienced practitioner will expect, and he will not often be disappointed,
to find that by some unaccountable association, even ordinary topics are
linked with his darling delusion,?the mass of his mind will point out
that the smallest rivulet flows into the great stream of his derangement.
?Haslam.
