Outlines of Lectures on the Nature, Cause, and Treatment of Insanity
=====================================================================

Jfttscellamous Notices.
By Sir A. Morison, M.D. Edited by his Son, Thos. C. Morison,
Esq. London : Highley. 1848.
We had intended fully analysing tliis work in our present number, but
owing to a pressure of matter, we have been obliged reluctantly to defer
its consideration for some future occasion. We cannot, however, permit
the Journal to go to press without directing the notice of the profession
to these Lectures. They will find the volume full of valuable informa-
tion. The notes of the son will be read with great interest. In the
next number of the Journal of Psychological Medicine, Ave propose
doing ourselves the pleasure of reviewing in detail this treatise.
Report of the Recent Progress of Psychological Medicine. By C. Lock-
hart Robertson, M.D., Medical Staff, attached to the Royal Mili-
tary Lunatic Asylum of Yarmouth, &c.
We have to acknowledge the receipt of this reprint from Dr. Ranking's
half-yearly Abstract of Medical Sciences, vol. vii., 1848. The author
is a gentleman of considerable talent, and bids fair to take a high posi-
580 MISCELLANEOUS NOTICES.
tion in liis profession. He lias paid much attention to the subject of
insanity, and Dr. Ranking has shown much judgment in selecting Dr.
Robertson to write the report of the progress of psychological medicine.
He has performed his duty admirably. The article in question contains
a faithful analysis of the works which have appeared in connexion with
this subject, since the publication of the last volume of Dr. Ranking's
annual abstract.
Twenty-eighth Annual Report of the Dundee Royal Asylum for 1848.
Since the publication of the last Report, fifty-two patients have been
admitted into this asylum. In most of these cases the disease had not
been of more than twelve months' duration. The deaths in the asylum
have exceeded the general average. The report, on the whole, is ex-
tremely satisfactory. The tabular documents at the conclusion appear
to be drawn up with great care.
The Report of the Medical Officers of the Lunatic Asylum for the
County of Lancaster. 1848.
At the date of the last report, there were in this asylum G81 patients.
During the past year, the admissions have amounted to 259 ; 11G have
been discharged ; 59 have died ; making the present number of inmates
765. In comparison with former years, the number of admissions have
been greater, and the mortality less. Since the last report, two addi-
tional Avards on the male side have been opened for the reception of
patients. On the subject of the schools established in this excellent
asylum, the report says :?
" It is now more than six years since the first attempt was made to bring the
influence of tuition into operation as a means of improving the inmates. In the
first instance, we endeavoured to accomplish this object through the medium of a
few of the better-informed and cnpable patients. It was thought that, when
carried out in this way, the schools would serve a good purpose, not only in giving
instruction to the ignorant, but also in providing a suitable occupation for the
better educated and intelligent. For some time, one of the day rooms on each
side of the building was appropriated to the purposes of a school room, and the
patients were conducted thither each morning. Considerable inconvenience arose
from this arrangement, in consequence of the necessity of bringing patients through
the different wards to school; and, moreover, the desirable influences of education
could only be brought into operation on a very small portion of the inmates. After
a while, it was determined to try how far evening schools could be made to serve
the purpose in view. The experiment was first conducted in the winter months,
among that class who work in the land, and who live together in a separate
building. Some little difficulty was experienced, in making the attempt, to induce
nearly all the inmates of a ward to enter upon school exercises. Ey a little per-
severance and determination, however, this was at length surmounted, and the
system was forthwith brought into operation in every ward throughout the esta-
blishment.
" It is the custom at Lancaster to keep the patients employed, as much as pos-
sible, up to four o'clock in the afternoon. At this hour, all work in the wards is
put away, and the patients are encouraged to enter on different recreations and
amusements. But, on those evenings appropriated to tuition, the patients are formed
into different classes, and the instruction is conducted by the attendants and nurses
of each ward, aided by a few more able patients, who act as monitors. During the
past winter, we have derived much valuable assistance from the kind co-operation
MISCELLANEOUS NOTICES. 581
of the chaplain, Mr. Danby, who has materially contributed in forwarding this
important work.
" In addition to the evening schools, the daily training of the idiotic forms a
part of each morning's employment in one ward on each side of the house.'?p. 6.
The following is a summary respecting tlie ages of those patients in
the asylum congenitally affected :?
No. under 25 years. Average age of the whole.
Females 106   26   39
Males 107   35   34
" The result of this inquiry proves, as might naturally have been anticipated,
that a great many of those born mentally imperfect, amongst the lower classes, are
not brought into the returns until they liave reached that period of life when, with
an ordinary amount of faculty, they would have been able to maintain themselves.
Whatever may be the circumstances which lead to this?whether it be from an
unwillingness to report, on the part of the parents, from an undefined dread that
their helpless children will be removed to the workhouse?or, whether it arise from
a refusal on the part of relieving officers to render pecuniary aid on behalf of those
so juvenile?the fiict is certain, that the large body of idiotic paupers do not attract
notice until they have passed the period of youth. They are brought forward and
cast on the public, as a permanent charge, at a time of life when little hope is left
of remedying their defects, and rendering them capable of contributing to their
own support.
" If to the returns already made of those idiots who receive parochial relief, we
were able to add the number of very young idiotic pauper children for whom
assistance has not yet been sought, and if, also, we were able to ascertain the actual
number belonging to that class of the poor placed just above pauperism, we should
have a more just idea of the extent to which such mental imperfections prevail
among the lower grades of society. There is no doubt that it would be necessary
to make a very large addition to the figures 503, which, according to the existing
returns, represent the numerical amount of the idiotic poor in Lancashire.
" In the State of Massachusetts, a thorough inquiry has lately been made on this
subject, and it appears that out of 543 idiots visited by the commission, only 106
are supported at the public expense. Although the condition of the poor, in this
county, and in Massachusetts, may be widely different, yet this fact may serve to
give some idea how far the number of individuals now receiving parochial relief
in Lancashire, on account of congenital mental imperfections, falls short of those
for whom some further care and provision appear desirable."?p. 8.
It is lamentable to think that juvenile idiotic paupers are not brought
under the cognizance of the Poor Law authorities, until the period of
youth is past. Owing to this circumstance, we have reason to believe
that idiocy prevails to a greater extent in this country than would at
first sight be imagined. It is justly observed in the report that,?
" It is incumbent on those who are in any way responsible for these helpless
beings, to endeavour to devise and establish the necessary means of rescuing them
from a life of degradation, by training them up in orderly habits, and applying
their small share of faculty to appropriate occupation."?p. 9.
The following extract in relation to the subject of idiocy will be read
with interest:?
" There are some districts in the north of Lancashire, where idiocy is so pre-
valent as to give rise to the opinion that local causes contribute to its origin. In
one particular district, comprising a population of 2250, it has been ascertained
that there are no less than eleven idiots, the children of parents belonging to
the agricultural and labouring classes, two only of whom are returned as paupers.
Some investigation has been made in these villages, with a view of ascertaining
whether any information could be derived which might throw light on the causes
producing so striking a prevalence of congenital imperfections of mind. The
582 MISCELLANEOUS NOTICES.
parents are generally intelligent and industrious, and although living in a remote
and sea-bound part of the country, where intermarriage might he supposed to he
frequent, yet it did not appear that this cause had contributed to the degeneracy of
offspring. In most instances, one child only in a family was found affected, the
others appeared healthy, lively children, evidently capable of, and disposed to
bestow, an affectionate care over their weaker brother. At the same time that
such solitary examples appear to have arisen in different houses, yet it is singular
that all the children in one family, amounting to no less than nine, were affected
from birth. Both parents are intelligent, labouring people, they are not related by
consanguinity, nor are they aware of any hereditary tendency to insanity in either
family, the sole trace heing that of slight eccentricities in one of the ancestors.
Only one child out of the nine is now living, the others having died at various
ages between infancy and manhood, hut all surviving long enough to leave no
doubt that each was born mentally deficient. Had all these children survived, the
proportion of the idiotic in this particular district would have been considerably
increased.
" Before leaving this subject, it may be as well to notice, that a still greater amount
of idiocy is found to prevail among the poor who live in some of the secluded dales
formed by the range of hills separating Lancashire from Yorkshire. In one par-
ticular locality, the proportion is so high as to reach one in a hundred of the
inhabitants. And it may be remarked, that here intermarriage has evidently
formed one of the circumstances which have given rise to this degeneracy. But
not to dwell further on the causes of imperfect cerebral development, it is satisfac-
tory to think that the means of remedying such defects are now practised with
success; and therefore, it has been thought desirable rather to direct attention to
the alleviation of the evil, than to devote much time to the investigation of its
causes."?pp. 9, 10.
It would appear, according to a return of tlie number of idiotic and
insane paupers in the different townships of the county of Lancaster,
made by the Poor Law medical officers in 1847, that there were?
Idiots 198
Imbeciles 305
Insane 185
Total .... 688
The Ethnological Journal. Edited by Luke Burke, Esq. Nos. 1, 2, 3,
and 4. London: (monthly.) Red Lion Court, Fleet-street.
"VVe give this new periodical a most friendly greeting. The subject
which Mr. Burke has proposed to elucidate, is one of much interest and
importance. The articles which have appeared in the magazine are
happily selected, and are written with ability. The journal is deserving
of success. "We are pleased to hear that its circulation is increasing
both at home and abroad. We hope ere long to consider somewhat in
detail the topics discussed in the numbers before us. For the present
we must be satisfied with giving it a hearty welcome.
The Morning Side Mirror.
We have, through the courtesy of our Scotch friends, received several
copies of this interesting little periodical, written and printed in the
Morning Side Asylum for Lunatics. The profits of this publication are
devoted to the reading-room of the asylum. The articles are well
written, showing talent, spirit, and wit. From a number before us we
select the following extract of interest:?
MISCELLANEOUS NOTICES. 583
" In the heart of the Alps, and at some four thousand feet above the surface of
the sea?surrounded by all the grandeur of Swiss scenery, and beyond the noxious
influences -which render insalubrious many of the most beautiful spots of that land
of heroes and poets, like some out-post of that civilization and philanthropy, the
essence of which it so fully represents?lies the Hospital of Abendberg, the first,
and, we believe, as yet, the only establishment founded with the avowed purpose
of curing Idiocy. This malady, which is very prevalent in Switzerland, is asso-
ciated with, if not caused by, various diseases of a purely physical nature, such as
scrofula, rickets, and bronchocele; takes the name of Cretinism; and, like its con-
comitants, is transmitted from parents to their offspring, assuming forms the most
repugnant, and exhibiting humanity in its most degraded condition.
" From motives purely scientific, as much as from the humane and truly Chris-
tian tendency of such an institution, we should not hesitate to undertake a difficult
journey, and would think lightly of many a sacrifice which should enable us to
visit an establishment having so many claims to notoriety, and possessing so
much intrinsic merit. Without having been called upon to perforin any such act
of self-denial, we have been, through the kindness of our Resident Physician,
favoured, not with a sight and inspection of Abendberg, but with that which we
consider of greater interest still, a few hours' conversation with its celebrated pro-
jecter and founder, Dr. Guggenbiihl. Fain would we treat our readers to a glance
into the benevolent and ingenious mind of the gifted individual by whose earnest
and sustained labours science and humanity have gained so much; but as the task
would require further opportunities, besides a proportionate amount of talent, to
?which we can lay no claim, we shall content ourselves with a few observations
gathered from his conversation; being moreover, assisted by a pamphlet on the
subject, from which we hope to gather some information not uninteresting to our
readers.
" As affording the best idea of the truly Christian spirit which animates our
kind and benevolent doctor, we cannot do better than translate the following pas-
sage, occurring in one of his letters, published in 1846 :?
" ' To improve the deplorable condition of these unhappy beings, and, with the
assistance of God, to form and instruct them, until they become useful members of
society, is nothing less than accomplishing an intellectual resurrection; it is in our
epoch the greatest miracle of Christian charity, and one of the most noble mis-
sionary labours undertaken in the service of God. Let him not boast of his Chris-
tianity who does not feel himself disposed to do his best towards furthering this
end: he is a man devoid of heart, and his soul is a prey to a species of Cretinism
far more dangerous than that which attacks the physical and moral nature of these
poor children.'
" To prove the importance of his subject, Dr. G. has collected, from various
sources, information which goes to show that even in Austria, Cretinism has be-
come so prevalent along the margins of the Danube, large and populous parishes
are to be found, where, at the annual recruitment, not a single individual can be
had capable of bearing arms. In many parts of Switzerland and Germany there is
scarcely a family that is not burthened with at least one of these unhappy and help-
less beings; while many families are to be met with composed altogether of cretins
and half-cretins.
" It is evident from the above, that one hospital in Switzerland, containing only
about forty children, is far from being sufficient to relieve the amount of disease
which such statements indicate; nevertheless, Dr. Guggenbuhl's Institution has,
since its establishment, greatly ameliorated the sanitary condition of the country.
Many of the children, who are often taken in at the early age of six months, are
soon cured, or so far improved as to enable their parents to carry on the same sys-
tem of education, for which purpose they are supplied with ample directions from
the doctor. None of them are kept beyond the age of seven years, it being found
that, after this period, little can be done for such as are proof against all previous
treatment.
" Besides the therapeutic and hygienic treatment, which partakes more or less of
the plan followed in all cases of analogous disease, particular attention is paid to the
intellectual and moral. This consists in ' giving the child a consciousness of the
principles which form the foundation of its faculties, and in otherwise favouring the
development of the intelligence. We begin by leading him into comparing, and the
584 MISCELLANEOUS NOTICES.
perception of analogies, and differences between various objects; and this is done
by proceeding according to degrees of size, colour, form, substance; and next we
resume these judgments in detail, and proceed to the formation of a general idea;
and, thereafter, to certain conclusions drawn from these general ideas. When, by-
previous efforts, we succeed in awakening in the child the sentiment, that the exist-
ence of visible and limited matter reposes alone on the idea of the eternal and infi-
nite?that the good and the just alone are agreeable to the Deity, while evil and
injustice are displeasing to him,?then w.e see reason unveil and manifest itself.'
" ' This sentiment,' adds Dr. Guggenbiihl, ' obtains great predominance with a
great number of children at the moment when the mind awakens from its lethargy;
and we have for a long time observed that their conception of the existence of God
precedes the comprehension of such objects as fall within the sphere of their senses,
such as a table and the like. It is the same with the sentiment they experience,
that God manifests his presence in the phenomena of nature, so varied and so mag-
nificently laid before their eyes in the neighbourhood of Abendberg. It is neces-
sary to have witnessed the amazement, the joy, arid the admiration of these children
on regarding the sun rising and setting, the rainbow, or while listening to the re-
verberation of the thunder, in order to comprehend the truth of Diesterweg's say-
ing, that " many an adult might be ashamed of his indifference and moral torpor in
the presence of the phenomena of nature, when he finds himself beside the innocent
child whose attention is thereby charmed, and whose joy and admiration know no
limits." '
" That the labours of Dr. Guggenbiihl have not failed in reaping the harvest
which every well-intended and sustained effort must needs produce, may be gathered
from the following extracts, translated from his letters, published in Zurich, and
embodied in the Archives des Sciences Physiques et Nuturelles.
" ' Many of our beloved pupils, who returned to their homes two years ago, have
suffered no relapse, and their faculties have become sufficiently developed to enable
them to follow the public schools with success.' Farther confirmation of the above may
be found in the following, written in 1847, and a year subsequent to our first extract:
4 Since the commencement of our labours, we may consider this summer as the most
interesting period. This we owe both to the activity and devotion of our assistants,
and to the creation of a species of institute for the mothers of children affected with
cretinism, who are desirous of becoming acquainted with the details of its treat-
ment.' And again?' Since the publication of my last report (184G), a good num-
ber of pupils have left the establishment; the majority of them had mastered their
elementary instruction, and were, physically speaking, sufficiently developed to
enable them to embrace a profession. The worst cases have been improved; and
there has been no death. Our experience continues to prove that the caprices of
these children soon give place to amiable sentiments, affection, and gratitude. There
are some at present who write very pretty letters to their parents, and have a very
remarkable knowledge of geography, natural history, &c. &c. I am more and
more convinced that the spectacle of the phenomena of nature furnish the most
efficient means to call into activity their torpid faculties, since these phenomena are
of daily recurrence in our beautiful locality, and supply the mind at every moment
with a new stimulus. At present I am engaged in experiments relative to the
action of several vegetables calculated to combat this disease, and which grow in
abundance in our vicinity.' ....
" We might add much on this comparatively new subject, both from the work
before us, and the conversation of Dr. Guggenbiihl, to which we have listened with
the greatest interest; but it would far surpass the limits of this notice, and might
possibly tire the patience of at least some of our readers. We have only to add,
in reference to his visit to this establishment, where he spent the best part of the
day, that he expressed himself highly pleased with its internal arrangements, and
present condition ; and having no reason to complain of these ourselves, we do not
say Amen, and bow to his better judgment in such matters. After tea he repaired
with Dr. Skae and ourselves to the ball-room, it being one of our assembly nights;
and here, again, we were delighted to find that the strict good order and harmony
observed, were to him so many additional sources of delight; and we were no
less pleased with his remark, that although he bad visited the most important
establishments of the kind in Europe, he had nowhere found more order and
regularity, or a more complete application of the enlightened methods of treating
ON HALLUCINATIONS. 585
a malady in which the body of the material or?an, not the mind, the immaterial
essence, is at fault. He holds the same opinion in reference to cretinism, and
hence his self-devotion, his almost missionary, or more than missionary zeal, and
religious fervour in his praiseworthy efforts to awaken the soul from a lethargic
indolence and insensibility to its vital interests, for which, in its abstract existence,
it has no absolute relation; having never been intended by our all-beneficent
Creator to drag on that less than vegetative life which our ignorance, or worse,
have entailed upon so many of the children of men."
