The Power of the Soul over the Body, Considered in Relation to Health ana Morals
=================================================================================

Art. II.-
?>y (jrEOKGE Moore, M.U., Member ot the
Royal College of Physicians, &c. &c. Third Edition. London:
Longman and Co., 1846. 8vo, pp. 364.
We are the living images, or plastic models, of the past. Our minds
are the formation of ages long since gone by, as our manhood is the
moral product of the truths or the errors instilled into us by the nurse-
maid, the mother, the master, or the friend. Such as we are born and
grow up, so we die?each succeeding generation advancing a step higher
in the scale of intellectual and spiritual life, and excelling the one from
which it took its rise by the onward movement of acquired experience
and habit. The children of to-day are necessarily wiser than the child
of four thousand years ago. Even those masses of the population
which we, in our palmy days of wealth and pride, disdainfully regard
as ignorant, are more enlightened now than the similar masses were
during the agrarian disturbances at Rome, or in the great plague that
desolated Athens, so forcibly described by the historian Thucydides.
Homer's famous heroes were vulgar pugilists when compared with the
better born and far more highly educated military officers of modern
times. Nothing is stationary. There is no such thing as a statu quo.
Good and evil are evermore tending to their opposite results. The
evil is always ceasing through its malicious tendencies to self-destruction,
and the good is as unceasingly multiplying into itself, in consequence of
its own undying vitality. The infant colony of Aden, on its leafless
promontory in Arabia, at the entrance of the Red Sea, is beginning at a
point of elevation in the scale of civilized society unattainable by Jeru-
salem under David, by the city of Paris when Clovis ruled the Franks,
or by London in the romantic days of King Alfred the Great. Real
knowledge and conventional manners are better understood as time rolls
on; and, according to the several degrees of virtue, (actual vice apart,)
the happiness of the entire world, like that of the individual, advances
in an inverse ratio to the bloom of youth and the number of the days
of our years.
Behold the mental influence of man on man, when reviewed in the
MENTAL INFLUENCES. 367
phantasmagoric mirror of his history. Science,* the sentinel of time,
eyes the past, and gives the watchword to those who challenge him at
his post. Who goes there1? A comrade. The pass? How goes the
world 1 From youth to manhood, from manhood to the grave.
But, as nations influence nations, and ages direct and control ages, so
do individuals control, direct, or influence other individuals. The ruling
mind, for the time being, is the prevailing idea of a party, or of the age.
A Cromwell, a Caesar, a Charlemagne, a Louis XIV., a Henry VIII. of
England, and a Martin Luther, are, as it were, the algebraic signs re-
presenting the moral quantity which they themselves endeavour to
enunciate and enact; and, as they derive the force of their particular
genius from the quality of the times in which they move, so do they
reflect that very quality in its most intense, personified, and emphatic
shape, back upon the world at large, thus influencing the minds of those
over whom they are allowed to bear dominion, rule, or sway. This is the
reason why one mind is able to hold the ascendancy over other minds?
few, many, or all?for the time being. It is the means of order, the
soul of success, and the public avowal of a great principle. In the midst
of the turmoil, carnage, smoke, and din of battle, the general catches a
word from the lips of his dying aide-de-camp, and immediately gives
the command by which a division, a brigade, a regiment, or it may be
a battalion only, is advanced or retired on the field. A chill passes
with electric celerity through the opposing lines, freezing their courage,
like the exact degree of cold that glazes a pond with ice on a frosty
night. Victory is no longer doubtful. One mind, expressed by a single
act, has influenced both armies, and renders success as certain to the one
side, as defeat is unavoidable on the other. And how is this 1 It is the
practical result of a well-conceived idea.
And ideas?what are they 1 Are they not hard, substantial stuff,
more durable than flesh and blood, and as everlasting as the ages of ages ?
The idea of this world must last for ever, and the idea of God is from
all eternity. For the idea of anything is the evidence (the mental, not a
legal proof) of the thing itself, inasmuch as we can have no idea of that
which does not exist; while that of which we have an idea is as palpable
to our senses as if it were actually visible to our eyes. Faith, which
is the evidence of things not seen, is the intuition of mental verities.
The influence of mind over mind is all-extensive. It needs nor
speech, nor sign, nor look, nor deed?its actual being is alone sufficient.
A priest traverses the woods and prairies of the far west with nothing
but his breviary, a crucifix, and a fiddle, under his arm. He is seen to
pray, and is heard to chant to the sound of his musical instrument;
and the wild Indians, rushing out of their cabins, crawl around him, and
listen and wonder. He cuts down a sapling, and, fixing a stick at its
top, makes a cross of it, and plants it in the earth. In broken accents
he explains to them the meaning of redemption. They listen, wonder,
understand, and believe. They next solicit baptism; and eventually
* Science (scientia) is the outwavil knowledge of things; conscience (conscientia)
is, or ought to be, the intimate knowledge of ourselves.
368 MENTAL INFLUENCES.
cease to do evil, and learn to do well. Such was the history of Paraguay
?the achievement of an idea due to the genius of a Michael Angelo
Buonarotti.
We live as it were in an atmosphere of mind, as we do in the che-
mical atmosphere that envelops the earth; and, though we cannot live
without inhaling the air, yet we go on living unconscious of, or inat-
tentive to, the different effects produced upon our corporeal system hy
the various vicissitudes which it is incessantly undergoing. And thus,
as our feelings change with the complexion of the day, so are our senti-
ments being perpetually modified, confirmed, suppressed, or evoked by
the relationships we contract, the words we interchange, the looks we
perceive, and the passions fired within us by others.
Dr. Moore has made an attempt to demonstrate the power of the soul
over the body, or, in other words, to show that the living human being
is a spiritual and rational, rather than a sensual animal?that human
actions are but the mind in deed. The train of reasoning with which he
opens his subject is logical and correct:?The phenomena of life are the
exterior evidences of an interior principle. Whatever really appears on
the surface must, it is evident, proceed from a reality still more potent
and profound than itself. A phenomenon once exhibited implies a
cause, inasmuch as there cannot be an effect without a cause. Of the
phenomena of life, the cause must necessarily be an intimate one.
Now, as every effect is in proportion to its cause, it follows, that all
the exterior phenomena are comprised within the interior principle of
life; because, if the cause did not contain the properties of the pheno-
mena in a super-eminent degree, the phenomena themselves could never
be produced. Consequently, the intimate cause of the vital phenomena
is a supernatural one, and is that which we call mind, or, in its highest
degree, the soul. The brain is the organic focus of this mystical cause.
If the brain is diseased or deranged, the mystical cause becomes more
or less inoperative; and incoherence, delirium, insanity, or idiotism are
in their several degrees the inevitable result. Not that the brain is in
itself the madness, but that inasmuch as it is the prime agent of the
soul, the spirit is distorted or obscured, or, more properly speaking, mis-
represented, as soon as its agent the brain is defective or false. Con-
sequently, we are not corporeal, but spiritual beings, since the body only
does the bidding of the mind, which is the superior directing and in-
dwelling potentate; and, as a mind aboriginally weak gives rise to irra-
tional actions, so a diseased nervous system ruffles or darkens a mind
the most luminous and serene.
The touching tale of Laura Bridgman?blind, deaf, and dumb?with-
out a companion, without knowledge?is an instance of solitude to which
the tragic poem of the prisoner of the " Castle of Chillon," or the his-
torical senigma of " VHomme au Masque de Fer," is a comedy. In her
case the mind was more than latent; it was self-existent and alive, and
it only required the ingenious touch of Dr. Howe to quicken it within
its sightless shrine. That the consciousness of God is intuitive we can-
not doubt, since intuition is the highest faculty of the soul, underivable
from extrinsic sources. Our external senses connect us with the ex-
terior world, but, beyond this range of ideas, the mind arrives at the
MENTAL INFLUENCES. 369
more remote conclusions by the operation of its own native powers of
insight, comparison, ratiocination, and judgment. Idiotism may depend,
not on ocular blindness, indeed, but on an inert brain or cerebral blind-
ness, in which the mind may subsist as potentially as it undoubtedly
does in the oval germ, in the foetus, or in the scarcely conscious infant
at the breast.
Although we are not disposed to enter upon a defence of popular
phrenology, yet we cannot avoid remarking, that the brain being the
material organ of thought, no more leads to scepticism, than the acknow-
ledged fact of the hand being the material instrument of the will in each
particular act of daily intercourse or responsibility, leads to the conclu-
sion of the materiality of human volition; for the ultimate molecules of
matter can never become spirit, neither can a primordial ray of spirit
ever become matter. Sound logic, which denies an absurdity, is the
safeguard of phrenology and the bulwark against materialism; and
natural reason, which teaches the nature of matter, assures us that per-
sonality is an attribute of the body, whereas the reason, which proves
that identity is a quality of the soul, is supernatural; consequently, the
supernatural mind may exist without the nature of matter; for the soul
is more than matter in the same sense as God is more than either.
Two philosophers, who Ave re crossing a lake in a ferry, fell into a dis-
pute with each other on metaphysics and religion. Close beside them
sat a Capuchin friar, listening attentively to all that passed. On landing
at the other side, the two wise men addressed the monk, and said?
" Good father, you have heard each of us plead our cause, which of the
two is in the right ?" The Capuchin, recollecting himself, replied?" I
have listened to your discussion with the greatest pleasure, but do you
wish me to tell you the truth?" " By all means!" they eagerly ex-
claimed. " Then," returned the monastic, " I own I have not under-
stood a word of what you were saying!" Many of our readers may be
inclined to agree with the honest Capuchin in the same opinion respect-
ing our own lucubrations.
Putting aside duality of the mind, already considered in a previous
article of this journal, as well as Iieichenbach's transverse polarization
of the body, (an odd question,) the foregoing is a succinct digest of
Dr. Moore's first part of his work. He leans to the view of the nervous
system being a galvanic apparatus, but Ave must declare that the brain,
if similar to, is not identical Avith the voltaic pile; nor can Ave, in the
present state of our knoAA'ledge, admit that electricity is more than an
agent (such as our daily bread is likeAvise) in the manifestations of life.
Concerning the resurrection of the flesh Avliich he struggles so manfully
to vindicate, every neophyte Avould, if he Avere asked Avhat is meant by
the resurrection of the body, ansAver, that Ave shall rise again Avith the
same bodies at the day of judgment.
But to the man of the Avorld all this is mere speculation; for Avhat is
the practical result? What, but the proper treatment of the mind, of
Avliich we can knoAv nothing, unless Ave take pains to investigate and
understand its nature and properties. The inquiry is unavoidably an
intricate one, and the practice of the highest importance. The mind
can destroy the body. Persons have been knoAvn to drop down dead
370 MENTAL INFLUENCES.
on the receipt of a mental shock, and others to (lie of joy; some have
died for grim religion, and some for love; others have died through
fear of want, while not a few sad, woful mortals have, through the
dread of dying, died all their lives. So common are these catastrophes,
that it only requires the least informed to call instances to their recol-
lection, which they have either known themselves, or been credibly
informed of by their acquaintances. It is the influence of the mind on
ourselves or on those about us, that constitutes the happiness or the
misery of the world; and it is the malignant influence of the mind on
the body, or of the body on the mind, (somatic or psychical,) that fills
our asylums with patients, our homes with nonentities, and our parishes
with maniacs. Do you see yon gaunt, meagre woman, whose rueful
features are stained as it were with saffron, and whose lack-lustre and
jaundiced eye looks viewless on the bustling crowd as she lags along
that dirty alley? See the scanty rags that hang from her waist, her
slip-shod heel, and her lanky, wriggling fingers crossed upon either
shoulder. Dost know her history? 'Tis a common one:?ungoverned
youth, abused feelings, the death of those she loved, ignorance of moral
worth, want, despair, and banishment from kith and kin. But here
comes one whose mien and intellectual bearing bespeak a higher class,
and whose eye beams with the fire of active genius and benevolence
combined. He catches sight of the wretched woman we have just
noticed, and his purse is already in his hand, from which he is pouring
out its contents into her squalid and skinny palm. She stands fixed
before him, a spectre of amazement; and he is addressing words of
comfort to her with astonishing volubility, for at one glance he read off
her history in her face, and with the generous impulse of an overflowing
heart he means to do what Providence has in mercy, or in chastise-
ment, withdrawn?give her abundance and her youth again! The
dirty boys are crowding round them both, designing to share the spoil
or seize upon the plunder they have already marked out for their own.
He reads their intentions too, and, look, how tightly he has caught the
most cunning of the gang by the ear, and is kicking him soundly on
account of his premeditated mischief. Now, this man is likewise as
mad as the woman whose madness he pities. What a fine forehead he
exhibits as he takes off his hat to wipe his brow dropping with per-
spiration, and liis mouth lathered with foam! How he trembles; and
his lips, how blue they are! The reason, sir, I pray you ? An over-
worked brain?the necessity of bringing up a large family with all the
agremens of life about them. He lived in the streets daily in order
that he might be enabled to pass six restless hours every night in his
own palace for the best part of a quarter of a century. If not mad-
men, there are many other fools like this demented gentleman in this
vast metropolis. It is the order of the day. But turn your eyes
towards that paltry dwelling, the window of which opens into the public
passage; and Avhat do you see? There is a youth, pale and wan, with
his head shaven and the recent scars from cupping-glasses on each
of his temples. Surely he does not need the loss of blood in that chair-
less, fireless, carpetless apartment, with the bare cupboard yonder, the
door of which is half open, in the opposite corner? What is he about?
MENTAL INFLUENCES. 871
He smiles and talks to himself, and is continually taking out little books
and religious tracts from an old deal box, and putting them back again.
Now he is pretending to write with a pen without ink; and then he
folds up the paper, and fancies he is despatching it on some serious
errand, while he turns up his blanched eyeballs towards the ceiling, and
clasps his bloodless hands together in an attitude of prayer. His lean,
worn-out mother stands at the door watching him. He was her hope
and the pride of the family, who was to make their fortune and raise
them once more to their proper standing in the world, with a good
dinner and a clean table-cloth spread before them. But, alas! his
intellect, prematurely developed, and imprudently exerted, broke down
in the noble effort to cope with his betters in the task of science.
Life can destroy life, as surely by the over-indulgence of our holiest
virtues as by the practice of the most abandoned vices. This remark,
however, which is but a truism, does not go au fond of the question,
nor show us how so imponderable an essence as spirit can act upon so
gross a substance as the flesh, and energize with so mighty a force in
the duration, mode, development, and final issue of our being.
The world of mind is full of wonders. There have been blind
sculptors,blind musicians, blind philosophers, (no great wonder, perhaps!)
and blind watchmakers. The memory has been the most alive, when
all the other senses have been dead; and even the art of seeing to per-
fection has been the acutest when the hearing has been the most obtuse.*
Sleep has its marvels. Tartini, the musician; Coleridge, in " Kubla
Khan;" and Ceednion, the Saxon poet, were each of them fast asleep
when they conceived their ecstatic visions in poetry, rhyme, and the
concord of sweet sounds. Divines, or professors of medicine, have, like
Dr. Haycock of Oxford, composed fluent sermons in their dreams,
which they could not venture to pronounce in public during the waking
hours of their sober senses. Ladies, too, have turned parsons in the
warm and genial atmosphere of the land of dreams; and maid-servants
have, moreover, been known to sing melodies and entone canticles of
joy with emphatic energy in those hours of lucid repose, such as when
Lady Macbeth washed her hands and indiscreetly confessed her sins with
her eyes wide open and her senses dead within her. Sleep, likewise, has
its walkers; and the word somnambulist, which has passed into a pro-
verb, forms the theme of one of Bellini's most enchanting operas.
Connected with this ethereal condition, is that of double consciousness,
and the threefold consciousness of mesmerism?the morbid, the mes-
meric, and the normal?which remains to be explained by those who
deliberately call into question the reality of its existence. Coleridge's
servant recited at midnight Latin, Greek, and Rabbinical Hebrew, of
which she did not recollect a word during the insipid and vulgar in-
tervals of her daylight gossip; and Dr. Pritchard's woodman, who went
suddenly mad one night, only remembered the axe he had left in the
hollow trunk of a tree the evening before, on awaking one day to
reason after several years of oblivious delirium. This man pertina-
ciously speaks nothing but his native Welsh to-day, because he has just
* Vide " The Lost Senses," by Dr. Kitto.
372 MENTAL INFLUENCES.
received a blow on the head; that child remembers in a trance all the
terrible circumstances of the surgical operation of trephining which
had relieved it years previously from pressure on the brain; and another
person dies in the full possession of deliberate speech and cool, collected
reason, after having passed a length of time in stupor or fatuity, in
consequence of living with more than a pint of water within his skull.
Some have been wise only when they were mad, and foolish only when
they were in the approved condition of their common senses. Dr.
Willis mentions a gentleman who expected with impatience the
periodic return of his mania, for then only were his wits alive,
and his genius replete with images; while, alas! a few have (strange
to say) never told the truth except in moody absence of mind,
when they accidentally forgot what they were saying. A gentleman,
who eventually became a noted writer, grew up very stupid at first,
until, one day, something snapped in his head, accompanied with
a report (to himself) as loud as that of a pistol, and for ever afterwards
he was just as clever as he had been stupid. A clergyman, who was
quite a Cicero at his Latin, swooned in the midst of a discourse on the
subject of his favourite language, and on recovering from his fit, awoke
and found himself a perfect ignoramus?his Latin was gone; until,
after a tedious interval of going to school again, it unexpectedly returned
to his memory as completely as ever. Casper Hauser, Peter the wild
boy, and the thoughtless experiment inflicted by Psammetichus on the
two children, for the sake of discovering the primitive tongue, as re-
lated by Herodotus, in Euterpe, are extraordinary phenomena of some
problematical service to those who maintain or deny the doctrine of
innate ideas. Some have learned to write during their insanity, others
to sing; and the celebrated Descartes, in a desperate fit of love, caught
the agreeable habit of squinting from the bewitching eyes of the fair
object of his affections. Memory, again, is the witch or the genii of
second sight. Witness the painting, still preserved in Cologne Cathedral,
executed from memory?a copy scarcely discernible in point of artistic
skill from its transcendent original. A whole ship's crew saw their
cook with a crooked leg, who had died a few days before, hobbling along
the water in the shape of a piece of wreck bobbing up and down upon
the waves; and Dr. Hibbert met a deceased friend of his one morning,
dressed in a coloured cravat, and the identical coat which he knew he
had laid aside several months previously.
To some, solitude is a spiritual fire-damp; while others are fools every-
where except in their own closets. The mental abstraction of the ma-
thematician is insanity to the man of pleasure; and the eager crowd of
money-changers at the Bank of England would make a ready j oke of
the monastic in his cell, with nought but his breviary in his hand, in-
stead of a newspaper or a dividend-warrant, a cord round his waist,
his beads by his side, and a crucifix before him. Fakirs perish fixed to the
spot they have religiously chosen for themselves in a determined attitude
of self-immolation; astronomers forget the approach of sunrise during
the hours of their starlight observations; calculators, such as Yioti, have
almost died of starvation from omitting to eat and drink for days together
MENTAL INFLUENCES. 373
during the all-absorbing pursuit of their favourite occupations; and
players at whist will unwittingly pass a week in winning the odd trick,
and expecting the fortunate upshot of a lucky deal. It is a masquerade
as motley as that of the grand carnival at Venice; and we may almost
ask, with holy Job?" What is wisdom 1 and where is the place of
understanding 1"
The third part of Dr. Moore's very interesting work is taken up in
considering the effects of mental cultivation, but our space will not allow
of our doing justice to it in the present article. It is too important a
subject to be treated lightly. In education, science may do a little;
classic erudition a good deal; moral philosophy much more; but religion
most of all; and yet religion is icy or ferocious without a heart; and
were we called upon to record our suffrages in support of any one of
these several popular modes of education, we should, without the slightest
hesitation, give our unqualified vote in favour of the heart. To you, O
ye mothers! is confided the office of the heart?you, to whose eye we
look up as it were to the heaven of our happiness and the haven of our
hopes?you, in whose bosom we have nestled, and on whose lap we
have reposed in infancy, and to whose sympathising breast Ave have im-
parted the griefs or follies of our maturer years. Abandon not, we be-
seech you, O ye English mothers! the noblest functions of the state;
dismiss not your darlings to the merciless schoolmaster, the mercenary
tutor, and the dissolute usher, of whom you know nothing save his
name and title; nor, for the sake of heading your table or presiding
with distinction in the silken drawing-room, leave the hungry innocent
minds of your children to feed upon the depraved tuition of a house-
maid, a serving-girl, and that most invaluable of all earthly creatures,
an exacting, flouncing head-nurse. Take the education of your children
into your own hands, and abandon everything else for their sakes; it
will amply repay you; and if you object that conduct such as this
would break through the conventional modes of society, and be regarded
as an act of folly, we can only reply by making an appeal to your
heart.
At its best estate, human knowledge is extremely shallow?Sed Lexis
novit cogitationes hominum, quoniam vance sunt. We fancy Ave knoAV
the science of all things, because Ave are acquainted with some of their
phenomena, and Ave gratify our vanity by pretending to state their
causes, laAvs, and properties. But our understanding stretches itself out
much farther than this. The earth goes round the sun in 365 days,
some hours, and a few minutes. What is the cause of this rotation1?
Gravity. What is gravity 1 A poAver. But every cause is a power.
Who has seen these poAvers ] No one. What is that Avhich is floAving
from the tip of our pen as Ave Avrite at this moment for the sake of en-
tertaining or instructing our readers 1 A poAver. What poAver 1 The
mental. Who lias ever seen this mental poAver, or the mind 1 No one.
And yet Ave are forced to grant that the mind is an invisible, supernatural
poAver, which exerts a natural and visible effect upon everything within
the range of its operations?upon the earth, air, Avater, fire, the brutes,
men individually and nationally, spiritually and intellectually, far and
374 STATE OF LUNACY IN THE BRITISH ASYLUMS.
wide?nay, that its influence extends beyond the infinitude of space to
the remote revelations of divine truth. And so true is this, that with-
out this supernatural agency of the human mind or spirit, the universe
would be, as far as we mortals are concerned in it, a blank?the whole
would be mute and immovable?nothing would die, nothing would live
?all would be nothing?a dead calm, like that preceding the last tem-
pest, silent, dark, tremendous, horrible.
