On" the Compression of the Carotids? Its Effects on Headache, Epilepsy, Hysteria, &C
=======================================================================================

BY AUGUSTUS WALLER, M.D.
The carotid arteries are seated so superficially, their pulsations so
manifest, tliat it is not surprising that their compression, so as to in-
terrupt the flow of " animal spirits," in the opinion of the ancients, and
the course of the arterial blood according to our more correct notions of
physiology, should have been tried even at the earliest period of medical
science. Serapion mentions the compression of these canals as a means
of curing pains in the head, but from his time I am not aware of any
mention of this fact until a very recent period, when the subject was
again taken up by the late Dr. Parry, of Bath.

My attention was first directed to this subject by the relief it gave
me when suffering from obstinate pains of the head. I was unaware
that any researches had been made on this point. On the present
occasion, it is my intention to give the results I have obtained by using
ON THE COMPRESSION OF THE CAROTIDS. 027

this process in various cases, and at the same time endeavour to show
the importance of it in elucidating, in an experimental way, some of the
physiological and pathological actions of the cerebral hemispheres.
It is unnecessary to enter into details respecting the distribution of
the carotid and vertebral arteries, which supply the entire head with
blood. It is requisite, however, to bear in mind the following par-
ticulars. The two vertebral arteries, either before or after their inoscu-
lation in one trunk, supply with blood the upper portion of the spinal
marrow, the medulla oblongata, the pons Varolii, the cerebellum, and
the tubercula quadragemina. The anterior and middle lobes of the
brain, the corpora striata and optic thalami are supplied by the carotid
ai'teries. The posterior lobes of the brain are provided with blood from
the posterior cerebral and the posterior communicating arteries. The
first arising from the vertebrals, the latter from the internal carotids.
At the base of the brain, communicating branches exist between the
four supplying vessels, which- renders it possible for one of these arteries
to keep up the circulation of the brain even where the rest are obli-
terated. This has been effected on man and animals by disease, or by
surgical operation, and in such cases the communicating branches are
found to be increased in proportion to the current required to nourish
the parts beyond. Sir A. Cooper's experiments on this point are well
known, therefore I shall not dwell upon them, but consider it sufficient
to mention that he obtained the following results. Ligature of the
carotids had no serious effect; he merely observed acceleration of the
movements of respiration and of the heart. Ligature of one vertebral
of a dog caused dyspnoea, which increased after the second ligature was
made; to this there succeeded quickened action of the chest and heart,
and weakness of the four extremities. Ligature of the four vessels was
constantly fatal to rabbits, but not always so to dogs. After ligature
of the carotids, compression of the vertebral arteries caused respiration
to cease, and convulsive struggles to ensue. Ligature of the carotid,
when performed by man, has been attended with various results, (see
" Carotide Diet, des Sciences Medicales,) Avhich some have endeavoured
to explain by the fact, that the communicating branches at the base of
the brain are in some cases voluminous, and in others but little deve-
loped. I have tried to ascertain how far compression of a main trunk
may be compensated by a flow from the inosculating branches. By a
simple experiment we may determine the manner in which the blood
circulates in the brain when a carotid is compressed, and are able to
decide whether the arteries are distributed in a normal manner. We
are aware that the internal carotid gives off in the interior of the
cranium a branch called the ophthalmic artery, of which a considerable
branch, after passing through a separate foramen of the orbit, takes the
name of the supra-orbital artery, and ramifies over the forehead. The
pulsations of this last are very perceptible in ordinary cases; and a
little consideration will show, that they may serve as a faithful index of
the state of the other branches of the carotid, which are concealed from
direct observation. In the cases I have examined for this purpose,
compression of one carotid arrested all pulsation of the corresponding
supra-orbital artery, and diminished slightly the strength of the other
G28 ON THE COMPRESSION OF THE CAEOTIDS.
on the opposite side. The pulsations of both were entirely obliterated
when the two carotids were compressed. We may therefore conclude
that the circulation in the same hemisphere was acted upon in like
manner.* I am convinced that examination of the circulation of the
brain, in the mode above described, might be valuable in certain diseased
conditions of that organ. After ligature of a carotid, for instance, it
would be important to ascertain when the pulsations re-appear in the
supra-orbital artery.
As the jugular vein accompanies each of these vessels, it is advisable
not to establish the compression over too large a surface, as the return
of the venous blood might be prevented. My usual mode of proceeding
is to apply the extremities of the two forefingers, or that of the thumb,
over the pulsating vessel. It is always advisable to try the effects of
compression on both arteries. It is easy to ascertain if it is effectually
applied, by placing the disengaged hand on either the facial or supra-
orbital branclies.t
External pains of the head.?These pains, which are seated generally
in tl$ integuments, are frequently relieved by arresting the flow of
blood in the carotids. To choose an instance of the most simple
description, we may mention the following :?In a case of imperfect
amaurosis, a blister with Gondret's ointment; which takes effect in a few
minutes, was placed on the sinciput, and caused a severe pain of a
throbbing nature, isochronous with the beating of the arteries, and a
sensation of excessive weight in the head. Compression of the carotid
on either side, immediately caused considerable diminution of the pain,
and slightly relieved the oppression of the head. As a general rule,
external pains of the head, depending on an afflux of blood, are much
alleviated by arresting the arterial current; but those from neuralgia,
which follow the various ramifications of a nerve, and are of a continuous
character, are not generally influenced by so doing. Pains in the eye-
ball have not been relieved by this process, except in one or two in-
stances. In cases of periodic neuralgic pains of the head, relief is fre-
quently experienced by carotid pressure, during the attack ; but the
same process has no effect in relieving the extreme tenderness of the
skin, which often remains during the intervals. In a recent case of a
* I have also made similar experiments on the pulsations of the collaterals at the
fingers. At the hand, the ulnar artery supplies the superficial palmar arch and
seven internal collaterals; the radial artery supplies the other three collaterals, and
the deep arch, which anastomoses freely -with the other. Compression of the radial
arrested all pulsation of the three external collaterals, and weakened that of the
other seven, while compression of the ulnar stopped the seven internal collaterals,
and enfeebled the other three. In some cases, however, all the collaterals con-
tinued to beat feebly, while the supply artery was compressed.
f Compression of the carotid close under the inferior maxillary, generally excites
an involuntary movement of deglutition every time it is applied, which is produced
by the irritation of the pharynx, whose fibres are stimulated to act by external
pressure, in the same way as when they are excited by the pressure of food. This
fact may be usefully applied in case of children or of patients in a comatose state,
?where there is a difficulty in the administration of food or medicines, for after the
liquid has been conveyed to the posterior part of the mouth the application of
external pressure on the throat will immediately excite the required act of
deglutition.
ON THE COMPRESSION OF THE CAROTIDS. G29
gentleman wlio suffered from severe pains over tlie right eyebrow, every
morning at the same hour, I found that carotid pressure immediately
relieved him, although when pressure was applied over the part affected,
it was found to be exceedingly sensitive.
Internal pains of the head.?Dr. Parry states that " headache, whether
affecting the external or internal part of the head, is owing to the cor-
responding conditions of circulation in the internal or external carotid
artery. That which occurs from dyspepsia is of the first kind, and may
be generally relieved by strong pressure on the carotid arteries, in
consequence of which the peristaltic movement of the alimentary canal
is often increased, the heat of the head diminished, and the feet, if pre-
viously cold, become more warm." (Elements of Pathology.) The
sick headache, described by Dr. Fothergill, he specifies particularly as
arising from determination of blood to the internal carotid j of the same
nature he considers common headache, which affects nervous patients,
without sickness. This pain, whether affecting the internal or external
parts of the head, he finds to be usually accompanied with strong circu-
lation in the carotids, lieat of the head, &c., and to be relieved by cold
to the head, a tight bandage, and by compressing the carotids." He
observes, (section 718,) that "the term vertigo is applied to two different
species of sensation in the head. The first is characterized by a feeling
of quick rotation in the inside of the head." It is this species he believes
to precede epileptic, paralytic, and apoplectic attacks. " In a moment
after its commencement, the patient is seized with nausea, and some-
times with vomiting, and at other times almost immediately falls sense-
less." I will now mention some cases in which I have tried this process.
Case 1.?Jean Baptiste M , aged twenty, had been tormented,
for many months, with chronic pains in the head, generally on
the left side. There had existed for many months on that side a
slight discharge from the ear, and in which, on one or two occa-
sions, he had detected small fragments of bone, which appeared to belong
to the ossicula auditus. Hearing was almost entirely lost. These
symptoms remained stationary for some months, when suddenly he
perceived, one morning, that he had almost lost the use of the right arm,
accompanied by a sense of numbness over the skin, and frequent
twitching of the muscles of the whole of the right side. After remaining
for several days in this condition, he recovered the use of the arm, under
the influence of an active treatment. The pains of the head, which I
mentioned as being very severe before this attack, lasted for several
months after. Generally they were very slight in the early part of the
day, but towards the evening they usually became more acute and
throbbing. At all times they were liable to be induced by any excite-
ment, after a copious meal, or by an empty stomach. This was among
the first cases in which I tried compression of the carotids. The effects
of it were (particularly when applied to the side painful) almost entire
cessation of the pain, which remission continued for several hours after
the pressure was removed. After frequent use of this remedy, he found
that the after effect became shorter, and that the cessation from pain
only contained so long as the pressure was applied. Ultimately, after
the lapse of a year, this patient recovered, with the exception of the
loss of hearing 011 one side.
630 ON THE COMPRESSION OF THE CAROTIDS.
Case 2.?A gentleman, aged twenty, had severe pains on the left side
of the head, deeply seated, and easily induced by mental exertion. He
had slight twitchings in the muscles over all parts of the body, and
shortly after imperfect hemiplegia and loss of sensibility in the left half
of the body. Compression of the carotid, on the same side, invariably
stopped the pain, which returned again as soon as the pressure was
removed. The twitchings of the muscles appeared so irregularly, that
it was impossible to ascertain positively whether it Avas at all affected
by carotid pressure, but it appeared to me not to be influenced by it.
I had occasion frequently to examine this patient, and perceived that
the pulsations of the carotid were considerably weaker on the side
affected than on the other. The radial and collaterals of the fingers on
the same side were likewise weaker than on the other.
Case 3.?Mrs. N belongs to a family several members of which
are very liable to deeply-seated pains occupying one-lialf of the head.
Sometimes half the body, on the corresponding side, has likewise been
in pain, accompanied with vertical liemiopia. Mrs. N , the subject
of this case, has experienced all the symptoms above mentioned,?
namely, liemiopia, hemicrania, and diminished sensibility on one side of
the body. On a recent occasion, she had scarcely recovered from a
severe attack of pleurisy, when the head became very painful, the
memory much affected, together with most of the symptoms above
mentioned, accompanied with vomiting. After all these had been
relieved, there remained a feeling of numbness and pricking at the
inner surface of the cheek, and part of the throat and tongue; ex-
ternally, on the same side, one cheek was less sensitive than the other.
Carotid pressure stopped the pain in the head, which returned imme-
diately after the pressure was removed.
The three preceding cases present a close analogy to each other. In
all, there was pain in the head, generally on one side, deeply seated, and
although quiescent during considerable intervals, liable to be called into
existence by various causes ; and very probably, if the internal parts
could have been examined, we should have found a portion of the mem-
branes, and of the cerebral substance itself, congested with blood. In
case 1, the internal ear appears to have been the main cause of the con-
gestion. Carotid pressure in all three caused a cessation of the pain ;
with this difference, however, that in the first the effect was much more
permanent than in the others. In case 2, the carotid was weaker on
the side affected. This is a point which deserves great attention, but at
the same time is surrounded Avitli considerable difficulties. Dr. Parry
appears to have met with frequent cases of this sort. He mentions, in
particular, that of a gentleman suffering pain on one side of the head,
and in the eye of the same side. On the opposite side of the body,
there was hemiplegia, and the carotid was preternaturally strong. But
unless the case is as decided as this, or as case 2, there is much difficulty
in ascertaining the comparative strength of the carotid. Careful injec-
tion of these arteries after death might be a means of determining this
point positively. The effect of a loaded stomach, in inducing congestion
of the brain in apoplexy, has not escaped popular observation ; but the
contrary condition of that organ (the stomach) is not less effectual in
ON THE COMPRESSION OF THE CAROTIDS. 631
causing pain in certain congestive conditions of tlie brain. The cerebral
symptoms which occur in starvation are well known.
The following case is interesting, as it shows that compression of the
carotids does not always alleviate pain arising from congestion of the
brain :?
Case 4.?Mrs. H had been suffering from severe pain over the
forehead, spreading sometimes over the entire head, which was aggra-
vated by the slightest movement of the head. At the same time, there
existed giddiness and loss of memory. Carotid pressure always appeared
to increase the pain. She informed me that she had omitted to be bled,
as had been her custom once a year, and the catamenia were absent.
The pain in the head was relieved by abstraction of blood from the arm.
On the following day, after a violent attack of hysteria, inflammation of
the brain declared itself, accompanied with hemiplegia; and imperfect
anaesthesia of the right side. After a prolonged illness, during which
an antiphlogistic treatment was had recourse to, she recovered the
use of her limbs. There still remained a severe pain in the head, which
carotid pressure had the effect of relieving.
Case 5.?Margaret , aged nineteen, strong, and of a plethoric
habit, had a severe attack of indigestion after eating large quantities of
fruit. After rejecting the irritating substance from the stomach, there
remained constant nausea, and repeated efforts at vomiting, which con-
tinued upwards of two hours, after the stomach had been emptied,
notwithstanding the internal and external means resorted to. On
account of some violent pains in the head, I was led to try compression
of the carotid, which immediately relieved the pain, but also, to my sur-
prise, the vomiting ceased. On removing the pressure, the pain and
sickness returned immediately. The same effects were produced by
removing and applying pressure several times. I found it desirable to
remove blood from the arm, which afforded immediate relief to the pain
and vomiting.
This case is the more remarkable, as I have not generally found that
vomiting is relieved by carotid pressure. It is well known that vene-
section, when carried to a certain extent, frequently causes nausea and
vomiting; and when the bleeding is carried on still further, syncope
and convulsions will ensue. Again, patients suffering from violent and
habitual pains of the head, when there exists no general excess of blood
in the system, not uncommonly complain of considerable nausea when
the carotids are compressed. In the case I am now about to relate,
carotid pressure acted in such a manner as might have been expected
from a considerable loss of blood.
Case 6.?Mr. W , a person of drunken habits, complained
of constant heaviness and deeply seated pains in the head, increased
by stooping and by compression on one of the carotids. About six
ounces of blood were taken from him, while he was in a standing
position, which caused him to become very weak, and the vein was
closed. In the course of half an hour he recovered, and was able
to walk. Compression being applied at this time on one of the
carotids, caused immediate syncope. On removing the compres-
sion he speedily recovered. A second application was attended with
G32 ON THE COMPRESSION OF THE CAHOTIDS.
the like results, only in a less violent degree. On a third occasion it
appeared to have no effect whatever.
In cases of hysteria and epilepsy compression of the carotids fre-
quently exerts a most remarkable influence, when performed during
the attack, in shortening the duration or in diminishing the violence of
the convulsions.
Case 7.?Miss M  has suffered from attacks of hysteria for two
years, accompanied by strong convulsions and slight foaming at the
mouth. I had recourse to pressure on the carotids; and after it
had been applied a few moments, the patient began to look about and
recognise those around her. By continuing it she recovered entirely,
though remaining much exhausted. Within the space of a few hours
after she had two other slighter attacks, which were easily relieved in
the same manner. As I have before said, this process is very beneficial
in epileptic fits ; but the contraction of the muscles of the whole frame,
and especially of those belonging to the neck, frequently renders it im-
possible to continue it for a sufficient length of time.
Case 8.?William F , aged 30, four years ago had brain fever,
followed by paralysis of the left side, from which he completely reco-
vered. A few months after this he had his first epileptic attack. The
premonitory symptoms were, generally, heaviness and pains in the head,
alleviated by pressure on one of the carotids, and slight twitcliings over
various parts of the body. At the time of the convulsions, compression
on one of the carotids calmed the violence of the spasms, and he soon
settled into a state of lassitude and heaviness, which shortly terminated
in a troubled sleep. Dr. Parry relates, that in a severe case of catalepsy,
accompanied with total insensibility, pressure on both carotids uniformly
suspended the symptoms and restored the patient's senses, and that
pressure on one carotid had no perceptible effect, that a moderate de-
gree of pressure on the carotids removed the catalepsy, and induced
convulsions, while a greater degree removed the convulsions also. The
converse order of occurrences was equally true.
Case 9.?Mr. P., in consequence of an attack of congestion to the
brain, had the right side nearly paralyzed, and at intervals the right
arm was agitated by a tremour which he was unable to control ; at
the same time, there existed violent pain on the right side of the head,
and the power of hearing on the same side was nearly lost. Carotid
pressure on the side affected gave relief, and on the other side still
greater, and caused the shaking of the arm to cease for a few minutes
each time it was performed. A few ounces of blood taken from the
arm until faintness ensued diminished the pains, and freed him from
the spasmodic trembling in the arm. This last symptom appeared
again after the lapse of two hours, and, after continuing about an hour,
suddenly ceased, and did not return. A son of Mr. P. was affected on
two occasions with epileptic fits, which had been preceded by violent
pains in the feet. The fits were not relieved by carotid pressure, but
were stopped on each occasion by tight ligatures round the legs.
As a remedial agent, compression of the carotids cannot, in its pre-
sent condition, be ranked with others which are intended to effect a
permanent cure of disease. Its application is limited to those cases, not
unfrequently to be met with in practice, when, other agents having
1
ON THE COMPRESSION OF THE CAROTIDS. 633
been found powerless, this process provides us with an active means of
shortening and dispelling a series of formidable symptoms distressing
to witness. Under this point of view its sphere of usefulness, though
bounded, is important, inasmuch as it is a matter of experience that
hysteria, epilepsy, and spasmodic affections in general, are more likely
to disappear altogether in proportion as their attacks are rendered less
frequent, and as they have less obtained a " droit de domicile " in the
economy.
For diagnosis it gives us several indications of importance. By re-
stricting our attention to its effects on pains of the head of every de-
scription, we may distinguish three kinds of headache, according as they
are either removed, remain unaffected, or are increased, by arresting the
current of blood within the carotids. The pains of the first kind are
generally of a throbbing nature, increasing with the systole of the
heart. Those of the second appear to arise from some local action in
the tissue affected, which is independent of vascular congestion. These
pains are generally much more diffused over the head than the former,
they continue longer, and are less likely to exacerbate at intervals. The
third kind includes most of those pains which occur from antemia, or
from the blood not possessing some of its usual elements, as in chlorosis.
It comprises, likewise, certain congestive states of the brain, where
pressure does not remove but increases the pain. In the foregoing
cases, I have mentioned some instances of this sort which I have found
to be benefited by bleeding. It is impossible at present to explain
satisfactorily these exceptions, which are not unfrequent, but I have
often found them combined with general plethora. With respect to the
spasmodic diseases, Avhere compression sometimes acts in a way so im-
mediate and efficient, and at other times not at all, a more full investi-
gation will very probably enable us to find the part of the nervous
system primarily affected.
Considered as a physiological experiment, carotid compression pre-
sents an unlooked-for means of testing some opinions concerning the
action of the brain, and of the cerebral hemispheres in particular. Aris-
totle and Galen were already aware that artificial irritation of the brain
caused no pain, and modern physiologists, in confirming their state-
ments, have ascertained that neither mechanical, chemical, nor other
modes of irritation of the cerebral hemispheres and cerebellum ever
cause convulsive movements or pain. On the other hand, they have
discovered that irritation of the spinal marrow, or of the medulla ob-
longata, invariably causes convulsive action. The discoveries of Dr.
Marshall Hall have shown, physiologically, the line of demarcation
existing between these two divisions of the nervous system. He has
demonstrated that the spinal marrow, far different from being merely a
large nerve, containing in one sheath all the nerve tubules ascending
to the brain, possesses distinct faculties, which enable it to act as a
medium of communication between the separate nerve tubules which it
receives from all parts of the system. For the physiologist and the patho-
logist it is impossible to overrate the importance of the reflex actions
and the excito-motory systems. It has served to guide us in the intri-
cate course of the various internal impressions, from the points at which
NO. IV. T T
G34 ON THE COMPRESSION OF THE CAROTIDS.
they take their origin until their final termination within the muscular
fibre. But can we go to the extent of affirming, that in all cases of
epilepsy, convulsions, hysteria, etc., are the results of a reflex action of
the spinal marrow, or of a direct irritation upon it. I think it impossible,
in face of the preceding observations, to deny to the cerebral hemi-
spheres the power, in certain morbid conditions, of also giving rise to
similar increased muscular action.
The negative results of artificial irritation of the brain in animals
cannot be considered as invalidating the positive results of these expe-
riments made on our own species. In drawing conclusions with respect
to the functions of the brain, from experiments, it must not be forgotten
that the irritation we are able to excite is far different from that arising
from a morbid condition. In vivisections the irritation is of that violent
nature, that the part experimented upon may be considered as " struck
with death," and no longer capable of continuing its functions in any
way. In disease, on the contrary, the excitement which causes epilepsy
and other convulsive conditions, appears to be general and diffused
either in one or both hemispheres, and sufficient only to exalt the
natural functions. The effect is, to cause increased manifestations of
the mental faculties, arousing the images treasured in the cerebrum.
When carried a degree farther, the excitement of the cerebral tissue, no
longer contained in these bounds, becomes capable of being transmitted
downwards to the rest of the encephalon.
In confirmation of these ideas, how frequently we find each return of
the catamenia attended with mental excitement and perversion of the
moral sentiments, terminating often in a violent attack of hysteria.
The heat and injection of the countenance, the suffusion of the con-
junctiva, surfaces supplied by branches from the same arterial trunk,
furnish us with correct indications of the state of the parts within the
cranium. It is in this condition, by restoring the equilibrium in the
various parts of the vascular system, by moderating the impetus of the
blood in the branches of the carotid, that Ave are enabled, as if by a
charm, to subdue the whole train of morbid symptoms which have arisen.
1, St. Mary Abbot's terrace, Kensington,
August, 1848.
