Notes on Feigned Insanity
============================

:Author: C. LOCKHART ROBERTSON, M.D.
MEDICAL STAFF, ATTACHED TO THE MILITARY LUNATIC ASYLUM AT YARMOUTH, ETC.
" King. What lie spake, though it lack'd form a little,
Was not like madness." Hamlet.

" Edgar. While I may scape,
I will preserve myself: and am bethought
To take the basest and most poorest shape,
That ever penury, in contempt of man,
Brought near to beast: my face I'll grime with filth;
Blanket my loins ; elf all my hair in knots ;
And with presented nakedness out-face
The winds and persecutions of the sky.
The country gives me proof and precedent
Of Bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
Strike in their numbed and mortified bare arms
Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary ;
And with this horrible object, from low farms,
Poor pelting villages, sheep-cotes, and mills,
Sometimes with lunatick bans, sometimes with prayers,
Enforce their charity." King Lear.

Section 1. History.?The earliest record we possess of mental disease
being feigned, is in the fabled story of Ulysses, who is supposed to have
lived 1190 years before Christ. Ulysses, on being summoned to join
the Greek army in the expedition against Troy, pretended to he insane,
in order not to leave his beloved Penelope. He yoked a horse and a
hull together, and ploughed the sea shore, and sowed salt in the furrows
instead of corn. Palamedes perceived this deceit, and exposed it by
placing the infant child of Ulysses, Telemachus, before the plough of
his father, when the latter turned the plough a different way, to avoid
injuring the child, which appears to have satisfied the minds of the
Greek princes as to his sanity.'*

The next instance of feigned insanity is that related by the sacred
historiant of the royal psalmist, in the following words:?" And David
changed his behaviour before tliem, and feigned himself mad in their
hands, and scrabbled on the doors of the gate, and let his spittle fall
down upon his beard. Then said Acliish unto his servants, Lo, ye see
the man is mad: wherefore then have ye brought him to me? Have I
need of madmen, that ye have brought this fellow to play the madman
in my presence 1 Shall this fellow come into my house 1"
The third instance of feigned insanity recorded in history is that of
L. Junius Brutus, elected consul upon the expulsion of the Tarquins
from Rome, B.C. 509. His story ran as follows:?The sister of Tar-
quinius Superbus, seventh king of Rome, married M. Brutus, a man of
great wealth, who died, leaving two sons under age. Of these the elder
was killed by Tarquin, who coveted their possessions; the younger
escaped his brother's fate only by feigning idiocy, whence he is supposed
to have received the surname of Brutus. J

Section 2. Causes.?Insanity may be feigned,?
1. To escape from an obligation: as with the soldier, to obtain his
discharge from the service.

2. To escape the punishment due to crimes committed, the criminal
may feign one or other of the forms of mental disease.
It will at once be apparent how important the forming of a just
diagnosis is.

Section 3. General observations on the subject.?The discrimi-
nation between real and feigned insanity must always be attended with
great difficulty; indeed, it is impossible, without a practical acquaintance
with the disease, and without long-continued observation of the case in
* J. Lempriere, D.D. A Classical Dictionary. Art., Palamedes?Art., Ulysses.
+ 1 Samuel, chap. xxi. ver. 13?15.

J The tale of Brutus having feigned idiocy, though related hy most of the Roman
historians, is " irreconcilable with his holding the responsible office of Tribus Celerum
tinder Tarquinius; and that he did hold this office seems to be an historical fact, (Pom-
pon. de Orig. Turis, Dig. 1, tit. 2, s. 2, sec. 15,) and the story of his idiocy probably
arose from his surname, which is generally supposed to signify ' an idiot,' (Liv. i. 50 ;
Dionys. iv. G7, who translates it //\i0io? ; Nonius, p. 77.) Festus, however, in a pas-
sage which is pointed out by Arnold (Rom. Hist. i. p. 104), tells us that Brutus, in
old Latin, was synonymous with gravis; which, as Arnold remarks, would show a con-
nexion with flapvQ. The word may, therefore, as a surname, have been originally much
the same as Severus. This conjecture.we think more probable than that of Niebuhr's,
who supposes it to mean ' runaway slave,' and connects it with the Brettii, ' revolted
slaves,' whence the Brutii are supposed to have derived their name, (Strab. vi. p. 225;
Diod. xvi. 15 ; Gell. x. 3 ;) he further observes, that this name might easily have been
applied by the Tarquins to Brutus as a term of reproach, (Rom. Hist., i. pp. 63, 98,
515.)??William Smith, LL.D. Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography, &c.
Vol. i., Art., Brutus. London, 1844.

question, to arrive at a satisfactory conclusion, and truly to decide whe-
ther or not the symptoms of mental disease be feigned. " Nothing,"
says Ray,"' " requires a severer exercise of a physician's knowledge and
tact, than a case of simulated insanity." " Many of the instances on
record," says Dr. Conolly,+ " show the great difficulty of pronouncing a
decided opinion in cases in which no man would willingly run the risk
of being wrong;" and again, " where lunacy is feigned, it may be im-
possible to determine that it is so, without watching the patient for
some time, when he does not know that he is watched, and by night as
Avell as by day."+ " Insanity," says Mr. Marshall,? Deputy Inspector-
General of Army Hospitals, " has been frequently feigned by soldiers
who wished to obtain their discharge, and no doubt some have gained
their object. But it is also true, and the fact is a melancholy one, that
real insanity has been mistaken for feigned, and the patients treated and
punished as impostors. Facts of this kind ought to lead medical officers
to study with great care the indications of insanity?a branch of informa-
tion which can only be thoroughly obtained in receptacles for the
insane?and whenever there is a shadow of doubt, to proceed with the
utmost caution It is not so much because fictitious madness has
been treated as real, but because real madness has been treated as
fictitious, that I urge the necessity of medical officers devoting some
attention to the study of this class of diseases." Dr. Isfordink|| informs
us, that in the Austrian army " mental disease is frequently successfully
feigned."

The acknowledged difficulties in the diagnosis of mental disease ought
certainly to impress those in authority with the necessity, in doubtful
cases, of being guided only by the opinion of physicians who have made
mental disease their study. This has been Avell pointed out by Ray:^[
" The effect the difficulty of detecting attempts to feign insanity should
have on the mind of those who are to form their opinions by the evi-
dence they hear, should be to impress them with a strong sense of the
necessity of an intimate, practical acquaintance with insanity on the part
of the medical witness, and convince them that without this qualification
the testimony of the physician is but little better than that of any one
else."

Section 4. A case illustrating the difficulty of the diagnosis.
?The following case, related by Dr. Conolly,*'* illustrates so forcibly the
difficulty of distinguishing between real and feigned insanity, that I quote
his account of it in full.

" I was a few years ago," he says, " requested to see a man confined
in gaol for the crime of cutting off his wife's head. This man had made
no attempt to deny the deed, or to escape the consequences. For some
time after he was taken to prison his conduct was quiet, and on common
subjects he would talk in a common way with his fellow-prisoners.
* A Treatise on tlie Medical Jurisprudence of Insanity, p. 228. Edinburgh, 1839.
t An Inquiry concerning tlie Indications of Insanity, p. 459. London, 1830.
X Ibid. p. 4G7.

? I lie Enlisting, Discharging, and Pensioning of Soldiers, p. 161. 2nd Edition.
Edinburgh, 1839.

|| Militaerische Gesundheits Polizei. Erster Baudseite 51.
Op. cit. p. 230. ?* Op. cit. p. 455.

When he was asked about the murder, and reminded that he would
certainly be hanged for it, he always said that he did not know he had
done any harm. After being confined five or six weeks, he occasionally
showed a disposition to be violent, and on one occasion put a handker-
chief round his neck, as if he intended to hang himself. Subsequently
he became taciturn, and his demeanour changed to that of an imbecile
person, which it was at the time of my seeing him. He wore a woollen
cap, which he had taken from one of the prisoners, and carried a piece
of wood about with him, which he represented by signs to be his sword ?
for he would not speak nor answer any questions, only breaking silence
now and then, by repeating the word ' cabbage,' without any kind of
meaning. He had buttons and other common trinkets tied round his
Avrist, and he had made a great many attempts to walk out of the hospital
of the prison, in which he was lodged. When a watch, or any shining
substance was shown to him, he Avould assume an idiotic smile, and
begin to dance.

" Notwithstanding all these appearances, I could not help suspecting
that the man was playing a part. The nature of his crime, and his
conduct after committing it, certainly went far to support the idea of
his insanity, and the insanity might have been coming on some time
before the murder; and although he might be cunning, he might still
be insane. Yet the mixed character of his mental disorder, and the
rapid supervention of idiocy on a quiet form of insanity, in a man of
thirty-five, seemed to me to be unusual circumstances. There was
nothing in his manner which might not very easily have been the effect of
imitation; and although he would not answer questions, I observed that
he both heard and understood them,?at least, when I asked him, a
little sharply and unexpectedly, if he did not know me, he immediately
looked up, which he would not do at other times, and shook his head.
I saw, too, that although he never looked directly at any one, except at
that particular moment, he was in reality very watchful of their move-
ments, even when they were distant from him. Several proofs of this
occurred in a short time, and he always made a sudden run towards the
door, when any one opened it to go out.

" I mention this case exactly as it was presented to me, without at-
tempting, even now, to say whether the man was mad or not."

Section 5. The diagnosis.?Seeing, then, that the diagnosis between
real and feigned insanity is attended with so great difficulty, it becomes
of importance to endeavour to discover rules which may guide us in the
examination of any supposed case of feigned mental disease.

There is only one broad and simple rule?viz., an intimate acquaint-
ance with the varied phases of intellectual and moral disorder which may
affect the human mind; and in proportion to the extent of his know-
ledge of this subject, will be the physician's success in deciding on
suspected cases.

Certain distinctive marks which are likely to exist between a case of
real and one of feigned insanity, may, however, be deduced from this
knowledge.

A few such diagnostics I have, in the following section, endeavoured
briefly to present, under the heads of mania, dementia, (including chronic
mania,) monomania, melancholia, imbecility.

a. Mania.?Although mania might be simulated, so as readily to im-
pose upon those not acquainted with the symptoms of the disease, I feel
satisfied that any one conversant with the treatment of insanity, would
detect the impostor.

It is a physical impossibility for a person of sound mind to present
the continued watchfulness, excitement, and resistance to the influence
of medicine, which characterize this disorder.

Again, the premonitory symptoms, as diseased action of the moral
feelings, disorder of the digestive functions, headache, sleeplessness, &c.,
will, in a case of feigned insanity, be absent.

A careful consideration of this point, together with the continued
watching of the suspected person for a day or two, and the administration
of an ordinary dose of opium, tartrate of antimony, colocynth, &c., would
go far to aid in forming a correct diagnosis. Further, the insensibility
to all external impressions, as hunger, thirst, &c., which pre-eminently
distinguishes mania from the other varieties of mental disease, as also the
total absence of all sense of decency and care for cleanliness, will not
readily be for any period simulated.

Violence and incoherence of thought are the only indications asso-
ciated in the public mind with mania, which being present while the
above-noticed premonitory and accompanying symptoms are absent,
would readily enable us to detect the impostor.

The frequency of the pulse has been much insisted on as a diagnostic
of mania, particularly by Drs. Rush and Foville, and the late Sir H.
Halford:

" My pulse as yours, dotb temperately keep time,
And makes as healthful music : it is not madness."?Hamlet.
The following table would, however, lead to the conclusion that fre-
quency of the pulse cannot be considered as diagnostic of mania. I ex-
tract it from Professor Guy's " Principles of Forensic Medicine." The
observations were made on eighty-nine insane females by Leuret and
Mitivie, and on fifty healthy persons of the same sex by Dr. Guy. The
results are expressed in per centage proportions of the whole number
of observations, and show that in forty-two per cent, in healthy females
the pulse was above ninety, while in insane females, in only nineteen
per cent, did it exceed ninety.

State of Pulse.
Above 100
80 to 09
80 to 89
70 to 79
00 to G9
Under 60
Leuret and Mitivie
8 per cent.
11
43 ?
33
4 ?
1
Professor Guy.
Standing.
30 per cent.
12
24
22
12
0
Sitting.*
12 per cent.
18
20 ?
32
14
4

* It being just possible that Leuret's observations were made in the sitting postnre,
Dr. Guy has given a column to that position also, whieh latter observations lender the
relative proportions above 90, in liealfhy females 30 per cent., in insane females 19 per
cent. iTtrfrnartm; i .*? -zM
b. Dementia, (including chronic mania.)?This disorder would be
more readily feigned tlian mania.

Although here there is present partial incoherence of thought, the
patient going off at a tangent from the subject of conversation, he gene-
rally, when questioned, is enabled to fix his ideas, and give a pertinent
answer to a question put to him. Again, the perfect state of the me-
mory of long past events, as compared with that of recent, is a striking
feature in the real disease, not likely to be simulated. The impostor, in
his anxiety to impress his hearers with the perfect disorder of his intel-
lect, would, in all probability, overact his part, and give to every ques-
tion an absurdly false answer.

Still, in the more aggravated forms of this disorder, the power, even
for an instant, of fixing the ideas, and the memory of even past events
are so entirely lost, that these points would not fail in establishing
the diagnosis.

In such instances, the previous history of the case would aid much in
deciding as to the reality or simulation of the disease, the symptoms
of confirmed dementia not generally presenting themselves but as a
sequel to mania, monomania, or some other form of mental disease.
Again, such persons are insensible to the operation of the passions of
hope, fear, anger, &c., the emotions of which may, in those feigning
dementia, perhaps be produced. Shakspeare, who evidently must have
studied insanity from nature, notices this in that beautiful delineation
of feigned dementia or chronic mania in the character of Edgar,?
" My tears begin to take liis part too much,
They'll mar my counterfeiting."?King Lear.

Fodere, in his " Traite de Medecine Legale," mentions having thus de-
tected an impostor, simulating this variety of insanity?viz., by ordering
the application of the actual cautery.

An American writer* coolly informs his readers, " That in the English
naval and military service, where the medical officer is often called
on to deal with feigned insanity, punishment is much resorted to, on
the principle that if the affection be counterfeited, it will be more effi-
cacious than anything else in restoring the impostor to his right mind,
and if real, it will do good by acting as a powerful derivative.'''' Such
ignorance, requires only to be noticed, carrying, as it does, its own refu-
tation Avith it.

In cases of difficulty, confinement with observation, in an asylum for
the insane, is our last resource, and cannot fail in the course of time in
proving successful. Since the establishment of the Military Lunatic
Asylum, in 1819, (where all soldiers labouring, or supposed to labour,
under continued mental disease are sent,) the attempts to feign insanity,
for the purpose of obtaining a discharge from the sendee, now seldom
occur.

I have at present a case under my observation in which I suspect this
variety of mental disease has been feigned with the above object. The
patient at present professes to be cured of the insanity which he stated he
laboured under on admission into this asylum. At that period he pre-
* Ray, op. cit., p. 242.

sented symptoms of chronic mania, talking unconnectedly, but only when
he considered himself to be observed, while he exhibited a loss of memory
not reconcilable with the recent invasion of the disorder, or with its
extent. The threat of coercive measures sufficed to produce, in a few
days, what he terms his cure. The existence, however, of a depression
in the left frontal bone?the result of a kick from a horse?together
Avith one or two minor symptoms of mental derangement, demand a
longer period of observation before any decided opinion can be expressed,
and aid in the illustration of the difficulty of diagnosing feigned partial
insanity.

c. Monomania.?The simplest form of this disease is characterized
by the presence of a false idea, or hallucination, which hallucination
might with considerable success be simulated.

The most marked difference between a real and feigned case of mono-
mania is in the condition of the power of reasoning. A real monomaniac
cannot be reasoned out of his false ideas; and in the maintaining of
them will set all the principles of logic at a defiance which the impostor
would not, from a fear of discovery, venture to do. " In real monomania
the patient never troubles himself to make the subject of his delusion
square with other notions with which it has more or less relation; and the
spectator wonders that he can possibly help observing the inconsistency
of his ideas, and that when pointed out to him, he should seem to be
indifferent to, or unaware of, this fact. In the simulator, on the con-
trary, the experienced physician will detect an unceasing endeavour to
soften down the palpable absurdity of his delusions, or reconcile them
with correct and rational notions."?Ray, op. cit.

Again, the impostor will endeavour to force his delusion on the
notice of observers, while the real monomaniac rarely recurs to his false
ideas, unless when questioned, or when the conversation bears upon the
subject.

These two points appear to me to be the safest grounds on which to
endeavour to form a correct diagnosis between real and feigned mono-
mania.

The more complicated form of monomania?viz., that preceded and
accompanied by perverted action of the moral powers, and in which the
delusion is but a symptom of the existing moral disorder, is not likely
to be feigned?still less likely to be successfully so.

d. Melancholia.?The simplest form of melancholia?viz., that un-
attended by bodily disease, and exhibited chiefly in an obstinate refusal
to answer questions, and in a total disregard of all that is passing on
around, might be successfully simulated. A case of this nature occurred
to me, which I had under my observation for several months, and
where I did not even suspect that the disorder was feigned.

In suspected cases, the endeavouring, as is recommended at page 282,
to excite one or other of the mental emotions, and careful observation,
are the only diagnostic marks that occur to me.

It is a disorder with which the public are not so well acquainted as
with general or partial mania, and which is not, therefore, so likely to
be feigned.

e. Imbecility.?Weakness of intellect is sometimes feigned by soldiers,
and, as Mr. Marshall informs us, with success.

" Mental incapacity," lie states, " or inaptitude for acquiring the
manual and platoon exercise, is easily feigned, and very difficult of
detection. It is very natural that regimental officers should wish to get
inefficient soldiers discharged, whether the unfitness arises from physical,
moral, or intellectual causes; but the general interests of the service
require, that no doubtful case of disability should be recommended to be
discharged, more especially on account of alleged weakness of intellect."
Mr. Marshall relates two cases in which inability to learn the drill
exercises was successfully feigned; and then concludes with a statement,
in the which I entirely concur, " that unless in well marked cases, where
the mind is weak on all subjects, and where that weakness is expressed
in the countenance, or readily discoverable during conversation, no man
ought to be recommended for discharge on account of mental defects;
because, if the disability is not obvious, he may re-enlist and be approved
for the service."

Roijal Barracks, Yarmouth,
February, 1848.
