Lunatic Asylums, Ireland
==========================

388
Art. III.
Report on the District,
Local, and Private Lunatic Asylums in Ireland, 1848, with
Appendices, presented to both Houses of Parliament, by command
of her Majesty.
Dublin: Thorn. 1849.

The state of lunacy in Ireland lias been repeatedly a matter of par-
liamentary inquiry, and now, when distress, famine, pestilence, and
voluntary self-expatriation are spreading desolation through that
unhappy land, the subject appears to us invested with a deeper and
more solemn interest than heretofore.

The want of proper accommodation for the insane and the lunatic
poor of Ireland was long ago a national grievance. Prievous to the
year 1810, no provision had been made by the legislature for this
class of sufferers beyond a few cells in the workhouses, and county
prisons, and St. Patrick's Hospital, which was opened upon the 19th
of September, 1757, and is now capable of receiving 150 patients.
In the year 1810, a grant was made by parliament for establishing
the Richmond Lunatic Asylum in Dublin, for the accommodation of
200 patients, [55 Geo. III. c. 107,] which was opened in 1815; but
the sphere of its operation, extending through the counties of
Dublin, Meath, Wicklow, and Louth, embraces a population of
180,984 persons, and it is shown by the tables before us that its
institution is wholly inadequate to meet the wants of so extensive a
district.

In 1817, a committee of the House of Commons reported that the
only effectual mode of relief would be the establishment of district
asylums, eleven of which are now open; but although they have been
considerably enlarged and extended, the provision they afford is
wholly inadequate to meet the wants of the lunatic poor in each
district. The result is that patients are still consigned to gaols and
cells in workhouses, " where these poor creatures are often obliged
thus to remain until vacancies occur in the asylums proper for their
reception."?{Report, p. 5.) The impropriety, or rather the absolute
inhumanity, of such a system is obvious. In these temporary places
of refuge, proper care and medical treatment in the early stages of
the disease are impracticable; the disorder, consequently, becomes
aggravated and confirmed, and to this cause may now be ascribed
the fact that the district lunatic asylums are now encumbered with
hopeless and incurable cases. The Report states?

" The evils arising from the practice of committing lunatics to
gaols, and the want generally of adequate asylum relief, increased to
such an extent as to be made the subject of a parliamentary inquiry,
in the year 1843, when a select committee of the House of Lords
was appointed to examine into the state of the Irish asylums, with
the view of remedying these defects.

" The result of their labours will be seen in their report of the
evidence taken before them, and their views, after a careful examina-
tion of that evidence, are generally embraced in the following reso-
lutions?viz.,

" 1 The committee are desirous of impressing on the House, as the
result of their inquiries, the following propositions, on which they
have formed the strongest opinion?
1. The necessity of discontinuing, as soon as practicable, the
committals of lunatics to gaols and Bridewells.

2. The necessity of amending the Act of the 1 Yict. c. 27,
which appears, on the authority of the Lord Chancellor of
Ireland, to have led to the most serious abuse.
3. The inexpediency of appropriating the union workhouses as
places either for the custody or the treatment of the
insane, for both which purposes they appear wholly un-
suited.

4. The necessity of providing one central establishment for
criminal lunatics, under the immediate control and direc-
tion of the government of Ireland, to be supported from
the same funds and under the system adopted in respect
to criminal lunatics in England.

5. The necessity of increasing the accommodation for pauper
lunatics in Ireland, and of providing for the cases of
epilepsy, idiotcy, and chronic disease, by an increased
number of the district asylums, by an enlargement of
those asylums, or by the erection of several establishments
specially appropriated for these classes of patients.'
" The valuable suggestions thus thrown out by the committee
were taken up by the Irish government the following year, and a
correspondence opened with the grand juries of each county, and
their opinion requested on the elegibility and centi'ality of certain
sites proposed for the new asylums, which the inspectors-general of
prisons were instructed to inspect, and report on for the information
of the lord-lieutenant.

" The limited powers of the Executive under the existing enact-
ments, interposed an obstacle to any further progress beyond mere
pieliminary arrangements, with the exception of some additions vto
the asylums, called for by the pressure of demands for admission
in some of the districts. But it is now gratifying to state, that
the evil has been at length remedied, by the Act of last session,
8 & 9 Vict., c. 107, which removes the legal restriction that has
hitherto limited the accommodation of each asylum to 150 inmates,
and thus prevented their enlargement to any sufficient extent. It also
provides for the erection and establishment of a central asylum for
criminal lunatics, which will relieve the existing asylums from this
class of patients."?(Report, p. 6.)

Notwithstanding these laudable intentions promulgated in 1846,
we perceive by the present Report, that on the 31st December, 1848,
there were, out of an aggregate of 5678 patients?338 confined in
gaols, and 1940 in union workhouses. Furthermore, from another
table, exhibiting the number of committals of lunatics to gaols, and
their discharges, we observe that during the years 1847 and 1848,
there were as many as 1041 lunatics committed to gaol, without
being convicted of any offence beyond their being unhappily so
afflicted. This is not all. The inspectors report that they " have
also reason to believe that family disputes, particularly where land
and other property is in question, have occasionally led to the con-
finement of individuals, [under the Act, 1 Vict. cap. 27,] some pro-
vocation to an act of violence being given in order to bring the
parties within the more effectual cognizance of the law."?(Report,
p. 8.) To provide against this evil, the inspectors require a copy of
the certificate of admission of every dangerous and criminal lunatic;
but even this appears to us insufficient. The practice of committing
lunatics to gaol ought to be abolished; nay, although a majority
of them be minor culprits, their offences are probably the result
only of their insanity. We regret, therefore, that such a system as
this should still exist in Ireland. The provision for the insane in
workhouses, although only temporary, is equally objectionable;
indeed we cannot conceive a more deplorable picture than the in-
spectors themselves give us in the following statement:?

"The wards allocated to lunatics in the workhouses of this country,
however ill-constructed and ill-adapted to the purpose, may be looked
upon as so many subsidiary depots affording a temporary shelter to
the insane, in the absence of suitable accommodation. Originally
intended for idiots, as their name implies, these wards become from
time to time receptacles for patients labouring under every type of
mental disease. On our visitations, we have occasionally found in
them cases of the most acute mania, requiring a care and vigilance
that could not be expected from a class of attendants taken out of the
general mass of paupers, frequently aged and infirm themselves, and
whose services are for the most part unrequited. If admission to the
district asylum cannot be procured for individuals thus acutely
affected, no alternative is left, but to await a vacancy, unless in the
interim, as usually happens, they are committed to tlie nearest prison,
as dangerous, or perhaps as criminal lunatics. The great majority,
however, of the insane in unions, may be classified as idiotic, epileptic,
and demented, amounting in all to 1943. There being no law nor
fixed regulation to confine persons labouring under these different
grades of mental aberration to a continued residence in unions, when
once admitted, their numbers in them are necessarily subject to much
fluctuation. Of 130 poorliouses, 124 at present contain a certain
proportion of lunatics, ranging from four to over sixty. In some
unions, during the two past years, such was the pressure from without,
and so great the necessity of hospital accommodation, that the idiot
divisions, when not fully occupied, were done away with altogether,
and made available for general purposes, their former inmates being
diffused through the paupers at large. We are aware that the Com-
missioners for the Relief of the Poor in Ireland, as well as the local
authorities, are alike sensible of the great inconvenience caused by
the residence of the insane, no matter of what class, in workhouses,
where, generally speaking, cooped up in gloomy cells, ivithout any
provision for exercise, comfort, or employment, any attempt at classifi-
cation, or moral treatment on their behalf, is quite impracticable."
Such a description as this?the sane mingling with the insane?
the poor idiot with the pauper?cooped up in gloomy cells, and
wholly unprovided for with either moral or medical treatment, carries
us back to the remoter and darker age when insanity was little un-
derstood, and the unhappy victim was left, as in Hogarth's picture,
to pine away in straw and misery. Such is at this moment, it would
seem, the state of lunacy in Ireland.

Another point for regret which is suggested by the Report before
us is, the want of any definite statistical account; inasmuch as we
find by the Report of 1846, that the number of pauper and other
lunatics in Ireland were disposed of as follows :??

IK ASYLUMS, OR OTHERWISE
ACCOMMODATED.
District Lunatic Asylum
IiOcal ditto ....
Gaols
Poor Houses ....
Total in District Asylums, Gaols,
and Poor Houses ....
Wandering, cases of Idiots and Sim-
pletons, not in any Asylum, (from
Returns furnished in 1844) . . ,
Gross Total of Pauper Lunatics .
In Private Asylums
Lunatics under care of Court of Chan-
cery, not iu any Asylum ....
Total in private Asylums, and under
protection of Court of Chancery
Total in Public Asylums, Gaols,
and Wandering cases . . . .
Grand Total . . . .
M. F. Total
91
72
440
87
112
533
178
184
15
epileptics.
M.
119
21
212
F. Total,
55
35
377
174
56
589
M.
355
20
51
F.
Total.
404
15
47
34
759
35
52
85
incurable.
M.
740
116
97
92
F.
098
171
210
52
Total.
1,444
287
307
144
M. F.
1,311 1,244
229 333
177 113
754 1,167
2,471 2,857
3,992 2,225
6,463 5,082
155 96
47 29
202 125
6,463 5,082
6,665 5,207

Hence at this period, on the 1st of January, 1846, there were
11,872 lunatics in Ireland; and yet in the report now published, we
find that the aggregate accommodation which will he provided by
the new and existing asylums will only afford reception for 4500
inmates. It is stated, and the fact is melancholy, that the famine
and pestilence of 1847, which pressed so heavily on the pauper popu-
lation, visited with peculiar severity the insane. The inspectors re-
port, that " as a class no portion of the community suffered more than
the destitute, whether labouring simply under aberration of mind or
a total deprivation of reason. At a period of aggravated misery,
when individual life depended upon individual exertions, or personal
appeals to charity, it cannot be a matter of surprise that the un-
protected lunatic or idiot, in whom physical debility is for the most
part combined with mental imbecility, should be amongst the first
to suffer. Destitution itself was no unfrequent cause of madness;
independent of direct cases, which fell under our own cognizance, we
have unerring testimony to the fact, in the palpable increase of
applications for admission to asylums in a diminished population;
and in many instances, it would seem that the insanity arising from
starvation was a ..mere prelude to death, as the comforts and remedial
treatment of our hospitals were found inoperative to restore either
health or reason. To these causes,' combined with an epidemic
dysentery, would Ave attribute the unusual and extensive mortality
which prevailed during 1847 and the commencement of 1848
amongst the insane. The deaths in district asylums alone amounted in
1847 to 422, and in gaols to 122, exceeding those of the preceding
year by 224 and 47 respectively. In poor-houses, the disproportion
of mortality between these two years was much greater, as might be
expected, in consequence of the more rapid propagation of disease
from their overcrowded state. In some of the southern and western
unions, the inmates of the idiot wards were almost all carried off by
fever or other complaints; and, as a case in point, we may adduce
Bantry, where, in the course of a few months, out of thirteen of these
afflicted beings we found but three remaining."?(Report, p. 6.)
Such a calamitous season vitiates, quoad that period, any ordinary
statistical induction ; but this is not all. In the table above given
for the year 1846, there is a return of " wandering cases of idiots
and simpletons, not in any asylum, from reports furnished in 1844,
amounting to 6217;" and in the present Report, which appears to
us very defective upon this point, we gather, that according to the
returns furnished by the constabulary, the number of wandering
lunatics and imbeciles amounts to 6000, although the inspectors
add, that in some remote districts " they may be considered almost
to be extinct"?as if, indeed, they were Saurian reptiles, deserving
no better fate. But take the number, as given by the constabulary,
at 6000, we shall then have in Ireland :?

Lunatics in district asylums 2,603
? local asylums,  365 ?
? private asylums  432
? gaols   338
,, union workhouses 1,940
Total. . 5,678
Wandering lunatics and imbeciles .... 6,000
Total. . 11,678
And yet the accommodation contemplated in the improvement and
enlargement of existing asylums will not exceed admission for more
than 4500. This is truly lamentable !
Again, the inspectors in the Report before us attest their belief
that these wandering lunatics and idiots, by intermarriage, actually
propagate the disease. "We may here," they observe, "express
our belief, as the result of observation and inquiry, that insanity
in all its varied forms can be occasionally traced, even through
remote degrees of relationship, from its original propagation by
wandering idiots and imbeciles, and that the practice of intermar-
riage, which prevails in some districts, from a desire of the parties to
perpetuate the tenure of land or other property amongst their imme-
diate kindred, is not an unfrequent cause of lunacy; in evidence of
which, we might instance the fact of ten of the same family being
committed, in the course of a few years, as dangerous lunatics alone
to the gaol of Monaghan."

With an increasing population, we are well aware that insanity
will also be on the increase ; but the ratio of insanity to the popu-
lation in England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland is different. The
inspectors in this Report calculate, that in England the number of
persons labouring under mental disorder is to the general mass as
1 to 870 ; in Scotland and Wales, 1 to 740; while in Ireland, it is
1 to 900. We, however, repeat, that the data for any accurate in-
duction is obviously so defective, that we cannot come to any satis-
factory result. In Ireland, as in England, there is a large class of
lunatics unprovided for?persons who are not exactly paupers, but
enabled to pay a certain sum, although small, for their board and
residence. " I am most anxious/' said Dr. Conolly, in his evidence
before the committee of the House of Lords, in 1843, " to see such
institutions in this country. There is not a Aveek passes without
my having the most affecting accounts of distress brought upon
families in middle life by the insanity of some relative?the head,
perhaps, of the family?or a son, or a daughter, and there is no
place to send them to. We want an institution that should receive
them for a small sum, within their ability to pay?say 20/. or 30/.
a year, other patients being received at higher rates, but all being
accommodated alike."

The same want appears to exist in Ireland. "We regret," say
the inspectors, " that as yet no provision exists for the insane, who
not being paupers, are legally inadmissible into our public institu-
tions, and who at the same time are unable to meet the charges
generally made in private licensed houses. The individuals in ques-
tion principally belong to the farming classes, and as they are heavily
assessed for the erection and support of our district asylums, we
think, under certain restrictions, they have an equitable claim to
enjoy the benefit of such public establishments as paying patients,
and at an average cost of maintenance.

" The only mixed institutions into which the insane are received
at a moderate rate are St. Patrick's Hospital and the Retreat; the
accommodation in them is, however, far too restricted for general
purposes, and they are consequently more appropriated for lunatics
from the better classes of life, and who may have fallen into strait-
ened circumstances. Of the manner in which they are conducted we
take the present opportunity to express our approval; and it is a
circumstance of pride to us to state that the asylum originally founded
by the celebrated Dean Swift, when the treatment of lunacy was little
studied, and humanity towards the insane still less practised, was
and has ever continued, from the liberality and benevolence of its
governors, as well as the high professional character of its atten-
dants, a credit to the country."

Besides the district and local asylums, there are also private esta-
blishments, principally in the vicinity of Dublin and Cork, for the
reception of patients in the higher ranks- of life. These, with one
or two exceptions, are under the management of members of the
medical profession. With these private asylums the inspectors state
they have every reason to be satisfied, and they trace a continued
improvement in such houses, and the social and domestic condition
of their inmates.

"We have also observed that a strong disposition exists on the
part of proprietors to make up for primitive defects by structural
improvements, which are being effected in many licensed houses, and
will, we anticipate, be extended to all; and notwithstanding the dis-
advantage arising from their not having been originally intended as
abodes for the insane, it is gratifying to report that an effective
classification is preserved, ancl that in some instances completely
detached buildings have been licensed and appropriated for the
exclusive occupation of the respective sexes?an arrangement much
to be approved of.

" Due provision has also been made for religious service, and the
patients have full opportunity of conforming to their respective per-
suasions : as the amusements and occupations must principally
depend on the character of the disease, and the progress towards
recovery; for those who are not allowed beyond the precincts of the
asylum, various social recreations are provided, such as music, reading,
drawing, &c.; whilst convalescents in a more advanced stage are per-
mitted to drive, walk out, and occasionally go to concerts, and other
places of amusement, under proper surveillance; there is every reason
to believe that this indulgence induces a feeling of contentment, and
tends towards the eventual recovery of the patients.

" On our various visitations to licensed houses, we have made their
domestic arrangements particular subjects of inquiry, and amongst
other matters, we had occasion to direct that a greater variety of diet
should be supplied in some, with a more suitable attendance on the
patients. We also found it our duty to communicate directly with the
immediate relatives of parties respecting clothing and other requisites,
where satisfactory evidence was adduced to show that the remonstrance
of the superintendent or proprietor had failed in obtaining the neces-
sary supply; and we required, in more than one instance, the defi-
ciency to be provided for at the asylum. Our interference may have
thus occasionally extended beyond the special injunctions imposed on
us by law; but feeling it incumbent, as a matter of duty, we have
not failed to exercise the discretionary powers vested in us by the
Act of Parliament to the fullest extent, wherever our official inter-
position could in any way advance the social condition, or promote
the comforts of the lunatic."?(Report, p. 12.)

The inspectors, in their present Report, make several suggestions,
which may be very advantageously adopted. In reference to the
profits arising from the industrial employment of patients, they truly
observe?

" That habits of industry are far from being incompatible with the
loss of reason, or an original deficiency of intellect. Independent of
farming operations and common household trades, many are em-
ployed in the manufacture of cloth, linen, lace, &c., the saving from
which amounted in the last two years to 3629/. We would here
take the opportunity to suggest, that a certain portion of the net
profits might be both charitably and judiciously laid aside for the
benefit of convalescents, particularly females, so as to secure them a
temporary support after their discharge, and to obviate the danger of
a relapse from penury and destitution."

They very properly advise that clergymen, whether Catholics or
Protestants, should he attached to every asylum.

" There are at present but three district asylums which are not
regularly attended by paid chaplains; and though visited from time
to time by the parochial clergy, as such visits are gratuitous and un-
certain, we have recommended to the boards the propriety of adopting
a system which elsewhere has been found beneficial. In one of the
establishments referred to, objections may arise, from the variety of
religious persuasions in it; but as a large proportion of the inmates
belong to the Established and Roman Catholic Churches, it is highly
desirable to have chaplains respectively for them, with a Presbyterian
clergyman for the others generally."

They also propose that the resident managers of all hospitals for
the reception of the insane shall hereafter be professional men, which
is clearly a proper suggestion; for whatever be the form of the
malady, every patient ought to be at all times under medical sur-
veillance.

The inspectors, in conclusion, comment on the defective state of
the law of lunacy in Ireland, and repeat their recommendation in a
former Report, that the several Acts now in operation be consoli-
dated into a single statute.

" Our sphere of duty," they observe, " having become gradually
extended much beyond its original limits, and finding our usefulness,
on the one hand, daily impaired by the defective provisions of pre-
vious acts, and our exertions, on the other, continually retarded by
the circuitous interposition of powers conferred under the still older
enactments for public asylums, dating some of them more than
twenty years back, we would desire to impress upon your lordships'
attention that the exigencies of the Irish department require an
enactment such as that already in force in England; we do not,
therefore, hesitate to recommend a consolidation of the different
lunacy Acts at present in force in Ireland, feeling convinced that the
interests of this branch of the public service demand that a bill
should be submitted to parliament during the coming session, which
would embrace within the compass of a single statute, a combined
system of laws to regulate both the public and private lunatic asylums
of this country.

" e have thought it our duty to submit to your lordships' consi-
deration this expression of our conviction, feeling assured that the
existing English enactment, and the bill before parliament for Scot-
land, afford, with the experience of this department, a strong prece-
dent, and sufficient materials from which to frame a similar measure,
adapted to the character and wants of our Irish asylums; and when the occasion presents itself, we will endeavour, by our suggestions on
the several points in detail, to show that a central authority, with an
organization like that extended to England, and contemplated for
Scotland, could he effectually applied in this country to carry out
an improved system of superintendence and management, and in a
manner calculated to secure an uniform and effective administration
of our Irish institutions."

In bringing our analysis of the Report before us to a conclusion,
Ave would observe that at a period of Irish history so fraught with
domestic and political strife, setting at bold defiance the concen-
trated wisdom of the British legislature to find for the many evils
which exist an efficient remedy, how is it possible for us to expect
that the wants of the insane portion of the population can be suffi-
ciently provided for in a manner at all commensurate with their un-
happy and deplorable condition 1 The attention of government is,
we are glad to hear, directed to these crying evils, and every dispo-
sition exists, on the part of the Irish authorities, to meet the exi-
gencies of the case. We must not expect, for the present, great
things; but we have no doubt that, ere long, a just and compre-
hensive enactment will receive the sanction of the Parliament, which
will, as far as such enactments can do, grapple with this important
subject.
