The Sedative Treatment of Insanity
===================================

In tlie first number of our Journal, we brought under the notice of
the profession the recently published views of Dr. E. J. Seymour on
the treatment of certain forms of insanity, by the persevering ad-
ministration of sedatives. We considered Dr. Seymour's observa-
tions on this subject founded 011 sound physiology, and supported by
practical experience. Having witnessed the most extraordinary
results from the long continued exhibition of the acetate of morphia,
as prescribed by Dr. Seymour, we felt it our duty to direct tlie atten-
tion of those having the care of the insane to this distinguished phy-
sician s work. Since the publication of the article in question, wc
have received from private practitioners, and gentlemen associated
with our public institutions, a large body of evidence in support of
the treatment recommended by Dr. Seymour. We have before us a,
v 9
320 THE SEDATIVE TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
paper written by Dr. Frederick Engelken, superintendent of tlie
Asylum for the Insane at Obernenland, near Bremen, on the exhi-
bition of opiates in various forms of mental derangement. The
views of these physicians are strongly corroborative of those enter-
tained by Dr. Seymour. Dr. Engelken would find the acetate of
morphia more satisfactory and curative in its effects than any other
form of sedative.
The writer, after expressing his unqualified disapproval of the
empirical method that had been advocated at some of the scientific
meetings of Germany, regarding the exhibition of opium in large
doses, gives his opinion that this medicine is, undoubtedly, one of the
most admirable remedial agents in psychical diseases. " During a
'period of eighteen years," says Dr. Engelken, " in which I have
employed opium in a large number of cases, both in private practice
and in my own establishment, I have seen its administration attended
by the most surprising results, and in this respect my opinion of its
efficacy is confirmed by the thirty years experience of my father
and predecessor. Opium is generally favourable to excitable nervous
constitutions, and appears to be specially indicated where there is a
greater or less degree of erethism of the nerves, and where, conse-
quently, the affection is not of a dynamic nature, but is psychically
manifested by a preponderance of exaltation. It should be given in
doses of from one to two grains, and gradually increased. In most
cases, the object aimed at is attained by giving from three to four
grains morning and evening, and it is not often found requisite to
increase the doses. The first sleep induced by this exhibition occa-
sionally constitutes a special kind of crisis, as in delirium tremens.
An amendment is immediately discoverable, which progresses from
day to day. It is worthy of notice, that the excitement which is
usually induced by the remedy in question soon wholly disappears,
and is succeeded by uninterrupted calm on its continued administra-
tion. Where there is only a regular and inconsiderable increase of
vascular activity, I have been accustomed to combine acetum digitalis
with the opium, and to increase the doses until nausea, and even
vomiting, was induced, the result of which was, on every occasion, a
decided derivation from the brain owing to antagonism."
" Opium exercises a special, or I might almost say specific, power
in a condition of disease which I have designated as melancholia
hypochondria, and which has been admirably described by Dr. G. R.
Fleming as precordial distress. I fully concur in all that he has
said on the primary and secondary origin of this affection; but I
THE SEDATIVE TREATMENT OE INSANITY. !32L
think, witli Professor Scliroedcr van der Kolk, that the plexus of the
sympathetic nerve in the abdomen must also he included, as the seat
of the affection. The first stage of precordial distress is frequently
observed in patients under treatment, and is not of unusual occur-
rence in general practice. It most frequently arises in consequence
of violent mental agitation, as sorrow, vexation, annoyance, terror,
fear, &c. &c. If the affection be only of recent date, relief may
generally be afforded in a very short time; and even in cases of this
class, of longer continuance, a successful cure may be effected by the
continued exhibition of opium. The dose should be from one to
two grains; and if this small quantity does not afford any aid in the
treatment, a larger dose will seldom prove of more avail.
" The circumstance that opium generally affords such valuable aid
in this precordial distress, and in melancholia hypochondria, may be
regarded as a proof of the general nervous nature of the affections.
I am confident that, if opium were more frequently given in general
practice in this form of disease, the physician would often be enabled,
not only to afford immediate relief to the suffering of his patients,
but also, in many cases, to prevent precordial distress from leading
to increased melancholy, suicide, or mania. I would here briefly
remark, that magnetic electricity affords much benefit in precordial
distress.
"I have long been firmly convinced that opium, when given in small
doses, cannot be reckoned amongst narcotics, either in its primary
or secondary action, for it evidently increases the activity of the
nervous system.
" Scliultz Scliulzenstein, in his new and admirable Pharmacology,
places opium in the same category with wine and ether. It is only
when given in larger doses, he writes, that it tends to exert a fatal
action. Participating in this view, I have given opium for many years
in cholera, with the best possible result; and during the last year I
had four cases of this disease in children of poor country people, in
three of whom there was decided weakness of mind, and even imbe-
cility. This complication easily supervened, when the patient was not
immediately subject to a proper course of treatment.
"The first case was that of a girl aged fourteen. The affection had
continued for ten weeks, and the patient had been treated by three
different physicians, the last of whom told the parents that, as the
medicine prescribed (aq. laurocerasi) had produced no effect, the case
was incurable. When the girl came under my care, she looked ex-
tremely pale and ill ~} her body was much emaciated, and she could
322 THE SEDATIVE TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
neither sit nor walk, and was obliged to continue lying down : she
could not use her hands, and was obliged to be feci, being unable to
turn round without assistance. She seemed able to understand the
questions put to her, but could not make a suitable reply, and con-
tinued to chatter on nonsensically: she was irritable, captious, easily
excited to anger, and excessively silly in her manner, gestures, and
behaviour. I ordered op. pur., ^ gr.; rad. valerian, 8 gr.; Jlor. zxnei,
2 grs., to be taken morning and evening. At the end of a week I
was informed that a slight amendment had manifested itself; the
opium was increased by -} of a grain pro dosi. In three weeks there
was a perceptible amendment, and the opium was again increased ^ of
a grain. At the termination of five weeks, the child had in fact
recovered her power of walking and speaking. Doses of 1 grain of
opium were continued, and in eight weeks the patient had essentially
recovered, and the medicine was stopped. She is now strong and
healthy.
"The second case was that of a child aged 10 years. She had had
violent toothache, and on an attempt being made to extract the aching
tooth, the irritation had attacked the spinal chord, giving rise to
chorea. The brain participated so decidedly in the affection, that the
child appeared to be quite deranged. A perfect cure was effected in
the course of three weeks by opium, given in doses of from to ? of
a grain.
" The third case was that of a boy aged 10| years. A certain
degree of feebleness had manifested itself in this patient, showing
itself in a slight degree of mental derangement, combined with a
peculiar and continuous fretfulness and whining, without shedding
tears, and which it was impossible to arrest. A cure was effected in
this case at the end of five weeks, and the boy is now perfectly well.
" I could add other cases to these from my earlier experience, but
these will be sufficient to draw attention to an admirable means of
cure in this form of disease.
"I have employed this medicine,with the most anxious caution, in
cases of persons in health as well as in those diseased, and I can truly
say that I remember no case, either in insanity or chorea, with or with-
out mental derangement, where it has exerted any directly injurious
effect. It is most efficacious in recent, or in any not very chronic
cases. I consider it, in general, as extremely dangerous to begin at
once with large doses of three grains, and to increase these rapidly,
although occasionally a cure might be more speedily effected by
such a course. Should, however, apoplexy follow on such a mode
ON PARTIAL INSANITY.
323
of treatment as might accidentally happen, it cannot he determined
with certainty that this was not tlie result of the opium. It is only
in cases of decided hypercesthesis psychica et nervosa, where the vas
cular system is hut slightly implicated, that larger doses are indicated
at the commencement of the treatment."
