The Pulse of the Insane
========================

elections.
The Pulse of the Insane.?M. Jacob! lias instituted experiments
on the pulse in a great many cases of the different forms of insanity,
and also on persons in good health, in the hope of being able to draw
conclusions with reference to the relation of the circulation with the
different pathological states of the intellect and the feelings. The ex-
periments were performed on upwards of 350 persons. Three times a
day, at six, a.m., at two, p.m., and at eight, p.m., the number of pulsations
was ascertained, and a vast number of meteorological and physiological
observations noticed. He was not contented, however, with merely
ascertaining the frequency of the pulse, but he took an exact note of its
greater or less degree of strength, of fulness, of slowness, or of tension,
in the insane patients who were under observation. He indicated, besides,
the relative pulsations of the different arteries, auscultated the heart,
and counted the number of inspirations and expirations; the state of
the iris even was examined, with reference to the general circulation;
nevertheless, he remarks, " I had the vexation to see that my researches,
so conscientiously made, did not fulfil the end Iliad proposed; and I
saw that it was impossible to establish the necessary connexion between
the different pathological states of the intellect and feelings, and the
observations I had collected on the state of the circulation, the respira-
tion, and the temperature of the skin, in the insane."?Annales Medico-
P sychologiques.
144 SELECTIONS.
Compression of the Carotids in Insanity.?The phenomena no-
ticed by M. Jacobi, as resulting from this operation, were very variable;
the principal were, a sensation of burning heat, which extended over the
whole head and neck, and even to the chest. Others complained of
the same sensation inside the head. The sight was affected in many
persons, and brilliant substances seemed to pass before the eyes. It was
not uncommon for them to complain of great difficulty of breathing,
amounting even to agony. This was accompanied by a sensation of
weight in the head, giddiness, and a tendency to sleep, which, in some
cases, really occurred, the breathing being stertorous. It is probable
that in these cases sensation was lost, although it is not mentioned by
Jacobi. Syncope was of common occurrence; and Avhen not complete,
the patients complained of a difficulty in moving the lower extremities.
One person, during the compression of the carotids, fell as if struck by
lightning; but he soon got up again, and did not experience any further
ill consequence. In another person, the syncope was of considerable
duration.
M. Jacobi mentions a phenomenon which has not been described by
Burrows or Parry, namely, the sudden diminution in the beats of the
radial artery, in consequence of compression of the carotids. In seven-
eighths of his patients, the pulse fell from 100 to 66?from 72 to 48.
In three instances only the frequency of the pulse was increased.
Those persons are more readily affected by carotid compression, in
whose temperament the venous circulatory system predominates, or
whose cerebral activity has been increased by immoderate indulgence in
sexual gratification, or alcoholic drinks. Adults in the prime of life
are more easily brought under the influence of this operation than
women, children, or old men. It appears to be injurious in cases of
cerebral congestion, probably owing to the then existing greater pre-
ponderance of the venous circulation. It is, therefore, an operation
requiring peculiar precautions, and one that it would be dangerous to
employ indiscriminately.?Ibid.
Treatment op Epilepsy.?M. Delasiauve, in the concluding portion
of his essay on the treatment of epilepsy, directs especial attention to
the importance of hygiene, which he considers to equal, if not surpass,
that of medicine in the disease. There are some practitioners, even, who
look upon medicine as utterly useless in such cases, and place their sole
reliance on such measures as serve to guard the patients against the
causes which induce the fits, and favour the action of such natural
agents as are capable of changing the constitution. Hippocrates re-
commended a change of climate; and Van Swieten mentions several
instances in which epileptic patients were freed from their fits all the
SELECTIONS.
14.5
while they remained in the East Indies. M. Delasiauve advises, when
a change of climate is practicable, that a gentle, temperate climate
should be selected?one but little subject to atmospheric changes;
because experience has shown, in those asyla where epileptic patients
are admitted, that the fits are much more frequent during extreme
cold or extreme heat, and especially during continued variations of
temperature. With respect to diet, the temperament, idiosyncrasy of
the patient, state of the constitution, and his usual habits of living, will
more or less modify it; but nevertheless it may be stated, that ex-
cess in quantity or quality, of either food or drink, will prove injurious.
Every infraction of the rules of temperance will induce a relapse.
More vegetable than animal food should be taken, and cooling fruits
may also be used. Complete abstinence from wine is perhaps hardly
necessary ; but if it be drank, the wine selected should be the
least stimulant, and even then only taken in moderation. Those pa-
tients who are liable to be attacked during the night, should make but
a light supper, to avoid increasing the cerebral plethora, which is always
greater during sleep. The necessity of maintaining the excretions must
be self-evident. With respect to the insensible perspiration, cleanliness,
baths, pediluvia, frictions, and warm clothing are requisite. Hard
cravats and stays are decidedly injurious; and straw hats are better
than the hats and caps which are in common use. The hair should be
cut short; in bed, the patient should lie with his head high, to assist
the circulation of the blood through the brain. Constipation should be
avoided; when it occurs, it must be treated by injections and laxatives;
the digestive organs should be especially attended to.
A disordered condition of the menstrual secretion is generally the
cause of increased severity of the fits. The ordinary recurrence of the
' discharge is frequently sufficient to induce a fit, so that the attention of
the practitioner should be directed to this secretion, to maintain it in a
healthy state.
Continence is essentially the virtue of the epileptic; sexual inter-
course produces a nervous shock, which too closely resembles the emo-
tion which occasions the epileptic attacks, not to be attended with great
danger. Those who practise onanism have, in general, the greatest
number of fits. A peaceable and quiet life suits the epileptics best.
Even-thing that tends to excite their feelings, to rouse their passions?
the strong feelings of love, contradiction, and grief, inevitably add to
the intensity of the disease. Their situation demands the greatest ma-
nagement, as they are in general very susceptible and irritable, especially
just before and after a fit. Exercise is very salutary; an inactive,
sedentary life, increases the morbid predisposition, and renders the con-
sequences of the fits more deplorable. Hippocrates and Galen lay great
no. v. l
146 SELECTIONS.
stress on bodily exercise. Esquirol recommends gardening, horse-
exercise, the gymnasium, swimming, fencing, &c. Some of these M.
Delasiauve considers objectionable. M. Ferrus, on whose opinion our
author evidently places great reliance, depends much on the utility of
out-door work, such as agriculture and gardening. While acting as the
principal physician at the Bicetre, M. Ferrus tried this plan of treat-
ment somewhat extensively, both with the insane and with epileptic
patients. Both classes were benefited, but the latter most so. The
utility of gardening is equally discoverable in private life. Of this Ave
have in the essay before us an illustration, in the case of a gentleman
subject to epileptic fits, for which medical aid was powerless, but which
were entirely arrested by a journey to Switzerland, and garden-work,
carried on by the patient for a series of years. Other cases are also
alluded to, in which a similar result followed the having recourse to garden
employment.
Horse exercise, swimming, and fencing, which, as previously men-
tioned, are recommended by Esquirol, are stated by M. Delasiauve to
be dangerous, as are also all exertions which require too large an expen-
diture of strength, or a stooping posture, or in which the body is ex-
posed to a very intense heat or light.
Variety of occupation, intermingled with amusing relaxations, will
prove serviceable in cases of epilepsy. Intellectual employment requir-
ing deep thought is injurious. Reading, drawing, music, light composi-
tions, and the elements of chemistry, botany, physics, &c., afford great
satisfaction, and sustain the moral powers, instead of exhausting them.
In his concluding remarks, M. Delasiauve recommends the establish-
ment of institutions for the reception of epileptic patients, in order that
an hygienic as well as a medical plan of treatment may be carried out, as
is practised at the Bicetre. He considers them to be absolutely indis-
pensable.
With respect to the treatment during the fit, it resolves itself almost
entirely to the prevention of bodily danger by falls or otherwise. The
patient should generally be placed on his back in bed, all tight articles of
clothing removed, the head a little raised by pillows, in order to diminish
the determination of blood to the head, and the body placed a little on
one side, in order to favour the discharge of saliva, which collects in
quantity in the mouth, and might otherwise prevent the passage of air
into the lungs. Some patients, when attacked during the night, have
an unfortunate tendency to turn on the face, and unless carefully
watched, and their position changed, may die asphyxiated. Another
accident, which occurs in some instances, is the laceration, or even the
amputation, of the tongue during the fit. To prevent this, a piece of
wood, or a linen roll, may be placed between the teeth when the fit is
coming on.
SELECTIONS. 1^7
The symptoms consecutive to the attack occasionally require the
attention of the medical practitioner. Generally speaking, the patient
complains simply of a little fatigue, heaviness, and lieadach, which may
be removed by rest, or by a slightly sedative or cordial infusion, with
sinapised pediluvia. In the more severe cases, where the symptoms
indicate congestion of the brain or lungs, the indication of practice is
the abstraction of blood by large general bleedings, assisted by cupping
and the application of leeches. The loss of blood is readily borne under
such circumstances. Warm baths, external revulsives, sinapisms, flying
blisters, <fcc., may also be had recourse to. The utility of refrigerant
applications appears to M. Delasiauve to be problematical.?Annates
Medico-Psychologiques.
Lunatic Asylum, Nantes.?Patients are placed in the lunatic asy-
lum at Nantes, either by their friends or by order of the authorities. The
former is entitled placements volontaires, a term that does not indicate
that the patient has entered of his own free will, although such examples
occasionally occur, but that his friends have placed him there on the
authority of a medical certificate, which should indicate his mental con-
dition, the symptoms of his disease, and the necessity of treating his
case in an asylum, and of keeping him in one. One of the persons thus
admitted was a patient there for the second time. His insanity con-
sisted, not in a delirium of words, but of actions ; such as sensual appe-
tites, a desire for continual motion, and the purchase of all sorts of
articles without utility. M. Yerdon, the physician to the asylum, cer-
tified that he was insane?that the disease affected the will and the
character, rather than the ideas and the judgment, although the reason
could not be said to be sound?that the insanity Avas characterized by a
tendency to excesses of all kinds, to extravagant expenditure, and
romantic and ridiculous eccentricities. M. Foville, of the Charenton,
fully agreed with M. Yerdon, that the patient was a fit person to be ad-
mitted into the asylum; but notwithstanding, on the perusal of their
certificates, and the reading of a letter written by the person, he was set
at liberty by the authorities. The reporter observes on this case, that
justice is always unwilling to consider a man insane who can write a
reasonable letter, and sustain a long conversation without any wander-
ing in his ideas. Extraordinary actions, excesses, extravagant expen-
diture, and romantic and ridiculous eccentricities, it refers to a bad
education and pernicious habits.
The difficulty of this limitation, however, says M. Boucliet, the re-
porter, which equally exists for the disease of the intellectual faculties,
ought not to prevent our acknowledging this species of insanity, which,
without affecting the intellect, acts more especially on the moral prin-
148 SELECTIONS.
ciples. Psychologists have distinguished three distinct groups of the
faculties of the soul?sensibility, intellect, and the will : sensibility,
which comprises the pleasures and the pains, the appetites, the desires,
and the more or less reflective tendencies, that is, the sentiments; the
intellect, that is, the ideas, the notions, the thoughts; and the will, which
comprises the determinations and the resolutions, in a word, action.
This latter faculty is the result of the cooperation of the other two, or
of one of the two. Sensibility, intellect, and the will decompose in the
psychological as in the material order, and act together, or are separated
more or less completely in the pathological order. In order that man
may be in the full possession of reason, there must be a simultaneous
action of these three faculties in their regular or habitual course; but if,
under certain organic dispositions produced by disease, the equilibrium
is lost between these different forces, the mental faculties, which com-
prise the moral as well as the intellectual feelings, are changed in their
manifestations, and mental alienation is the result. The conscience
itself can no longer prevent the wanderings of the faculties; influenced by
internal sensations, it seeks its impressions in the deposed notions and
recollections of the intellect, as well as in the deposed feelings of sensi-
bility. With these elements it judges actions; thus it justifies murder
with Brutus and Charlotte Corday, suicide with Cato, and persecution
with Philip the Second and Robespierre. The lunatic who has a know-
ledge of the morality of his actions, without the power of controlling
them, or preventing their wanderings, judges and thinks rightly, but he
feels wrongly; and this perverted feeling, superexcited by disease, com-
mands the will, which directs the action in spite of his judgment, the
healthy state of which has rendered it powerless.
It is not therefore necessary that a patient should wander in his ideas,
judgment, reasoning, and language, in order that he be declared insane;
it is enough that he shows it by eccentric and abandoned actions,
caused by a diseased imagination, which the judgment is incapable
of controlling. If, in the sequestration of the insane, a separation
should be made between those whose insanity was indicated by their
words, and those who evinced it by their actions, there would be but
little room for hesitation. The latter ought to be submitted to seques-
tration rather than the others, because perversions of the sensibility
cause more injury in social life than the perversions of the intellect.
In dementia, the manifestations of insanity are less evident, because
all the faculties are merely weakened, (affaiblis.) The disorder' often
ceases, as regards words and actions, but the patient speaks and does
little; he replies at greater length than he questions, and his actions
are more routine than voluntary. The manifestations of delirium take
place only under some excitement influencing the intellect or the sensi-
SELECTIONS.
149
bility, which gradually become weaker, so as, at last, not to be in-
fluenced by any excitant. One can do as one will with these patients,
except induce them to reason. They have lost the power of combina-
tion. When excited by more or less vivid impressions, the disorder re-
turns, and its manifestations are often dangerous. Of this kind, two or
three examples are given in the report. In one of these, the patient, a
lawyer, having left an asylum apparently convalescent, while travelling
in Switzerland, mixed with society, and also bathed in the sea. The re-
sult was, that in a few days, mental delirium was displayed in the form
of all kinds of eccentricities, so that he was again placed in an asylum,
labouring under insanity and general paralysis, and died, some months
afterwards, at Charenton.
The next case exhibits, in a painful manner, the consequences of
setting at liberty a man labouring under dementia. The patient was
an old advocate; his complaint was demency, with general paralysis;
his idea, the extent of his riches. He was placed in the asylum, and an
interdiction obtained with respect to his property. Becoming apparently
better, he was removed; relapsing, he was admitted into another
asylum, whence he was withdrawn, on again improving. He then ob-
tained the withdraAval of the interdiction, and at once plunged into a
wild career of speculation, making also ridiculous purchases, until he
had ruined his own fortune, and that of his children, when the disease
carried him off.
With respect to the sequestration of the insane in asyla, it appears
that in France a law passed in 1838, (article 8,) requires the medical
man to state in his certificate, not merely the facts of the insanity, but
also that the patient's sequestration is necessary, otherwise he cannot be
received, unless the insanity be of a character to interfere with the .
public welfare, or to endanger the lives of individuals. M. Bouchet
dwells somewhat on the difficulty of indicating precisely the characters
of insanity which render a patient dangerous, and require him to be
sequestered. He considers those persons who, in their insanity, offend
against public order by wild cries, gesticulations, and menaces, and by
causing alarm, ? the religious, sombre enthusiast, who fancies he
does God service by committing murder,?and, again, the man who
fancies himself pursued and persecuted by imaginary enemies, to be
among those who require sequestration; but the patient labouring
under dementia, and the quiet idiot, may be, he thinks, kept under the
control of their respective families. Occasionally, he admits, they may
re\i\e from their apathy, and cause some annoyance to society, but this,
he says, is but momentary, and not of a nature to necessitate sequestra-
tion.
The "withdrawal of patients from the asylum is effected, first, in conse-
150 SELECTIONS.
quence of a cure; secondly, by the desire of the friends; thirdly, by
order of the prefect; fourthly, by order of the tribunal; fifthly, by
escape; and sixthly, by death.
In some cases, the indications of the cure are readily perceptible, but
in those instances in which the disease consists of an exaggeration to
delirium of an habitual state of intellect and sensibility, disordered by
nature or a bad education, the signs are less perceptible, and the patient
requires to be watched after he has left the asylum. This precautionary
measure is recommended in all cases. In some cases of insanity the
lucid intervals are so well-marked that the patients, although not cured,
may yet enjoy their liberty. In other, but very rare instances, the
dismissal of the patient before a cure has been effected becomes a
necessity, in order not to cause by a further sequestration an aggrava-
tion of the disease. This was exemplified in the case of a young
woman, whose mind was impressed with the belief that her family were
all in the asylum. Her dismissal took place, and in a short time she
was convalescent.
The second mode by which patients are withdrawn from the asylum,
is by the interference of the friends against the wish of the physician.
Of the injurious effects of this proceeding two instances are narrated :
the second is the more painful of the two. A lady, forty years of age,
labouring under incurable dementia, was withdrawn by her mother and
brother, in spite of the earnest opposition of the physician, who yielded
only on the promise of the brother that she should be under his sur-
veillance. This promise, however, was broken, and the old lady was left
alone with her insane daughter. The consequence was, that the latter
murdered her mother, by separating her head from her body, and was
then taken back to the asylum, which she ought never to have left.
The patients who are dismissed by order of the prefect are those whose
mental state is such as, under certain conditions, is compatible with the
arrangements of social life.
The fourth mode of withdrawal of a patient, by order of the tribunal,
is a legal process, and one not unattended with bad consequences.
The fifth is by evasion. This is partly attributed by M. Bouchet to
the insufficiency of the keepers, who, in consequence of the paucity of the
pay, are generally persons whose capacity unfits them for other employ-
ment. He mentions an interesting fact, that in consequence of a new
superintendent (surveittant du personnel) having been appointed, ten
escapes took place, he not having had time to make himself acquainted
with the persons under his charge. Another cause which leads to
escape is the insufficiency of the buildings where the lunatics are con-
fined, more especially in the places where they work. As in the latter
SELECTIONS. 151
case only quiet patients can escape, no great injury, M. Boucliet
thinks, can accrue, if they are soon re-captured; but it is different when
the escape takes place from the asylum, where the strictest precautions
should be enforced, and the building be so constructed as to prevent
escapes. One lunatic has escaped five times from the asylum, and four
times from the Bicetre; and another, a homicide, made his escape with
the strait-waistcoat 011.
The sixth mode, that of death, may be the result of violence or acci-
dent, or from the mental disease itself, or the accidental diseases by
which it may be complicated. The acts of violence may be committed by
the keeper in a fit of anger against the lunatic, induced by an assault
against him. To avoid this as much as possible, the service is so
arranged that the keepers are seldom alone, so as to have an imposing
array of strength to overcome the violent lunatic. They also have an
apron, which they are instructed to throw over the turbulent patient's
head, so that he can no longer see where to direct his blows. The
keepers are authorized to put on the strait-waistcoat; but confinement
in a cell can only take place by order of the physician. Accidents occur
to the insane while at work, as they do to other workmen, and from
the direct violence of the patients, while labouring under delirium. Of
the former only two have proved fatal in fourteen years. Suicide is rare;
but attempts at self-murder are frequent. The refusal to take food ia
generally obviated by the use of the oesophageal sound, modified by
Leuret and Baillarger. Generally speaking, this plan soon succeeds in
overcoming the refusal; but one patient persisted for several months,
alleging that her food was poisoned. She died of gangrene in different
parts of the body. Hanging is a mode of self-destruction frequently
attempted. One patient succeeded in destroying himself by tearing the
strait-waistcoat, and strangling himself with one of the bands. Another
patient poisoned himself with glass, which he had managed to collect
and break up; and another threw himself under a cart-wheel, but without
experiencing any injury.
Death, as the direct result of insanity, occurs but rarely in the
asylum. M. Bouchet refers the mortality of the insane to acute or
chronic cerebritis, the latter showing itself in the form of dementia,
complicated with general paralysis. The mortality in 1846 was nine-
teen per cent, among the men, three per cent, among the women. This
was owing to the greater number of cases of dementia, a disease more
prevalent among men than women. Among the diseases which com-
plicated insanity was scurvy, which showed itself in several cases of
dementia; these terminated fatally. It also appeared in patients affected
with other forms of insanity. Of these latter, two died, and about
152 SELECTIONS.
from seventeen to twenty recovered. The only cause that M. Bouchet
can assign for its occurrence, is the inertia which attends dementia.?
A nnales Medico-Psychologiques.
Attempt at Murder : Insanity.?A man named Miguand, alias
L'Oreille, alias Alexis, was, in December, 1847, tried at the Court of
Assizes of the Seine, for attempting to murder the police-serjeant, who
was about to arrest him for breaking his ban. Certain facts having come to
the knowledge of the magistracy, they directed an inquiry to be made as
to the state of his mind. Dr. Jacquemin, physician to La Force, reported
that " Miguand is a complex being : in his ordinary state he is gentle,
and as easy to lead as a child; but when opposed, he becomes ferocious,
and resembles a brute beast. On one occasion he literally crushed a
tumbler between his teeth. His excitement is such, that, in order to
restrain him, it is necessary to put irons on his hands and feet." Dr.
Jacquemin's opinion, however, was, that the accused fully understood
the nature of the crime he had committed. The crown eventually
abandoned the prosecution on the production of a certificate from the
physician to the Madelonnettes, stating that, in 1838, the prisoner was
confined there for confirmed insanity. The jury returned a verdict
accordingly.
A few days afterwards, Miguand was brought before the tribunal of
Correctional Police in Paris, on the charge of breaking his ban. His
costume on that occasion was bizarre. On his prisoner's dress he wore
the grand cross of the Legion of Honour; at his button-hole there was
a large pasteboard cross; from his neck there hung a myriad of
amulets, &c., and his fingers were loaded with rings. The contradictory
nature of the reports from La Force and the Madelonnettes induced the
court to order a fresh inquiry to be made into the state of the prisoner's
intellect.
Infanticide.?Louis Cellier, a priest, serving the parish of St. Gall,
in the diocese of Clermont, was arraigned at the Cour d'Assises du Puy
de Dome, on a charge of infanticide, the victim being his illegitimate
offspring, by his servant. The plea of insanity was alleged in his
defence. Several of the witnesses gave it as their opinion that sil
rietait pas fou, il etait bien drole tout le meme. During the mission he
himself rang the bells at all hours of the night. One day, during the
procession, he got a drum, and began to beat it; he did the same on
another occasion in the sacristy, while they were singing. Again, when
returning from administering the viaticum, and passing through the
village, he shouted out the song, " Reveillez vous, belle endormie." He
SELECTIONS. 153
used to consecrate eight hundred hosts for the spiritual wants of the
inhabitants of the commune, although they were only three hundred in
number. When he was the vicar at Maraingues, he used to get up at
night, and go out alone, or accompanied by a man he employed, and,
armed with a poniard, sword, or other weapon, give way to the most
extraordinary courses in the fields; or else, suddenly seized with a panic
fear, would flee until overcome with fatigue. At other times, he would
turn his weapons against his companion, and even against a tree, which
he would combat with, until he fell from exhaustion. His mother was
insane from an early age.
Louis Cellier was found guilty of the crime of infanticide, with miti-
gating circumstances, and sentenced to five years' hard labour. The
sentence did not change the expression of the prisoner's features in the
least?they bore the same pale and suffering imprint as before, the same
vague and unintelligent look.?Gazette des Tribunaux.
In this case, according to the editor of the Annates Medico-Psyclio-
logiques, the medical men who were consulted considered Cellier's con-
duet to indicate great excitement and bizarrerie, but not to amount to
mania. The editor of the journal observes that the court ought not to
have been content with this opinion, but to have summoned medical
men who have devoted themselves to psychological studies, as they alone
are competent to judge of the mental state of an accused person. How-
ever enlightened and well-informed they may be, other practitioners are
not able to seize the more minute indications of insanity, since even
psychologists themselves in some cases require a great deal of time and
attention to declare the presence or absence of insanity.
Cerebral and Meningeal Phlebitis in Puerperal Women.?
M.Ducrest, who has published an essay on the occurrence of cerebral and
meningeal phlebitis in puerperal women, states that the disease is met
with but rarely. When it is met with, however, it constitutes a very
dangerous complication of the puerperal state. Encephalic phlebitis
presents all the characters which belong to the anatomical lesions ob-
served in the phlebitis of other organs, that is to say, it is adhesive or
suppurative. In the first case, we find, in the calibre of the cerebral
vessels, a firm clot adhering to the vascular parietes; in the second, pus
is found in the veins and in the cerebral mass, either infiltrated or in
the form of abscesses; the extent, seat, and number, may vary. As the
result of these lesions, or occurring at the same time, we may note other
secondary alterations, such as meningitis, meningo-encephalitis, hemor-
rhage, and ramollissement. In all cases there were purulent collections
elsewhere besides the brain, that is, in the uterus, lungs, &c. It is
1 54 SELECTIONS.
worthy of notice, that cerebral phlebitis principally attacks tuberculous
subjects; M. Ducrest looks upon it as a secondary disease, a consecutive
phlebitis.
The symptoms described by M. Ducrest are chiefly those which are
indicative of cerebral mischief; they are not diagnostic of the disease in
question. They are?more or less intense headache, delirium of a
variable character and duration, preceded or followed in some cases by
a sort of obtuseness or torpor of the intellect; convulsions, trembling of
the muscles of the limbs and face; eclampsia, palsy, generally partial and
incomplete; contraction, generally backwards, even to convulsions ;
numbness of the limbs; feeling of burning and weight in the eyes,
irregular dilatation of the pupils, &c. These symptoms are neither
constant nor diagnostic; nor are they certain data for the prognosis
and treatment of the disease. M. Ducrest nevertheless concludes, that
the occurrence of all or of the greater part of these symptoms indicates
an organic affection of the brain, whatever it may be, which consequently
ought to attract the attention of the practitioner; that it should be
treated according to the strength of the patient, and the therapeutic
rules which guide the treatment in acute diseases of the brain; and
lastly, that, as there are stages in the progress of encephalic phlebitis,
a prompt and active treatment should be adopted in the early part of
the disease, to prevent its passing into the suppurative stage.?Archives
Generates de Medecine.
Treatment op Epilepsy.?M. Mettais, at Montrouge, strongly re-
commends the employment of tartarized antimony externally in frictions
on the head, in cases of epilepsy. He mentions several cases in which
benefit has been derived from this plan of treatment, which is not,
however, a novel one, counteraction having been employed long since,
although now much neglected.?Gazette Medicate.
M. Le Breton describes, in another number of the same journal, a
case in which he had recourse successfully to a much more severe treat-
ment for the cure of this disease. He was consulted by a young man,
who had epileptic fits daily, and whose countenance bore an impression
of hebetude. M. Le Breton applied the actual cautery, two lines in
diameter, to the sinciput, keeping the instrument applied about twenty-
five seconds, and pressing so as not to affect the whole thickness of the
skin. The cautery was applied once a week for about three weeks,
during the whole of which time the patient did not have one fit. The
cautery was not then applied until the twelfth day, and then more
superficially than before. M. Le Breton saw the patient a fortnight
afterwards, quite cured, his intellect and strength being fully restored.
SELECTIONS. 155
The same state of good health persisted when the patient was seen by
M. Le Breton about three months afterwards.
Nocturnal Neuralgia of the Forearm.?M. Gamberini, in
describing this singular disease, states that it commences by a pain at
the end of the fingers of one hand, generally the two last, and then
extends along the forearm, to within one or two inches of the elbow.
The pain has always stopped there in the cases which have fallen under
M. Gamberini's notice. The night is the time when the spasm occurs;
and it becomes so severe as to prevent sleep, and draw forth the most
piercing cries : nevertheless, with the daylight relief from pain occurs,
and few patients then retain any feeling of the past sufferings. The
part when examined, either before or during the attack, does not ex-
hibit any visible alteration, neither tumefaction nor heat, although the
patient, while the pain endures, complains of this latter sensation, and
throws off the bedclothes, or anything else that may tend to increase
the feeling. Cold applications, such as plunging the part into cold
water, cause the most acute suffering ; which is also increased by mov-
ing the limb. An evident crepitation of the tendons is occasionally
heard, resembling the sound emitted by walking on snow. One limb
only is generally attacked ; and women are more liable to it than men,
especially robust women, between twenty and thirty years of age, whose
occupations require fatiguing motions of the upper arms.
In consequence of the regular periodicity with which the disease
returned each evening, M. Gamberini was induced to exhibit the sul-
phate of quinine, but in vain. After trying several other remedies, he
found that belladonna, made into an ointment as folloAvs,?lard, ten
drachms; extract of belladonna, four scruples, and used in frictions on
the painful parts,?was possessed of the required efficacy. The general
indications should be attended to at the same time : thus, in a strong,
plethoric patient, in addition to the use of the belladonna, M. Gamberini
employed bleeding with advantage.?II Raccoglitore Medico.
Paralysis independent of Lesion of the Nervous Centres.
?Dr. Luyckx records the case of a woman sixty years of age, who,
having been exposed to cold and wet for a long time, gradually lost the
use of her legs, and afterwards of the arms. The limbs were in an
edematous state, and cold. The intellect was unaffected, and sensation
in the parts continued. The patient was treated by emetics, pur-
gatives, blisters, &c. In ten days improvement commenced ; and in
less than three months she was cured. M. Luyckx considers that in
this case the disease was in no way connected with the nervous
156 SELECTIONS.
centres, but was seated in the peripheric nerves.?Annates de la Societe
de Medecine cCAnvers.
(Esophageal Catheterism of the Insane.?The thesis of M.
Emile Blanche on oesophageal catheterism of the insane is reviewed
in I? Union Medicate. We extract from that notice the following
article :?
" Esquirol was the first who proposed introducing through the nos-
trils into the oesophagus a gum-elastic catheter, in order to convey
liquid food into the stomach. Two surgeons, Antoine Dubois and
Murat, accordingly practised the operation, without in any way modi-
fying the instrument which was used, although the route it had to
traverse was very different in its anatomical aspect. The consequence
was, that it did not always succeed; sometimes it was attended
with considerable danger, and followed even by death. To remedy this,
certain modifications in the instrument were made. The first and
most important, by Dr. Ferrus and Dr. Mitivie, was the substitution of
an ordinary gum-elastic catheter for the oesophageal instrument. This
has been used successfully for five months together in one case by Dr.
Ferrus; and for seven weeks at a time, by M. Blanche, on an insane
patient at the Salpetriere. The latter states that the operation with
this instrument is easily performed, and with proper care we may be
sure of succeeding. There are, however, certain difficulties connected
with its use : when the catheter reaches perpendicularly the posterior
paries of the pharynx, it may form an arch. If it be not very flexible,
it curves with difficulty; and if force be used, this part of the operation
may be painful. When the lunatic has acquired by practice the art of
applying the base of the tongue against the posterior paries of the
pharynx, by energetically contracting the muscles of that part, the
obstacle to the passage of the catheter becomes serious. In such a
case it may curve on the base of the tongue, and pass into the mouth,
and then, by using a little force, a false passage may be made, by
perforating the pharynx. The catheter may also pass into the larynx,
or it may bend at the part where its eyes are situated, and thus form an
obstacle which will prevent the passage of food, even when the instru-
ment is in the oesophagus. To remedy these inconveniences, M.
Baillarger provided the catheter with two stilets, one of steel, and the
other of whalebone; the first, bent to a proper angle, enabled the
operator to avoid the posterior paries of the pharynx; the second, after
the first had been withdrawn, straightened the catheter by its elasticity,
and applied it against the pharynx, thus withdrawing it from the glottis.
The double object of the operator was thus answered; but it was
attended with the difficulty of withdrawing the stilet in its curved state
through the nostrils, the vertical diameter of which is not sufficient for
that to be done readily ) its extraction therefore causes a dragging and
a compression which is always painful. To do away with this, M.
Blanche has invented an articulated stilet, the rings being thirty-one in
number, and so arranged as to play freely when flexed, but when ex-
SELECTIONS. 157
tended, wliicli is effected by a watch-spring working inside the rings, and
soldered to a stiff and moveable stem, it assumes all the rigidity of a
non-articulated stilet. This instrument, then, after it has been passed
in the cnrved state through the nostrils into the pharynx, can be
straightened, and passed on, so as to avoid the larynx. All that is re-
quisite is to pull upon the watch-spring, which becomes straight, draw-
ing with it the rings of the metallic chain, and thus apply the catheter
against the posterior pharyngeal paries. When it has reached the
oesophagus, the stem connected with the watch-spring is let go, the
articulated part resumes its flexibility, and the stilet can thus readily
be withdrawn."
This instrument appears to be a valuable modification and improve-
ment on those previously in use.
M. Brierre de Boismont mentioned at a meeting of the Societe de
Medecine at Paris, reported in the Revue Medicate, that in cases of
insane persons who refuse to take food, he puts on the strait-waistcoat,
and then introduces, by force, a catheter through the nose into the
pharynx. He does not consider it requisite to pass it into the oeso-
phagus. Some liquid aliment is then introduced through this canal;
and he asserts that the agony the proceeding causes, as well as the im-
minent sense of suffocation, are such that the patient never forgets it,
and will afterwards take the food that is offered to him, for fear of
being again subjected to the same.
Medico-Legal Report on the State of Mind of Marie Made-
leine Droin.?M. Girard has published in the last number of the
Annates Medico-Psychotogiques, a medico-legal report on the state of
mind of a woman named Marie Madeleine Droin, accused of attempting
to poison the daughter of a neighbour with whom she had been pre-
viously on good terms. It appeared that prior to this event she had
manifested unequivocal signs of mental derangement, dating from the
loss of an only child, about six years previously, to whom she was
greatly attached. Her character changed; she became ill-tempered
and malicious, rejoicing when any ill befel her neighbours; and instead
of living comfortably with her husband, she made his life unhappy.
Her mind was said to be constantly occupied and disturbed, without
however being regarded as insane. Her whole pleasure seemed to
consist of speaking of her lost child, except when she alluded to the
misfortunes of others. The reason assigned for the attempt at poison-
ing the child was, that she might cause great grief to the mother, with
whom she had had a quarrel. The witness by whom this opinion was
advanced, stated that she had heard several persons ask if the prisoner's
troubles had not affected her intellect, since she was continually speak-
ing on that subject, prior to the attempt at poisoning.
J 58 SELECTIONS.
It is further stated, that the prisoner scarcely ever is the first to
speak; that she replies only when spoken to; that she is habitually sad,
and very silent, remaining seated with her eyes cast down, passing her
hand over her forehead; and not paying any attention to that which is
going on around her, and that her appetite is disordered, she scarcely
ever eating anything.?M. Girard asks, are not these the characteristic
signs of melancholy insanity?
Other extravagant actions, committed before the crime of poisoning
was attempted, are also brought forward, as for instance, the attempting
to pull down the bed-curtains when in bed, cutting her own clothes
and those of her deceased child to pieces, and making up her bed in the
granary, &c. These attacks came on at the time when the catamenia
were present. Some of the witnesses deposed to incoherence of speech
on the part of the prisoner; and after she was confined in prison a short
time, she complained of there being black cats in her room; she was
constantly speaking of self-destruction. Her symptoms are thus
summed up by the reporter, as indicative of melancholic insanity:?
"Nothing is wanting," he says: "the attitude, gestures, physiognomy,
want of sleep, loss of appetite, love of solitude; the delirium of the
passion which is the strongest in women, the love of offspring; hallu-
cinations, convulsive movements, extravagant ideas, represented by
equally extravagant actions, having the character of melancholy, and
extending as far as the manifestation of the desire for death, and
finally, the predominance of a fixed idea, impressing its seal in the
whole moral and physical being. The correctness of her memory as
to dates, coherence in her conversation, reason in her actions, and the
regularity of her vital functions, are not," says M. Girard, "incompatible
with insanity."
The personal examination of the prisoner, by the reporter, confirmed
these views. A well-marked expression of wandering and sadness
was evident in the attitude and physiognomy; she appeared agitated
and oppressed, complaining of want of appetite, thirst, headache, heat
in the bowels, and constipation; this latter lasting for a week at a time.
She thinks she sees her daughter, hears her voice; perceives flames; is
insomnolent, and goes so far sometimes as to suppose that she embraces
and touches her daughter, who suddenly disappears, so that she only
seizes a shadow. She denies obstinately having given poison to her
neighbour's child, but manifests great hatred against the father, who,
she says, has several times attempted to seduce her. Her conversation
does not betray any sign of general insanity, except when on the subject
of her daughter, to which she constantly and irresistibly led it. The
remembrance of her child caused her tears to flow, and gave a very
singular convulsive expression to her face.
SELECTIONS. 159
M. Girard drew the conclusions from the preceding facts, and from
others which are detailed in his report, that the prisoner laboured under
partial melancholic insanity, characterized further by a marked general
disorder of the intellect at intervals only, and especially at the menstrual
periods. He considered, therefore, that the attempt at poisoning was
the result of feelings of hatred and vengeance, out of proportion to the
causes which gave birth to them, caused by a perversion of the moral
sensibility and of the intellect from partial melancholia.
The woman was acquitted on the ground of insanity.
Decrease of the Brain in Insanity.?From a paper read by M.
Parcliappe, before the Academy of Sciences, " On the gradual decrease
of the brain, in proportion to the successive degradation of the intellect in
simple mania," we learn that since the publication of his treatise on in-
sanity in 1841, in which he brought forward the preceding pathological
law, the author has continued his researches, and has obtained a collection
of 498 additional microscopic observations, confirming all the anatomico-
pathological conclusions he had advanced. The existence of this patho-
logical law of the gradual decrease of the brain in proportion to the suc-
cessive degradation of the intellect springs from the comparison of the
two categories, acute and chronic insanity, the medium of which differs
in a quantity equal to eighty-nine scruples (grammes) in men, and
eighty-five in women, in a proportion equal to 77*1000 in man, and
67-1000 in woman. It becomes still more evident, by the comparison
of the medium in the four categories of chronic insanity, where we see
the weight of the brain diminish at the same time with the intellectual
power, and where the difference between the medium of acute insanity,
and the last degree of chronic insanity, is as high as 152 scruples in
man, and 135 scruples in women.?Archives Generates de Medecine.
On Cerebral Congestion, considered in Relation to Hemor-
rhage and Softening of the Brain.?Dr. Durand-Fardel read a
memoir on this subject, some months since, before the Academy of
Medicine, an abstract of which is inserted in the Archives Generates de
Medecine. The two most common affections of the brain in the adult
and in old age, hemorrhage and softening, cause, he says, organic lesions
in the cure of which the vis medicatrix Naturse plays the principal, if
not the only part. Medicine can only be useful in seeking to prevent
these diseases. With that object in view, we must become acquainted
with the premonitory symptoms, and subject them to treatment as they
occur. The precursory phenomena of hemorrhage and softening of the
brain, when they exist and can be observed, are those indicative of
cerebral congestion, such as headache, giddiness, numbness, and formica-
100 SELECTIONS.
tion of the limbs, determination of blood to the head [coup de sang), &c.
The different forms that acute softening may assume at the commence-
ment?such as an attack of apoplexy, delirium, convulsions, and gradual
and rapid abolition of the functions of relation?are identical with those
which most frequently characterize cerebral congestion. In the body,
the nearer the commencement of the disease, acute softening, is ob-
served, the more certainly are traces discovered of general or partial
hypertrophy of the substance of the brain. The more ordinary com-
mencement of softening by an apoplectiform attack announces that the
brain has been suddenly invaded by general hyperemia, to which
succeeds the partial softening which is discovered at the autopsy, or
which becomes chronic. With respect to hemorrhage, whatever part be
ascribed to the alteration of the parietes of the vessels of the brain,
which is common in old people, or to that lesion of the nervous pulp,
called by M. Rochoux, " hemorrhagic ramolissement," the existence of
which cannot be contested, at least in the greater number of cases, it
is not possible to account for the hemorrhage itself, except by the
existence of a determination of blood to the brain. We often find
traces of this determination of blood in the bodies of persons deceased
from hemorrhage, although the time that has elapsed, the treatment
that has been adopted, and the unloading afforded by the rupture of the
vessels appear sufficient to cause it to disappear. En resume: if we
ought not to award to cerebral congestion, or even to fluxion of blood,
so direct a part in the preparation and production of these two diseases,
it is impossible not to recognise a striking relation between them;
whether the question be studied on the body, or during life. The dis-
position of the system of the encephalic circulation, the extreme vas-
cularity of the brain, the size of its arteries, the extreme division of
their branches, the obstacle to the return of the venous blood by the
narrow and difficult openings in the cranium, explain the complicated
role that cerebral congestion plays in the pathology of the brain. We
may also readily find in it the explanation of a great number of cases
of serous infiltration, so often met with in the subarachnoid cellular
tissue.
Epileptiform Hysteria.?In La Verdad, a Spanish medical journal,
we find the details of a case of epileptiform hysteria. The patient was
a female servant, twenty years of age, unmarried, and of rather weak
intellect. Epileptic symptoms first showed themselves during infancy, in
consequence of blows on her head. They re-appeared at puberty, accom-
panied by cerebral inflammation, the result of injuries and attempts on
her chastity. While residing in the house of Dr. Arguinosa, she com-
plained one day of fatigue, and pain in the loins. The precursory
SELECTIONS. 161
symptoms of an epileptic attack soon showed themselves, and a few days
afterwards, on returning from a short walk, she had scarcely time to
throw herself on a bed before she lost both sensation and motion. Skin
hot; respiration loud, and as frequent as the pulse; pupil immovable;
eyelids closed convulsively; limbs flexible; while the lips Avere convul-
sively moved, or else a sardonic smile sat upon them. Bleeding was
about to be practised, when all of a sudden, after some horripilations,
the skin became cold and colourless; the pulse and respiration were
suspended; and the insensibility and immobility were such, that had
it not been for some slight nervous contractions, it would have been
thought that the patient was dead. Affusions of cold water on the
head seemed alone to produce any effect; the respiration then became
agitated, the pulse strong, and violent convulsions, with tetanic rigidity
(pleurosthotonos), set in. Dr. Arguinosa considered the case to be one
of catalepsy, with nervous irritation of the spinal marrow. Venesection;
assafcetida injection.
During the night a less severe degree of excitement alternated with
well-marked collapse. The patient was then enveloped in a sheet
soaked in warm vinegar-and-water, which was renewed thrice daily.
This was attended with a beneficial result; the symptoms lessened in
severity, and the next day the patient could express her desires by
gestures, and reply to the questions which were put to her. A glass
of orangeade, however, having been offered her, she upset it suddenly,
screamed out, and fainted. All efforts to cause her to swallow liquids
were afterwards useless. Liquids were not the only excitants of her
anger and of her attacks; but the light also, the noise or the steps
of persons around her, the unexpected presence of any one, and the
slightest contact with her body or the curtains of her bed: the influence
of my voice, however, says the author of the case, in withdrawing her
from her attacks of delirium, and the preternatural reason and intel-
ligence with which she expressed herself as soon as she recovered her
speech (the second day), Avere very singular. She had a presentiment
of her approaching death, and stated that she had never been bitten by
any animal. The next tAvo days there Avere the same alternations, the
delirium occurring less frequently, and lasting a shorter time; she
foamed at the mouth, Avhen regurgitation, or hiccough, occurred. She
slept but little that night (the fourth); the next day the only symptoms
noticed Avere aversion to Avater, light, and air, Avitli the pain of stomach
previously complained of. The sixth day she asked for a bath, and the
opium, Avhicli she took in the evening. A stool brought on strong
convulsions and noisy delirium. The Avomen who were attending to
her believing her to be possessed by the devil, sprinkled her with holy
no. v. m
162 SELECTIONS.
water, which increased her furious cries and bizarre contortions. The
following night was dreadful?the mouth full of foam, the eyes injected,
and the delirium almost continuous. About two in the morning im-
moderate laughter succeeded the previous complaints. She then ex-
pressed her thanks and gratitude to Dr. Arginuosa, and shortly after-
wards expired.
The editor considers that this singular disease was neither catalepsy,
tetanus, hydrophobia, nor epilepsy, but epileptiform hysteria. To us
it appears more to resemble hydrophobia than any other disease we are
acquainted with.
Palsy op the Tongue Cured by Galvano-Puncture.?In 1813,
an old woman, Rosa Ponti, was seized with general palsy of sensation
and motion, in consequence of fright. Of this she was cured, except
in the arms, head, and tongue. She could not articulate a word. In
1836, twenty-three years afterwards, Dr. Dacamina had recourse to
galvano-puncture:?one pole of the apparatus being applied to the
occipital nerve by means of a needle introduced into the neck, and the
other to the tip of the tongue. After two applications the patient could
raise the organ, and after the third she could reply to some questions
intelligibly, although with difficulty. After this the points of contact
were varied, and the electricity applied to different parts. The patient
gradually recovered her speech, and the other palsied parts were also
cured.?Filiatre Sebezio.
Apparent Death.?In a memoir on Apparent Death, and the Means
of Preventing Premature Interment, presented to the Academy of
Sciences, by M. Bouchut, a candidate for the Manni prize, it is stated,
that all apparent deaths, particularly those which are owing to asphyxia
or syncope, present, whatever may be the diversity of their symptoms,
one character in common?the persistence of the pulsations of the heart
?a character which distinguishes them from real death.
The immediate and certain signs of death, according to M. Bouchut, are,
the prolonged absence of the heart's pulsations, as ascertained by auscul-
tation; the simultaneous relaxation of all the sphincters, owing to the
paralysis of those muscles; and, finally, the sinking of the globe of the
eye, and loss of the transparency of the cornea. The Commissioners of
the Academy, Messrs. Dumeril, Andral, Magendie, Serres, and Rayer,
admit the correctness only of the first of these: the others they look
upon as doubtful. The certain signs of death, which occur at a later
period,?cadaveric rigidity, absence of muscular contraction under the
influence of galvanic stimulants, and putrefaction,?are admitted by all
SELECTIONS. 16-3
medico-logists. The Manni prize was unanimously awarded to M.
Bouchut, as the author of the best memoir which has been sent in
during the last ten years.?Revue Medicale.
Insanity.?M. Boucliet, principal physician to the asylum and hos-
pital at Nantes, has addressed a letter to the Academy of Medicine, in
which he expresses his opinion that vice and crime are the consequences
of moral diseases, which should be repressed for the preservation of
society, and treated in appropriate penitentiaries. For such cases he
disapproves of the Auburn system, and considers the Pennsylvanian
plan, under proper restrictions, more adapted, and more likely to prove
of service. Insanity affecting the intellect is ameliorated generally, he
observes, by the patients mixing in society, subject, of course, to cer-
tain restrictions; general insanity, however, is rendered worse under the
influence of those conditions which incessantly excite the sensibility,
md turn it from its normal ccrurse.?Revue Medicale.
Acute Mania.?A robust man was brought to the Bicetre, and
placed under the care of Dr. Delasiauve, for an attack of acute mania.
His clothes were in rags, and covered with mud; his chest, knees, face,
ind hands bearing numerous traces of bruises and scratches. He did
not present any symptoms of disease, other than the disordered state of
the brain. He was bled, and put into a warm bath for two hours. For
two days all went on well; afterwards the bruises and scratches became
inflamed, and those on the hands suppurated freely. The wound made
by the lancet also inflamed, and yielded some unhealthy pus. These
symptoms were scarcely relieved before erysipelas attacked the face, part
of the scalp, and the parotid regions, and was accompanied by great
disturbance of the circulation, the pulse being small and irregular, and
so frequent that it could hardly be counted. An emeto-catliartic and
simple diluents removed the disease in about forty hours; but it was
followed the succeeding morning by extensive meteorization of the ab-
domen, so as to raise the false ribs, and render respiration very difficult.
The patient did not complain of pain; the only symptom he presented
was the tympanitis. Magnesian Avater and astringent fomentations re-
lieved him for a short time; but the meteorization soon reappeared, and
Avas attended Avith a great discharge of blood with the urine. Attention
was thus directed to the urinary passages, and it Avas not difficult to
ascertain, by percussion and by palpation of the hypogastric region,
that the bladder Avas distended by a liquid?a distention Avhich, acting
sympathetically on the intestines, and mechanically, by compressing
them backAvards, evidently contributed to the abdominal meteorization;
m 2
164 SELECTIONS.
On the introduction of the catheter, a quantity of a thick, red liquid,
exhaling a fetid ammoniacal odour, and composed almost entirely of
blood, mixed with a certain proportion of pus, was drawn off. It ap-
peared afterwards, on inquiry, that the man had long been subject to
lumbar pains and hematuria.
The evacuation of the bladder afforded considerable relief for a time,
and the tympanitic state of the abdomen diminished; but unfortunately
the hemorrhage continued, and again distended the bladder, requiring
the catheter to be used night and morning, a liquid precisely similar,
and more or less highly coloured, being drawn off on each occasion.
The man gradually sunk, and died a few days afterwards.
The examination of the body showed that the kidneys were greatly
hypertrophied, softened, and injected; the right kidney contained a
large quantity of black and half-coagulated blood, which was also found
in the calices and pelvis. The mucous membrane was of a blackish,
livid tint, and presented signs of ramollissement. The disease had pro-
ceeded to a greater extent in the left kidney. There was very little
blood effused, but its place was supplied by a thick, reddish, purulent
liquid, which poured out of the calices, and filled the pelvis of the organ.
The kidneys presented traces of most intense inflammation; the mucous
membrane was in some parts destroyed, and in others covered with
pseudo-membranes. The disease extended along the ureters. The pa-
rietes of the bladder were greatly thickened, owing, apparently, to the
hypertrophy and induration of the cellular tissue between the mem-
branes. Its internal surface resembled that of an uterus affected with
chronic metritis. On scraping it with the scalpel, a layer of detritus,
consisting of mucus, pus, and decomposed blood, was removed, exposing
beneath a very adherent, strong, and rough false membrane. This state
of disease extended partly into the urethra, especially to the prostatic
portion and the fossa navicularis. The membranous portion was in a
state of ramollissement; the bulb hypertrophied. At that part the
canal was greatly dilated.
The abdominal and thoracic viscera were healthy, with the exception
of the liver, which was increased in size, and, by its granular and yellow
appearance, evinced a tendency to the fatty degeneration. The ventricles
of the brain contained a small quantity of reddish serosity, as did also
the cavity of the arachnoid. There was also infiltration in the sub-
arachnoid cellular tissue, and a well-marked injection of the pia mater,
especially on the sides of the posterior lobes. The grey substance of the
brain was slightly discoloured.
M. Delasiauve, the reporter of this case, was inclined to attribute
disease to some syphilitic alteration, but he was unable to trace it the
to that source. Compression of the vesiculse seminales showed that,
SELECTIONS. 1G5
instead of the spermatic fluid which they ought to contain, they were
full of an abundant matter having the colour and consistence of pus.
He was of opinion that the mental disease, especially as it assumed the
characters of melancholia, was brought on by the extensive disease dis-
covered in the urinary organs.?Revue Medicale.
Epilepsy.?M. Peraire, considering epilepsy to depend on a mo-
mentary cerebral congestion, proposes to cure it by obliterating the
numerous arterial branches which are distributed to the pericranium by
subcutaneous incisions.?Revue Medicale.
Cold Affusion.?M. Baillarger communicated to the Societe de
Medecine de Paris, the case of an insane lady he attended fifteen years
ago, for whom he ordered cold affusions, which were effected by pouring
one or two pailsful of water over the body. Following one of these
affusions, his patient was seized with severe haemoptysis, and died eigh-
teen months afterwards from pulmonary phthisis.?Revue Medicale.
Treatment of Delirium Tremens.?M. Brierre de Boismont, in
drawing the attention of the Societe de Medecine de Paris to the treat-
ment of this disease, observes that the majority of practitioners have
recourse to opium, exhibited by the mouth or in the form of enema ;
while others, again, have effected a cure by the abstraction of blood,
and again in other cases by isolation alone, and momentary abstinence
from strong liquors. M. Brierre de Boismont seeks to point out the
cases in which venesection may be useful, and those in which it should
not be practised.
When the patient is strong, plethoric, sanguine, and subject to con-
gestions or coups de sang, he is of opinion that bleeding may be prac-
tised, but in moderation, its results being carefully watched. This
practice appears to be more suited when the trembling is but slight,
there are not any convulsive signs, and the incoherence is not strongly
marked. He avoids bleeding when the patient is nervous; a state
which may very well co-occur with all the appearances of a sanguine
temperament, when the drunkard has been rarely or never bled. Those
persons also in whom the delirium supervenes suddenly and violently,
when in its symptoms it resembles ataxic meningitis, or in whom the
trembling is well marked, or there are convulsive symptoms, great in-
coherence of speech, small pulse, or a haggard expression of the eyes,
are not fit subjects for bleeding.?Revue Medicale.
Gastralgia and Hypochondriasis.? Under this title a case is
recorded in the Revue Medicale, which appears to us to be one of the
166 SELECTIONS.
examples of spermatorrhoea. The patient drew up the details of his
case himself.
Physical Condition.?Pain and burning, insupportable itching and
tickling at the left side of the base of the cranium; the symptoms
extending to the back and arm-pit of the same side; pains in the joints
of the arms and legs; respiration difficult, oppressive; digestion painful;
urine loaded; complexion yellow, earthy; eyes yellow, surrounded by
a black circle; expression fixed; expectoration null; nasal secretion
suppressed; pimples on the face, which is sometimes bloated, and
sometimes extremely thin; limbs dragging; mouth pasty; loss of
taste; numerous involuntary pollutions during sleep; and, lastly,
general debility. The patient thought afterwards that he had cured
himself of the pollutions by taking camphor in the morning fasting.
The moral state was still more afflicting. A vague feeling of general
suffering, experienced by the mind and soul more than by the body;
profound sadness; utter depression; incapability to laugh or cry;
avoidance of all society; desire for solitude; restlessness; agitated
nights ; insomnia ; incubus ; hallucinations ; always discontented,
never even a ray of pleasure; incapable of the least work, or at least
of finishing that which had been begun; excessive slowness in the
execution of all things; more or less loss of memory, and great idleness;
in fine, taciturn and a dreamer, the patient passed all his time in
pulling out the hair of his head and whiskers; and, a burden to himself,
and doubtless to others, he constantly entertained the idea of suicide,
which he was prevented carrying into effect by a religious feeling,
Bleedings, salt-water baths, travelling, magnetism, liydrotlierapeia,
and a host of nervous medicines, were tried in this case, but uselessly.
Wearied by all this, the patient determined to treat himself. He
commenced by taking an emeto-cathartic, which acted well; a brisk
purgative was then had recourse to for several days, and afterwards a
milder one substituted, until it was no longer needed, the cathartic
being again employed when circumstances indicated the necessity.
Depuratives, and bran and gelatine baths, at the temperature of from
72? to 74? F. were next used, with exercise on foot and horseback;
music, both vocal and instrumental; abstinence from all spirituous
liquors, pure, and especially white wine, coffee, tea, salted or highly-
spiced meats, and, in fact, everything that might irritate the nerves.
A mild regimen was observed; and all excesses avoided. This plan was
pursued for six months, and now the patient says he enjoys excellent
health, sleeps for six hours at a time; rises as soon as he wakes; and
is as fresh and happy now as he was sad and depressed six months ago.
He has regained the integrity of his intellect, and can hear and under-
stand well; and his memory is excellent.
SELECTIONS. 1G7
The Organization of Labour for the Insane.?M. Parchappe
observes, that if the utility of labour in lunatic asyla were confined to its
curative influence, its importance would be greatly diminished, for the
patients who are really curable constitute but a very small proportion
of the population of these establishments. But labour is in lunatic
asyla, as in all large collections of men, an essential condition for the
maintenance of order, and the preservation of good conduct. The well
being of incurable patients even is not less intimately connected than
that of other men with the laws of labour, whether it be considered as
an hygienic measure for the preservation of health, by the maintenance
of the equilibrum of the strength, or as a moral power capable of keeping
the mind at peace, by the removal of sorrow and ennui.
It is evident, therefore, that as the greater number of insane patients
in asyla are incurable, and as the latter only can be engaged in conti-
nuous labour, and that for a long time, it becomes important, in the
organization of such labour, that it be adapted to the condition and
wants of the incurables. In the first place, the occupations should
be healthy, agreeable, and productive. In point of salubrity those oc-
cupations which bring all the muscles into action, and which necessitate
exercise in the open air, are those which should be preferred. Sedentary
occupations, which alone are adapted for a great number of women, can
hardly be considered healthy, unless interrupted from time to time by
intervals of sufficient length, during which exercise may be freely taken
in the open air. They should be pursued in large well-lighted and well-
ventilated rooms, free from the extremes of heat and of cold. Labour
may be made attractive, by varying the occupation, by changing the
place where it is carried on, and by the satisfaction experienced by the
creation of the products, and still more by the predilection for an oc-
cupation which the patient may have chosen, and to which he is
habituated. It is therefore important, in allotting work for incurable
patients, to select such as may the nearest resemble their employments
before they were admitted into the asylum. The productiveness of the
labour will be regulated by the wants of the asylum. The first step in
this respect would be the supply of the asylum itself with whatever
may be required by the work of the lunatics, and thus render it inde-
pendent of out-door labour. Should there not be sufficient occupation
thus afforded, other work may be given, regulated according to the
predominating character of the industry of the country. Thus, in the
asylum at Ghent, the fabrication of lace by the female patients is recom-
mended, and the culture of silk-worms in the South of France.?
A nncdes Medico-Psychologiques.
] 08 SELECTIONS.
Acute Tubercular Meningitis in the Adult.?M. Levy, principal
physician in the hospital Yal de Grace, has reported three cases of this
disease. In the first, the tubercular affection of the pia mater was com-
plicated by softening of the brain, tubercles in the mesenteric and
bronchial glands, pneumonia, with pulmonary apoplexy, tubercular peri-
carditis, &c. The patient Avas twenty-six years of age. In the second
case, besides the tubercular disease, there were, meningitis, softening of
the brain, and tubercles in the lungs, kidneys, liver, and several other
organs. The third case was an example of tubercular meningitis, de-
veloped as a sequence of measles, accompanied by chronic pleurisy, and
preceded doubtless by numerous tubercles on the lungs, and the general
tubercular diathesis.?Bulletin de V Academie Nationale de Medecine.
Complete Paraplegia cured by Cold Bathing and Urtication.
?Dr. Van Baugevem has published, in the Annates de la Societe de Me-
decine d'Anvers, the particulars of a case of paraplegia, complete as to
sensation and motion, occurring in a scrofulous subject, from constant
exposure to the vicissitudes of the weather. Frictions with campho-
rated spirit, blisters, and purgatives, were tried for five weeks, but
having altogether failed, Dr. Van Baugevem caused his patient to be
plunged every evening up to the middle in cold water, dry friction
with flannel being practised afterwards, for half an hour, and then
urtication. At the end of a fortnight there was considerable improve-
ment ; the flogging with nettles was then omitted, the cold bathing
and the frictions with flannel only being persisted in. Three months
afterwards the cure was complete.
Chloroform in Tetanus.?A young man of good constitution was
admitted into the hospital, under M. Forget, labouring under acute
idiopathic tetanus, the result of exposure to cold, while perspiring
freely. The symptoms he presented, on admission, were those of in-
complete trismus and opisthotonos. Bleeding and the internal exhibi-
tion of ammonia were at first tried, but without benefit. M. Forget
then determined to have recourse to chloroform, four scruples of which,
poured on a compress, were applied to the nose and mouth of the
patient. From the increase of the general spasms, the moaning, the
convulsive contractions of the respiratory muscles, and the turgescence
and lividity of the face, it was feared that asphyxia was impending; the
pulse, however, remained firm at 86, the respiration became stertorous,
the foam which filled the mouth was cleared away, and the compress
re-applied; all of a sudden the muscles became relaxed, the abdomen
supple, the limbs fell lifeless, as it were, the relaxation and insensibility
became complete, the colour returned, the stertor ceased, and a deep
SELECTIONS. 1G9
calm sleep supervened. The application of chloroform lasted from one
to two minutes; the sleep continued about ten. The tetanic symptoms
returned when he awoke. With the view of breaking the chain of morbid
habit, it was determined to re-apply the chloroform, but only twice a
day, fearing that if more frequently used, disease might be lighted up
in the lungs. The same effects were constantly produced by the anaes-
thetic agent, the period of excitement, however, diminishing in dura-
tion, and that of collapse occurring more or less quickly. M. Forget
mentions particularly the occurrence of well-marked divergent stra-
bismus, as an indication that muscular relaxation was taking place.
Under this medication, the disease slowly but surely amended; after the
lapse of seventeen days from the first use of the chloroform, and thirty-
four from the commencement of the disease, all tetanic symptoms had
disappeared, and the patient was able to walk about?in fact, was quite
convalescent. The strabismus mentioned as an indication of approach-
ing muscular relaxation, it appears, was a condition of the rectus muscle
of the eye, prior to the invasion of the disease; the squint, however,
disappearing during the muscular contractions incident to the com-
plaint.?Bulletin General de Tlierapeutique.
Melancholy cured by severe Bodily Injuries.?Dr. Labruyere
narrates the case of a man, thirty years of age, who bad been subject to
melancholia (delire melancholique) for several years, and who was severely
wounded by machinery, either accidentally or otherwise. He had
extensive wounds of the face and cranium, the bones of the latter being-
broken, and the brain partially exposed; the forearm was also torn off.
The treatment was necessarily protracted, but as cicatrization made
progress, the complete cessation of the mental disease occurred.
Journal des Gonnaissances Medico-Chirurgicales.
Musk and Blisters in Acute Hydrocephalus.?M. Legroux,
a physician practising at Beaujon, states that he has derived great
benefit from the repetition of blisters and the exhibition of musk in the
treatment of acute affections of the brain, when the following symptoms
are present: coma, dilatation of the pupils, convulsive movements, and
more or less extensive paralysis. He narrates cases in illustration of
his opinion, and considers that musk acts by lowering the pulse, and
the temperature of the skin, and by causing a velvety feel and relax-
ation of the integuments. In one case it acted as a sudorific. He
considers musk to be a cardiaco-vascular hyposthenic, and perhaps also
an hyposthenic of the nervous system.?Bulletin General de Tlierapeu-
tique.
170 SELECTIONS.
Mercurial Frictions in Encephalitis.?Dr. Privat, of Campagnae,
employs mercurial frictions in the commencement of encephalitis, and
when the inflammatory state is decreasing, but not when the disease is
fully developed. Mercury is, he says, a powerful sedative of the nervous
system, in cases of irritation and phlogosis, and a special excitant of
the exhalent and absorbent system. ? Bulletin General de Thera-
peutique.
Intermittent Cephalea caused by an Effusion of Blood
BETWEEN THE DURA MATER AND ITS PARIETAL ARACHNOID. M.
Dubois, of Neufchatel, was called to see a powerful robust man, fifty-
seven years of age, who complained of gastric disorder and intense
cephalea, caused apparently by grief for the loss of his child. The
headaches, which were very intense, proved to be intermittent. He
survived about six weeks, dying comatose. The head was examined
thirty hours after death. On the removal of the upper part of the
cranium, a considerable effusion of a black liquid was discovered over
the right hemisphere under the dura mater, or rather, the dura mater
properly so called, and its parietal arachnoid layer. The cavity, which
contained about half a glassful of the liquid, was of an oval shape.
There was not any clot. The cerebral substance was not apparently
altered, neither softened, nor injected, nor adherent to the pia mater,
nor to the internal layer of the arachnoid, nor was the arachnoid sac
thickened in any way, but smooth and shining, except at the adlierences
of the falx. A small effusion of coagulated blood, extending trans-
versely, was found in the lower third of the vertical thickness of the
tuber annulare. M. Dubois attributes the intermittent cephalea to the
hemispheric effusion, and the final attack of coma to the collection of
blood found in the tuber annulare. ? Bulletin General de Thera-
peutique.
Aldehide.?M. Poggiale, professor of chemistry at Yal de Grace,
states that the inhalation of the vapour of aldehide is rapidly followed
by the most complete insensibility; its stupefying action is more rapid
and more energetic than that of ether and chloroform. Its odour is
very powerful, or otherwise it would be preferable to chloroform in an
economic point of view. A very considerable quantity may be obtained
by a simple operation; all that is requisite is to distil a mixture of
sulphuric ether, water, alcohol, and peroxide of manganese, and to
rectify the condensed liquid with chlorine of calcium. Aldehide thus
prepared boils at the temperature of from 82 to 84 Fahrenheit, and
contains very little alcohol and formic ether. Perfectly pure aldehide
is not necessary.?A cademie des Sciences.
SELECTIONS. 171
Action of Cannabis Indica.?M. Courtive observes, as the result
of numerous experiments made to determine the physiological action of
the cannabis indica on the nervous system, that cannabine (the resin of
the Indian hemp) may be useful therapeutically, as narcotic and stupe-
fying, in the treatment of the neuroses in general, and in the last stages
of cancerous diseases. Cannabine produces also tetanic effects, and in
certain periods of its action it seems to be a general stimulant. In some
cases haschisch causes sanguineous congestion of the lungs, which, how-
ever, M. Courtive does not consider a reason for rejecting it, as the con-
gestion does not always occur, and may be removed by bleeding. It has
been employed with advantage in some cases of hooping cough and
bronchial catarrhs, and, according to M. Moreau, may be useful in
mental pathology.?Academie des Sciences.
Periodic Epilepsy, Hysteria, Neuralgia, and Hemiplegia.?
M. Mazade, in a communication made to the Academy of Medicine,
M. Bricheteau, reporter, narrates cases in which the periodicity of these
diseases was sufficiently marked to warrant the exhibition of the sul-
phate of quinine in rather large doses. The cases were successfully
treated. The fifth case is described as a sort of hemiplegia which re-
turned every day, that is to say, it was a momentary cephalic congestion,
with notable numbness and weakness of the limbs of the right side of
the body. This singular affection yielded to the employment of the
sulphate of quinine for three days, in the dose of a scruple and a half.
Chorea in Scrofulous Subjects.?M. Muller describes two cases
of chorea occurring in young girls of a scrofulous constitution, which
were cured by the internal exhibition of the ioduret of potassium.
Duration of treatment: in one case, thirty days; in the other, twenty-
two. In the one case, thirty-two scruples of the ioduret were given;
in the other, nineteen.?Academie de Medecine.
Influence of the Penitentiary System on Insanity.?M. Bou-
cliet, principal physician to the Lunatic Asylum at Nantes, states, in a
letter addressed to the Academy of Medicine at Paris, that in August,
1845, he received 15 lunatics from the prison at Vannes, of whom nine
have been discharged, one died, and five are still at the asylum. Of the
nine discharged, three were transferred, uncured, to the asyla of their
departments, when the period of their imprisonment had expired ; one
was imbecile and epileptic; another laboured under old monomania,
with hallucinations of the sight and hearing; but M. Bouchat cannot
affirm that they existed before the imprisonment; the last was affected
with that kind of reasoning or instinctive monomania, which, taking its
172 SELECTIONS.
origin in a lesion of the sensibility, does not sufficiently impair the
reason to warrant the term insanity, until characterized by certain acts.
Of the six others, three were affected with monomania, and hallucina-
tions of the senses referrible to fear ; these were discharged cured. The
other three, one of whom was of weak intellect, also laboured under
reasoning or instinctive monomania, of long duration, and before trial.
Having become quiet and working, they were discharged; but one of
them Avas afterwards arrested, and placed in the asylum belonging to
her department. The patient that died was always weeping, in which
state she was reported to have continued for ten years, although she
was condemned in 1843 only. She believed her husband and children
were dead, which was not the case. Of the five still in the asylum, the
first, affected with monomania and hallucinations of sight, had been
mad three or four years before she was tried; she had left her husband
and children, to wander about the country, and in a moment, as she
said, when it was stronger than she was, had set a house on fire. The
second, two years before she committed the theft for which she was
condemned, had been confined for eighteen months at Quimper, or at
Morlaix, as insane; after being in prison four years, she complained of
headaches, talked to herself, was annoyed at the slightest contradiction,
and stabbed herself in the abdomen, because she was put in a cell. Hers
was also a case of instinctive monomania, with well-marked intellectual
debility. The fourth, condemned in 1844, had for twelve years heard
voices, to which she replied, and which incessantly spoke to her of angels,
the cross, &c. The fourth, also instinctive monomania, was an instance
of great intellectual debility, and the fifth was a somewhat similar case;
the patients, however, worked pretty well, except when inordinate and
even violent instinctive acts occurred.
M. Bouchet, from these cases, cannot come to the absolute conclusion,
that the penitentiary system was the essential cause of the insanity,
which, in many cases, he observes, existed before the crime was com-
mitted for which the imprisonment was inflicted, and even was the de-
termining cause of the crime, without evincing itself to justice by irre-
fragable evidence. No cases of mania, properly so called, presented
under the circumstances.
The prison from which these lunatics were sent to the asylum at
Nantes, is conducted on the Auburn system.
Eclampsia cured by Stramonium.?Dr. Armand Jobert narrates
the case of a young idiot affected with eclampsia, which, after resisting
all the usual remedies, was cured by accidental poisoning by stramonium,
the patient having found and eaten five of the thorn apples. Dr.
Jobert is unable to say whether the cure was permanent, as the patient
SELECTIONS. 1 73
afterwards passed from under his care. The idiocy depended on a
physical defect of the brain.?Annales Medico-Psychologiques.
Tetanus Cured by Intoxication. ? In the same journal, Dr.
Jobert describes a case of tetanus occurring in a child five years old
from a cut of the finger, which he cured by intoxicating the child. The
patient became quite drunk and delirious; vomiting, diarrhea, and
general prostration, sweating, and deep sleep, followed. The next day,
the alarming symptoms of tetanus were removed, and the child soon
became convalescent. Leeches were applied behind the ears, to relieve
a determination of blood to the head, the result of the intoxication. A
similar case, with the same result, was recorded in one of the French
journals last year, and another case, in which the treatment was much
more protracted, has been read at a meeting of the Medico-Cliirurgical
Society. In a case of hydrophobia, which, however, terminated fatally,
Mr. Fitzpatrick afforded great relief by the same measure.
Effect of Music on the Nerves.?The first effect that music pro-
duces is merely physical. Sounds strike the nerves of the ear, and
make, according to their power, quality, character, roughness, or sweet-
ness, analogous impressions upon our senses. Too powerful, too sudden
strokes, might occasion nervous convulsions, destroy the faculty of hear-
ing, or even extinguish life. In the endless variety of organizations, an
endless variety of sensations is awakened by one and the same sound.
A delicate, sensitive ear, is otherwise affected than that of a stronger,
rougher nature. The tumult, the whistles, and the shrieks, in which
the latter delight, would throw the other into the highest state of
alarm or discomfort. Hence the curious anecdotes of men who could
not tolerate certain sounds, and who, on hearing particular instruments,
became the subject of the most unaccountable nervous sensations, of
which no other person was conscious. The beating of a drum produces
in many persons a corresponding tremulousness in the chest. Some
persons cannot refrain from weeping when they hear a certain note.
J. J. Rousseau says that he knew a lady who could not hear any kind
of music without being seized Avith involuntary and convulsive laughter.
The delicacy of the ear of Mozart was so great, that, without being
modified by other instruments, he could not tolerate the sound of a
trumpet. His father, who wished him to overcome this sensibility,
took him one day by surprise with a violent blast of a trumpet. The
boy shrieked, grew pale, and fell senseless to the ground. The monk
of St. Gallen tells us of a woman, who, when she heard an organ for the
first time, was so transported with rapture, that she never recovered
from the effect, and died in consequence. Animals, as well as men, are
174 STUDY OF MENTAL DISEASES.
accessible to the effect of sound. The musical susceptibility of certain
dogs is very remarkable. In the year 1827, all Home went to see a
dog who every day marched at the parade before the military band; in
the evening, he was found sitting in the orchestra of the Theatre
Delia Yalle; no one ever knew whence he came, or to whom he be-
longed. But sounds not only act upon the nerves of man and animals,
but even upon inanimate objects. Glasses, mirrors, china vases, have been
seen to vibrate and break at certain sounds of the flute, and notes of
the human voice. We may witness the latter in cathedrals, where
certain pipes of the organ cause a shaking of the windows, walls, and
pillars. A powerful bass voice, in the lower notes, has, in a limited
space, the same effects upon chairs and tables. We see, from these
simple facts, that the magical power of music is not always attributed to
its right cause. We are too often inclined to ascribe to the talent,
either of the composer or of the performer, the whole merit of the
wonderful effects produced. Undoubtedly, the power of talent and
genius, in the melodious and harmonious combinations of sound, should
be acknowledged; but it should not be forgotten that there is, in the
nature of sound itself, something mysteriously affecting. A simple sound,
by whatever physical cause produced, similar to that which issued from
Memnon's statue, or which is heard from Fingal's cave, at Staffa, excites
in us, with all its monotonous repetition, a something that either fills
us with melancholy or with awe. At midnight, the repeated call of the
sailor who sounds the depth, or the blast of a trumpet heard from a
watch-tower or minaret, has in it something solemn and majestic.
?Dr. Mainzer's Music and Education.
