The American Journal of Insanity
=================================

Art. IV.?
Edited by the Officers of the New York State Lunatic Asylum, Utica.
Vols. I. to Y. Printed at the Asylum. 1849.

Tiie Americans are an energetic, active people. The rapidity of
their progression in all the arts connected with civilization is one of
the marvels of modern history. The metropolis of the New World
vies in wealth, luxury, and magnificence with the metropolis of the
mother country. In science and literature the same enterprising
spirit is abroad; and philosophical inquiries are conducted with an
earnestness and zeal, and with an independence of principle, in the
highest degree favourable to the revelation of truth. Here the field
of speculative philosophy is not encumbered with scholastic dogmas
thrown like brambles across our path. No ancient prejudices fetter
our inquiries. Men of science associate together to promote the
progress of knowledge, and rejoice in breathing an air of intellectual
freedom. The American mind is essentially independent. There
are no university traditions which cloud its vision; and as nature is
the same now as it was the first morning of creation, the absence of
ancient authorities prescribing empirical forms of belief, is rather
favourable than otherwise to the progress of mental philosophy.
The zeal with which speculative science is being pursued in America
is highly characteristic of this state of progression?nay, in psycho-
logy and the department of medical science to which this journal is
specially devoted, there* is an activity displayed which has not yet
appeared on this side of the Atlantic. Already an association analo-
gous to the Psychological Society of Paris has been formed in
America. The medical superintendents of the different institutions
for the insane have united and formed an association, which holds
meetings at stated periods, when papers are read and reports made
on all subjects connected with insanity.

On the 8th of May, 1848, the third meeting of this association
took place at Astor House, in the city of New York, when, we are
informed, written reports were made on the following subjects, and
after full discussion, accepted and laid upon the table, subject to
future disposition by the association?viz.,

" On the comparative value of the different kinds of Labour for
Patients, and the best means of Employment in Winter, by Dr.
Rockwell."
" On the advantages and disadvantages of Cottages for wealthy
Patients adjacent to Hospitals for the Insane, by Dr. Kirkbride."
" On the relative value of the different kinds of Fuel for heating
hospitals, by Dr. Bates."
" On*the most economical mode of treating the Insane of the
Poorer Classes, by Dr. McFarlane."
" On Reading, Recreations, and Amusements for the Insane, by
Dr. Gait,"
" On the comparative value of Treatment in Public Institutions
and Private Practice, by Dr. White."
" On the use and effects of Tobacco on the Insane, by Dr. Cutter."
It is also stated, that in conformity with a resolution adopted at
the last meeting of the association, Drs. Brigham and Macdonald
made written, and Drs. Earle, Rockwell, Bates, Butler, Allen, and
Kirkbride, verbal reports on the subjects of post-mortem examinations
and the pathology of insanity, which were referred to the standing
committee on these subjects. On the 21st of May, 1849, another
meeting of this association was held, the transactions of which have
not yet reached us, but we refer to the fact of such a society existing
in America as an evidence of the activity and energy with which our
Transatlantic brethren are pursuing these inquiries.

The American Journal of Insanity, now upon our table, supplies
a further testimony of the zeal evinced in this department of medical
science. It is under the editorship of Dr. Brigliam, assisted by
the principal officers of this association, and is published quarterly.
It contains original articles on psychology and mental pathology,
selections carefully and judiciously made from contemporary journals,
and reports on the state of lunacy generally, in America and other
countries. The number of institutions open for the reception of the
insane in the United States was, in July last, thirty. Fifteen of
these are state institutions, governed by a board of managers, or a
committee appointed by the state. Five are corporate institutions
in connexion with general hospitals, constituting the insane depart-
ment of such establishments, and governed by the same authorities.
Five are institutions that have been established by the liberal bene-
factions of individuals, and are governed by a board of directors ap-
pointed by the donors and their successors. There are also three
private asylums, and some of the states are about to open similar
institutions. The returns, however, appear at present to be limited
to thirty asylums; but insane patients are received in several private
families, and many are kept in town or country alms-houses in all
the states of the Union. The number of the insane in the United
States does not appear to be satisfactorily ascertained. In 1840,
the insane and idiotic in the state of New York were 2340, and five
years later, according to the census of 1845, there were 3752, or
2142 lunatics and 1610 idiots.

There are, it is presumed, at the present period at leasf* 18,000
insane persons in the United States, not including idiots, which are
supposed to be G000, so that we have from the statistics before us
an aggregate of 24,000 lunatics and idiots, and yet the various insti-
tutions in the United States will not accommodate more than 4711
patients.

On this side of the Atlantic, the Commissioners in Lunacy in their
last report estimated the aggregate number of the insane and imbecile,
in England and Wales, together with their various committees, visitors,
medical officers, attendants and servants, at not less than 30,000, and
the number of establishments, public and private, at 614, independent
of 596 parish workhouses, in which many of the insane and imbecile
poor are located. The present inadequacy of the institutions for the
insane in the United States has called forth the strongest and most
energetic appeals and remonstrances from the association of medical
officers, who are so creditably and honourably engaged in this depart-
ment of the profession. The system of domiciling lunatics and
idiots in workhouses is universally condemned; and we believe
both liere and in America it lias been had recourse to only in cases
of absolute necessity. We would, however, deprecate in a still
stronger manner the admission into any institution for the insane
of patients affected with other diseases. From the reports of the
Mount Hope Institution, we find cases admitted into that establish-
ment of delirium tremens, erysipelas, syphilis, cancer, typhus fever,
<fec., and as there is but one building, the persons afflicted with these
loathsome diseases are in the same rooms with the quiet and conva-
lescent insane. Furthermore, this institution is not, we are informed,
subject to legal visitation or regular inspection by the authorities of
the state. The proprietors manage it as they choose, without being
called upon to give any account of their proceedings. We cordially
agree with the editor of this journal, that such an institution is an
anomaly, and ought not to be permitted. We also fully concur
with him as to the necessity of there being a resident medical officer
in every institution for the cure of the insane. " At a time when it
was supposed that all that could be done for the welfare of the
insane was to keep them closely confined, so that they could not
injure themselves or others, it was not deemed necessary to have a
physician or resident officer on the building appropriated to them;
but of late years, since insanity has been deemed a curable disease,
the opinion is entirely the reverse. Hence all modern, well-con-
ducted institutions for the insane have one or more medical officers.
This is so obviously proper, so necessary to the safety of patients, in
case of accidents or sudden change in their condition, so requisite
for observing their habits and varying states of mind and body, in
order to treat them properly, that we presume no one Avill venture
to dispute it." While it may be the more pleasing task of the
editor of such a journal as the one before us to record the progress
of this branch of medical science, it is clearly a duty he owes to
society to call the attention of the legislature to these and all
other abuses in such institutions, with a view to their immediate
correction. It should be remembered, that the victim of insanity
lias the strongest claims upon the sympathies of humanity; he is
often incapable of describing his misery, or even complaining of the
ill-treatment to which he may be subjected; and hence in every
civilized country, it is the duty of the legislature to throw a pro-
tection round these dependent and helpless beings.

It is true the unhappy lunatic is no longer left, as in the time of the
Jews, to wander and dwell amidst the tombs, or lie down as the ''impo-
tent lay at the pool of Silo am." Institutions, founded on the most phi-
lanthropic principles, have been established in every Christian land?
hospitals for the sick?asylums for the insane?houses of refuge for
the destitute. The stream of Christian charity flows silently, but
deeply fertilizing and blessing the soil through which it extends.
In no instance has this principle of philanthropy been more beauti-
fully exemplified than in the success which has crowned the attempts
which have been made in France, Prussia, Switzerland, and America,
to ameliorate the mental condition of the demented, the imbecile, and
the idiotic. In 1846, commissioners were appointed by the Legislature
of Massachusetts, " to inquire into the condition of the idiots of the
commonwealth, to ascertain their number, and whether anything
could be done for their relief."
In 1847, Dr. S. G. Howe reported:?

"We have obtained pretty satisfactory information from 171 towns,
containing an aggregate population of 345,285 inhabitants. From
these towns we have reports containing the names, age, sex, condi-
tion, &c., of 543 idiots, 204 of whom are males, and 339 are females.
Of these, 169 are less than 25 years of age, and of course are proper
subjects for instruction. Of the whole number, 106 are supported
entirely at public charge. If the other towns should present the
same number, it would show an aggregate of over 1000 idiots in this
commonwealth, of Avhom 300 are of proper age for instruction. We
have also obtained information, by personal inspection of the idiots,
in about 30 towns, in various parts of the state, which shows that
the condition of these unfortunate persons is very materially in-
fluenced by the character of those who have the charge of them. In
some towns, we found the idiots, who were under the charge of kind-
hearted, but ignorant persons, to be entirely idle, given over to dis-
gusting and degrading habits, and presenting the sad and demo-
ralizing spectacle of men, made in God's image, whom neither their
own reason, nor the reason of others, lifted up above the level of the
brutes. In other towns, idiots, who to all appearance had no more
capacity than those just mentioned, were under the charge of more
intelligent persons, and they presented a different spectacle?they
were healthy, cleanly, and industrious. We found some, of a very
low grade of intellect, at work in the fields, under the direction of
attendants; and they seemed not only to be free from depraving
habits, but to be happy and useful. The inference to be drawn from
this is very important. If persons having only common sense and
common humanity, but without the advantage of experience or study,
can so improve the condition of idiots, how much could be done by
those who should bring tl|e light of science, and the experience of
wise and good men in other countries, and the facilities of an institu-
tion adapted to the training of idiots,?how much, we say, could be
done by such persons, towards redeeming the minds of this unfor-
tunate class from the waste and desolation in which they now lie !"
To this report, Dr. Howe has appended the following interesting
remarks, from a letter addressed to liim by Mr. George Sumner from
Paris:?

" During the past six months, I have watched, with eager interest,
the progress which many young idiots have made, in Paris, under the
direction of Mr. Seguin, and at Bicetre, under that of Messrs. Voisin
and Yallee, and have seen, with no less gratification than astonish-
ment, nearly one hundred fellow-beings, who, but a short time since,
were shut out from all communion with mankind,?who were objects
of loathing and disgust,?many of whom rejected every article of
clothing,?others of whom, unable to stand erect, crouched them-
selves in corners and gave signs of life oxdy by piteous howls,?
others, in whom the faculty of speech had never been developed,?
and many, whose voracious and indiscriminate gluttony satisfied itself
?with whatever they could lay hands upon?with the garbage thrown
to swine, or with their own excrements; these unfortunate beings?
the rejected of humanity?I have seen properly clad, standing erect,
walking, speaking, eating in an orderly manner at a common table,
working quietly as carpenters and farmers; gaining by their own
labour, the means of existence; storing their awakened intelligence
by reading one to another; exercising, towards their teachers and
among themselves, the generous feelings of man's nature, and singing,
in unison, songs of thanksgiving ! "?-Journal of Insanity, vol. iv.
p. 79.

From the period when this commission was appointed by the
Legislature, April 11th, 1846, this benevolent object has been pro-
ceeded with; and more suitable accommodation has been provided
for the insane and idiotic at Massachusetts, than in any other state
in the Union. In the last number of the Journal before us, (April,
1849,) we find the following very interesting and satisfactory report
on the condition and capacities of the idiots in Massachusetts:?
"' Confining our attention to the cases of real idiots, above men-
tioned?viz., 420 out of 574?it is found that 188 are under 25
years of age. Of these, 172 seem capable of improvement; they
present proper cases for attempts at instruction, and the formation
of regular, industrious, and cleanly habits. Only 16 seem incapable
of improvement. Of those over twenty-five years of age, there are
7 3 who seem capable of little or no improvement in mental condition.
Of the 420 idiots proper, 19 can now earn their board and clothing,
under the management of discreet persons; 141 do earn their board,
when properly managed; 110 can do trifling work, if carefully
watched and directed; 73 are as helpless as children of seven years
old; 43 are as helpless as children of two years old; and 34 are as
utterly helpless as infants.

"1 With regard to pecuniary circumstances, 20 have property of
their own, held by guardians; 26 belong to wealthy families; 196
belong to indigent families, but are not public paupers; 148 are town
or state paupers; the rest are sometimes aided by the public, some*
times not. Of tlie whole number?viz., 574?there are 220 at town
or state charge.

"'Of the 420 idiots proper, 218 are insatiable gluttons; and 102
are known to be given to self-abuse in a frightful degree.'
" After describing their wretched condition, and also the successful
efforts made in Europe for the physical improvement and education
of this class of persons, the commissioners strongly urge that ' mea-
sures be at once taken to rescue this most unfortunate class from the
dreadful degradation in which they now grovel;'' and add, 'Massa-
chusetts admits the right of all her citizens to a share in the blessings
of education, and she provides it liberally for all her more favoured
children. If some be blind or deaf, she still continues to furnish
them with special instruction at great cost; and will she longer
neglect the poor idiot?the most wretched of all who are born to
her?those who are usually abandoned by their fellows?who can
never, of themselves, step upon the platform of humanity?will she
leave them to their dreadful fate, to a life of brutishness, without an
effort in their behalf 1

" ' It is true, that the plea of ignorance can be made in excuse for
the neglect and ill-treatment which they have hitherto received; but
this plea can avail us no longer. Other countries have shown us
that idiots may be trained to habits of industry, cleanliness, and self-
respect; that the highest of them may be measurably restored to
self-control, and that the very lowest of them may be raised up from
the slough of animal pollution in which they wallow; and can the
men of other countries do more than Ave 1 Shall we, who can trans-
mute granite and ice into gold and silver, and think it pleasant work
? shall we shrink from the higher task of transforming brutish men
back into human shape 1 Other countries are beginning to rescue
their idiots from further deterioration, and even to elevate them; and
shall our commonwealth continue to bury the humble talent of lowly
children committed to her motherly care, and let it rot in the earth,
or shall she do all that can be done to render it back with usury to
Him who lent it 1 There should be no doubt about the answer to
these questions. The humanity and justice of our rulers will prompt
them to take immediate measures for the formation of a school or
schools for the instruction and training of idiots.'
"Subsequently, during the latter part of the session of 1848, 'the
Legislature of Massachusetts made an appropriation of $2500 per
annum, for three years, to be devoted to the experiment of teaching
and training ten idiots.

" A school has been established at South Boston, under the direc-
tion of Dr. Howe; and several idiots are already under instruction."
?,Journal of Insanity, vol. v. pp. 374, 375.
In the fourth volume of the journal, Dr. Earle, physician to the
Bloomingdale Asylum, contributes a valuable article on the causes
of insanity. Upon the obscure subject of hereditary transmission,
direct and indirect, he observes?

" During the first few years of tlie existence of the asylum, there
appears to have been but little attention paid to this particular sub-
ject, and hence the records thereupon are imperfect. There are other
important obstacles in the way, to a correct knowledge of the full
extent of which the hereditary predisposition prevails among the
patients admitted into a public institution. These obstacles may, by
perseverance, be measurably overcome.

" Insanity being a disordered manifestation of the mind, dependent
upon some disease of the body, either functional or organic, is subject
to the same laws as many or most other maladies to which the
human race is subject. Like consumption, gout, diseases of the liver
and of the heart, it may attack any person whatever, but is certainly
somewhat more likely to prevail among those whose ancestors have
suffered from it.

"Of the men included in the foregoing table, 118 inherited the
predisposition from direct ancestors, and 33 of these had other rela-
tives insane. The remaining 58 had collateral relatives insane, but
no direct ancestors. Of the 52 who had insane parents, it was the
father in 27 cases, and the mother in 25. In one of these, both
father and mother had been deranged. It is also stated, that two of
those included under the term hereditary had ancestors, both paternal
and maternal, who were subject to the malady, and one who had a
daughter insane.

" Of the women, the predisposition was transmitted from direct
ancestors iii 89; of whom G7 also had other relatives insane. In
the remaining 42, the disease is stated to have appeared only in per-
sons collaterally connected, and in five cases in their children alone.
There are 18 cases in which it is mentioned that the father was
insane. In one case, the father and mother were both deranged. In
the case where it is mentioned that the whole family were insane, it
is said that all her father's family, which consisted of 12 children,
have been insane, and that their insanity did not, in a single instance,
make its appearance before the age of 21 years. Two of her bro-
thers, while insane, committed suicide. None of the third generation
have yet been attacked with insanity, although several of them have
passed the age at which it made its appearance in the second."
Dr. Earle next enters upon the physical and moral causes of in-
sanity, and out of 1186 cases, 664 are ascribed to physical, and 522
to moral causes. The older authors entertained the opinion that
mental causes were more prolific of insanity than physical causes.
" Within a few years, however, the opposite opinion has been gaining
ground?an opinion" says Dr. Earle, " which is sustained by these
statistics. But we may here observe that statistical inductions,
unless founded upon sufficient data, must always be unsatisfactory.
There is no branch of science in which we are so liable to be deceived
as statistics; for unless the aggregate number of cases included iii
the induction are sufficient to represent the universality of nature in
precisely analogous conditions, we are only misled by calculating
them. Among the physical causes of insanity, intemperance, accord-
ing to Dr. Earle, ranges highest; and yet may not the intemperance
itself be considered more properly as an effect or result of moral
insanity? Among the moral causes, pecuniary difficulties range
highest; yet may not this be mixed up with such other moral causes
as mental excitement, domestic trouble, anxiety, mortified pride, dis-
appointment, each of which has a different and separate position in
Dr. Earle's scale of causation? There is an old aphorism of Hippo-
crates, that no disease is produced by a single cause; and upon this
point we find our nosologists generally at fault. Among the physical
causes of insanity, thirteen cases are supposed to have resulted from
the excessive use of opium; and Dr. Earle appears to think that
tobacco, when vised by smoking, may tend to disturb the functions
of the liver, and by disordering the action of this organ, become a
not unfrequent cause of mental disease. To this opinion we can
hardly subscribe; at all events, the Turks, who smoke opium, and
the Germans, who are not only inveterate smokers of tobacco, but of
bad tobacco, are not peculiarly liable to insanity. In many instances
that have come under our observation, smoking tobacco has had a
comforting and soothing effect, as Dr. Earle admits in the following
remarks:?

" How little or how much soever tobacco may act, either imme-
diately or remotely, as a generative cause of insanity, it is a fact well
known to all connected with public institutions of this kind, that
there is no stimulus or narcotic substance in which the insane are
more prone to indulge. If within their reach, those who, previously
to becoming insane, have been accustomed to it, will use it to excess,
and many or most of those who have not before been addicted to the
habit, soon become accustomed to it. One man, included among the
patients remaining in the institution at the time these statistics
close, kept constantly in his mouth, both day and night, excepting
when at meals, a quid of tobacco, frequently as large as an ordinary
hen's egg. Whatever saliva it might have produced, it was rarely, if
ever, ejected from the mouth, but usually swallowed. He had been
in the institution during the whole period of its existence, being one
of those who were brought from the old asylum. He had been
accustomed to the habit for many years; and it might also be said
of him that?

" Like to the Pontic monarch of old days,
He fed on poison, and it had no power,
But was a kind of nutriment."

" Although as completely insane and incoherent as it is possible
for a human being to be, he worked regularly, doing about as much
as any ordinary labourer. The tobacco appeared to have a soothing
and controlling effect upon him, enabling him to concentrate his
powers upon the labour in which he was employed. If deprived of
it for a few hours, he became restless, agitated, excited, talkative,
and unable to apply himself to his occupation. In this respect, the
narcotic had an opposite effect upon him to that which it produces
upon many of the insane. It frequently increases their excitement,
and, in some instances, to a remarkable degree. Its action, upon the
whole, is considered so deleterious, that in most of the well-conducted
establishments for the insane in this country, its use among the
patients is prohibited. At this institution, it is not permitted, ex-
cepting in a few cases, in small quantities, by patients who have
resided here many years."

There is one cause of insanity, mentioned by Dr. Earle, which we
do not before remember to have met with ? viz., mesmerism.
Deleuze, Dupotet, Elliotson, Colqulioun, and other champions of this
subtle art, insist that the practice of mesmerism is never followed
by any permanently unhappy or fatal result. The subjoined case,
however, would seem to establish that insanity may be produced by
this cause:?

" The patient was a young man, about twenty years of age, of a
highly nervous temperament, with a brain remarkably developed,
and corresponding intellectual powers. For several years he had
suffered from occasional epileptic fits, which, as yet, had left his
mind but little if at all impaired. The skill of many physicians,
and the virtues of every medical resource, believed to be applicable
to such cases, had been exhausted upon him without benefit. As a
dernier resort, and at a period when he was in a state of comparative
stupor, such as frequently follows a succession of epileptic fits, he
was placed under the care of a person professedly practising ' mes-
merism' for the cure of disease. To use the expression of this
person, 'The patient was magnetized daily, for nearly a month,'
without effect, he remaining in the torpid condition already men-
tioned. At length, he was suddenly roused, appeared rational for a
few hours, and then passed into a state of high excitement and
absolute mania. A day or two afterwards, he was brought to the
asylum, with his arms and legs strongly bound. When admitted, he
talked but little, and that little was perfectly devoid of meaning. He
was highly excited, his face flushed, and the veins of his head
swollen; the circulation rapid, the pulse being from one hundred
and twenty to one hundred and forty per minute, the tongue furred,
and the bowels very much constipated. After free catharsis, an in-
ordinate quantity of medicine being required to operate upon his
bowels, he was placed upon the use of sedatives. Under this
treatment, and after the lapse of two days, he began to improve,
and in eight days he left the asylum, restored to his ordinary con-
dition, and without so much of the torpor as existed previously to
his excitement."

In the same volume, Dr. Ray, the superintendent of the Butler
Hospital for the insane, contributes a very interesting article on the
legislation for the insane in the Maine. The legislature of the
Maine passed, it appears, during the last session, an act for regu-
lating the government and management of the insane, which is
highly creditable to the humanity and judgment of that body. The
mode of determining the admission of the insane into asylums is very
simple, and similar to the plan prescribed by the code in France.
" The act provides, that on the application of any relative of an
insane person, or any justice of the peace, the mayor and aldermen
of cities, and the select men of towns, shall examine into the case of
such insane person, and if satisfied that the person is insane, and
that ' his comfort and safety, or those of others interested, would
be promoted by a residence in the insane hospital,' shall send him
forthwith to the hospital, where he must stay if the superintendent
see fit to keep him, at least six months. If their decision is not
satisfactory to any of the parties interested, an appeal is provided
to certain justices of the peace, who institute a new and final trial
of the case."

The Avocat does the duty in Paris which the justice of the
peace, or mayor, is here called upon to perform; and the obvious
advantage of the plan is, that the party who adjudicates upon the
insanity of the person has no interest whatever in his detention.
Another remarkable part of this act of the Maine is, that it provides
a change in the ordinary methods of criminal procedure in cases
where the accused is alleged to be insane.

" ' When any person,' says the act, ' shall be charged with a
criminal offence in this state, any judge of the court before which
he or she is to be tried, on notice that a plea of insanity will be
made, or when such plea is made in court, may, if he deem proper,
order such person into the custody of the superintendent of the
insane hospital, to be by him detained and observed, until the
further order of the court, in order that the truth or falsehood of
the plea may be ascertained.' This course, virtually, is pursued in
France and most of the German states. It is unknown, however,
to the forms of the English common law, and this, we suspect, is
the first attempt to incorporate it with those forms. We apprehend
no difficulty whatever in the practical working of this provision,
and we anticipate as its certain result, that the ends of justice will
be more effectually obtained, and the common prejudice against the
plea of insanity in criminal cases be removed. We cannot better
express our own views on this point than by quoting Avliat we
have already said in another place?

" ' A very serious evil in the administration of the criminal law in
cases where insanity is pleaded in defence, is the absence of any
legal provision for satisfactorily establishing or disproving its exist-
ence. The matter is left entirely to the counsel, who use such
means as they please and the law permits. They summon only such
witnesses as suit their purposes; and medical men can generally he
found?we regret to say it?ready to testify for or against the in-
sanity of the accused, who have had hut little practical knowledge
of the disease, and have made hut a superficial examination of the
case in hand. Witnesses summoned in this manner will be liable,
in spite of themselves, to testify under a bias, instead of expressing
the results of a dispassionate examination of scientific facts. The
intention of the prisoner's counsel to plead insanity may not be
known to the government-counsel in season to meet the plea with
appropriate evidence; and if the prisoner is acquitted,, the impres-
sion is conveyed, that the ends of justice have been defeated.
Indeed, with every disposition to arrive at the truth, it is generally
impossible under the present arrangements. In gaols, where pri-
soners accused of crime are confined, proper opportunities are not
afforded for investigating their mental condition. In the few formal
interviews to which the observation of the prisoner is confined, it
may often happen that the real condition of the mind will not be
discovered. If really insane, he will be likely to control his move-
ments, and to discourse and appear very differently from what he
would when left to himself and unconscious of being observed.
Many insane, as we have already shown, manifest their aberration
only under certain circumstances, and on particular occasions, and
appear quite correct at all other times. Many, too, whose insanity
is recognised by everybody who knows them, never evince it in
their discourse, but solely in their ways and habits. If, on the other
hand, the prisoner is feigning insanity, he will summon all his
powers to produce the requisite impression at these interviews,
which being short and few, the difficulty of his task is much less-
ened. To ascertain satisfactorily the mental condition of a prisoner
suspected of being insane, he should be placed where the expert
may be able to see him often, and at times when he is not aware of
being observed. His words, and acts, and movements, his manners
and habits, should be systematically watched; and a single day of
such observation would often throw more light on the case than
many formal interviews. We see no difficulty in so changing our
modes of criminal procedure, that when the court shall be satisfied
that there are reasonable doubts of the prisoner's sanity, it may be
authorized to postpone the trial, and place him, in the meantime, in
the charge of an expert?for which our hospitals for the insane fur-
nish a convenient and suitable opportunity?whose report shall be
received in evidence at the trial. This is substantially the course
adopted in France, and nothing short of its adoption with us will
render the plea of insanity powerless for evil, and remove the sus-
picions of the community upon this point."?Journal of Insanity,
vol. iv., pp. 215, 216.

Another important provision, which does infinite honour, says Dr.
Bay, truly, to the humanity and intelligence of the legislature of the
Maine is, that " no insane person shall be committed to, or remain
in, any gaol or house of correction;" and that, " when any inmate of
the state prison becomes insane, a commissioner shall be appointed
by the governor to examine his case, and if he be found insane, he
shall be sent to the insane hospital. We hope this noble example
will be speedily followed; and that, in New England at least, the
confinement of the insane in gaols will be remembered as among
the things that are passed."

There is no subject more difficult to speculate upon than the
mortality of the insane; because patients who are admitted into
lunatic asylums are often the subjects of other diseases which may
prove fatal. Organic affections of the heart and lungs, stomach and
liver, often co-exist with insanity, and are the ostensible cause of
death. Upon this subject, we find in the volume before us the fol-
lowing pertinent observations :?

" The mortality of the insane, though an interesting subject, is
one difficult to study with the accuracy requisite to satisfactory
results. It depends on such varying and local circumstances, that
nothing conclusive is learned by comparing the number of deaths at
one institution with those of another.

" Some asylums are able to select their cases, and rarely receive
any very bad ones; others do not receive the epileptic insane and
those disposed to suicide, unless provision is made by their friends
for special attendance and care; while some institutions are obliged
to receive all that are sent to them. Again, in some asylums, many
of the patients are from the immediate neighbourhood, and are sup-
ported by their friends, and when likely to die, are removed to their
homes, while most of those in other establishments have no friends
to take care of them, or are from a distance too remote to be sent
home when feeble.

" Pinel, setting aside cases of senile dementia, estimates the mor-
tality of the insane at one to twenty or twenty-three. Raymond
found the mortality at Marseilles to be as one to fourteen. Tenon,
at Paris, in 1786, fixed it at one to eleven. Esquirol thought it
higher, even one to six or eight, and gives the following from his
records:?

" Mortality in mania, one to tAventy-five.
? ? monomania, one to sixteen.
? ? lypemania, or melancholy, one to twelve.
}} ? dementia, one to three.

"According to the records of the lunatic asylums in the Northern
States of this country, for the last five years?viz., in Maine, New
Hampshire, Vermont, Connecticut, the McLean, South Boston, and
Worcester, Massachusetts; the Bloomingdale and Utica, New York;
the Friends' Asylum, and the Pennsylvania Hospital for the insane,
Pennsylvania, and the Ohio, the mortality in none is higher than
one in eleven. Eight thousand seven hundred and twenty-four
patients have been treated at these institutions during the last five
years, and the deaths have been 687, or about one in thirteen.
" We have not complete returns from the asylums in the Southern
States,-but judging from those we have, their mortality is greater;
but we shall endeavour to procure more full statistics on this subject,
Mid recur to it again."

An article on the paralysis peculiar to the insane (paralysie
generate) in the volume before us, also merits attention; but we can
only afford space for the following introductory observations:?
" This singular affection has been well described by Esquirol, and
more fully by Bayle, Calmeil and Guislain, and more recently by
several other writers. It should not be confounded with ordinary
paralysis that arises from cerebral haemorrhage or from ramollise-
ment or tumours of the brain. The parcdysie generate seems to
have a different cause, and to arise from a kind of chronic inflamma-
tion of the membranes of the brain that cover the superior parts of
the brain. This form of paralysis is more frequent among insane
men than women. 1 Eighteen years ago,' says Esquirol, when charged
with the service of the division of the insane at the Bicetre, during
the absence of M. Pariset, who was sent to Cadiz to study the yellow
fever which was prevailing there, e I was struck in comparing the
number of men, insane and paralytic, in the Bicetre, and the number
of paralytic women at the Salpetriere. The same observation may
be made in every establishment into which both sexes are admitted.
It has not escaped the notice of Dr. Foville, physician-in-chief at
St. Yon, Rouen. According to this physician, they amount to
one-eleventh at the institution over which he presides. Among 334
insane persons who were examined by him, 31 were paralytic?to
wit, 22 men and 9 women. At Charenton, the proportion of para-
lytics is still more considerable. They constitute one-sixth of .the
whole number of admissions. In truth, of 619 insane persons who
were admitted during the three years?1826, 1827, 1828?109 were
paralytics. But the proportion of men is enormous compared with
that of women. Of 366 insane men admitted into the house, 95
were paralytics; Avliile of 153 women, 14 only were affected with
paralysis. This complication is most frequently observed among
that class of insane persons who have yielded to venereal excesses, or
have been addicted to the use of alcoholic drinks; among those, also,
who have made an inordinate use of mercury, as well as those who,
exercising the brain too vigorously in mental strife, have, at the
same time, abandoned themselves to errors of regimen.'

1 These circumstances explain why it is that there are more
insane and paralytic men than women, and Avhy this disease is more
frequently seen in asylums for the insane that are in the vicinity of
large cities and receive the wealthy and dissipated, than in those
remote from cities, and that are filled mostly by the poor and indus-
trious. We think, also, it explains, what we believe to be facts,
that there is less of this disease in this country than in Europe, and
that it is on the increase. A most striking peculiarity generally
noticed in this complaint is, that those affected by it entertain the
most extravagant notions of their wealth, grandeur, and power, and
do not appear to suffer in body or mind, but continue cheerful and
full of hope until they die.

"The first published notice of this disease in this country was
given by Dr. Bell, of the McLean Asylum for the insane, in hi3
Annual Report for 1843. He says:?' That terrible complication of
insanity termed paralysie generate by the French, and of which
general paralysis can scarce be deemed a synonyme, since the- im-
pairment of the nervo-muscular apparatus forms by no means a pro-
minent symptom as in ordinary paralytic affections, and, indeed, for a
period in the progress of the malady, scarcely an appreciable mani-
festation, is one which presents a large proportion of cases in the
insane hospitals of Europe.' "

There are many articles in the volumes before us of a strictly
practical nature; the following observations on the effects of the
inhalation of sulphuric ether, in cases of insanity, will be read with
interest:?
" We have administered the vapour of ether to sixteen different
patients at the New York State Lunatic Asylum?viz., to fourteen
men and to two women.
" Some have taken it but once, several have taken it three or four
times, and a few eight or nine times.
" The cases in which we have used it have been various. Some
were cases of melancholy and of religious despair, others were affected
by various insane delusions and hallucinations, and some belonged to
the demented class. To none highly excited or maniacal have we
as yet given it.
" Some were not affected at all by it. One man and one woman
inhaled it for more than ten minutes without experiencing the
slightest change of feelings. Several seemed intoxicated, and said they
felt as if drunk. One who had slept but little for several nights, and
who usually slept poorly, rested remarkably well the night after
taking it, and said he must have taken a large dose of opium.
"Some have appeared better since they commenced taking it,
been more active, cheerful, and sociable. One who has taken it nine
times seems considerably improved. He was previously dull, inactive,
and unsocial, and his pulse but 48 in a minute. Since the use of
the ether, his pulse has increased to 66 in a minute. He is now
cheerful and sociable, and works some. He says he is better, and
thinks the ether has benefited him.

" A few were highly excited by it. One man who was in a state
of religious despair, after taking it, awoke as from a terrific dream,
and in a most violent rage seized the person who administered the
ether. He afterwards said that he at first dreamed he was in hell,
LUNATIC ASYLUMS AND INSANITY IN AMERICA. 413
and that taking the ether had sent him there, and hence his rage and
violence against the operator.

" When this excitement abated, he seemed ecstatic with delight on
account of the visions he had seen, and the revelations that had
been made to him. 11 floated away,' he exclaimed, ' in infinity of
space; I have seen a future world; what I have seen has proved the
dogmas of religion; unless a man comes up to an iota, it is over with
him.' He said he felt ' convinced of the truth of Newton's theory
of the solar system, as he saw the planets revolving in the order and
way pointed out.' When fully recovered from the effects of the
ether, he recollected the assault and begged forgiveness.
" Some were pleasantly excited after using it. One danced.
Another, when asked how he felt after awaking from a short sleep,
replied, 'exactly, exactly neat, by jingo?I never felt better in my
life than I do now. I thought I was in heaven, then in hell, then
at the judgment, and then at school; I must have slept two hours.'
Another, when asked by a patient to tell him what his feelings were,
said, 1 he felt like a kind of airy nothingness, as if he could fly.' To
none has it proved the least injurious, and we are rather favourably
impressed with its use, though we do not expect any striking remedial
effects from it. We shall, however, continue our inquiries, and shall
endeavour to ascertain if there is not some class of the insane to
whom it is especially useful."

In the early part of last year [February, 1848], two of the
managers of the New York State Lunatic Asylum and party jour-
neyed by land, or by the mail route, from Utica to New Orleans, and
returned by the Mississippi and Ohio rivers, visiting on their way
the institutions for the insane which lay within their route. In the
journal before us, the notes, relating to these institutions, taken by
one of the travellers, have been given under the head of an article,
entitled, "Editorial Correspondence," which is extremely amusing
and interesting:?

" Upon our way to Washington," observes our traveller, March 2,
1848, "we passed two days at Albany, where we found much to
interest us. The State Normal School, the Geological Rooms, the
Capitol and State Library, are very deserving the attention of the
traveller. The state library, which is in the capitol, is a very valu-
able and admirably-arranged collection of books. While in the Law
Library we had the curiosity to look up some of the oldest laws
relating to the insane in the state of New York, but we found no
provision for their cure and comfortable maintenance, but merely for
their safe-keeping, that they might not endanger others, and for the
preservation of their property. If we mistake not, there is no allusion
to the insane, with reference to their restoration, in any of the laws
of the state, until the act to < organize the State Lunatic Asylum,
and more effectually to provide for the care, maintenance, and re-
covery of the insane,' was passed, April 7, 1842. In some of the
oldest laws, the insane are denominated persons of ? unsane memory.'
We were much pleased with the additions to the State Library that
have been obtained through the exertions of M. Vattemare. Among
the French works we saw some relating to insanity. One large
volume of the ' State Trials of France' is devoted to the trial of
Joseph Henri for firing at the king, Louis Philippe, July, 1846, and
whom our readers will recollect Ave supposed to have been insane.
See Journal of Insanity, vol. ii. p. 184. On looking over the account
of his trial, it seems to us he was not defended with the zeal and
ability he ought to have been. He was found guilty and condemned
to the galleys for life, but we have seen it stated in the newspapers
that since the late revolution in France he has been set at liberty.
The State Library does not contain many distinct Avorks on insanity,
but there is in Albany one of the best collections of books on this
subject, belonging to Dr. T. R. Beck, that Ave have ever seen.

" "VVe made no stay in NeAV York, but passed a day in Philadelphia,
and visited the Pennsylvania Hospital for the Insane, under the care
of Dr. Kirkbride. We found this establishment as usual in excellent
order, and noticed some late improvements. We Avere particularly
desirous of seeing the detached cottage that had recently been
erected for patients. It is a neat building, one story high, 46 feet
by 25, and placed about 40 feet from the main hospital, and adjoin-
ing the ladies' yard. It aa\is occupied by tAVO females, and seemed to
us to be a very desirable appendage to a large establishment for the
insane.

"We Avere pleased to learn that preparations Avere in progress for
establishing a museum at this hospital. The one at the New York
Asylum, at Utica, though small as yet, has proved to be a source of
interest and gratification to many patients, both Avliile at the institu-
tion and after they have returned to their homes. In a previous
number of this journal, Ave suggested that a museum, or collection
of minerals, shells, pictures, specimens of ancient and modern art,
and curiosities of all sorts, should be connected Avitli institutions for
the insane; and Ave are pleased to learn that several have commenced
making preparations for the purpose. The day Ave Avere at the
hospital, Dr. Cunven, the excellent assistant-physician, Avas making
preparations for deliATering a lecture, on some branch of natural
history, to the patients in the evening. This, as a means of benefit-
ing the insane, Ave think highly of, and have long urged increased
attention to the exercise of the mental faculties in many cases of
insanity, especially in monomania and dementia, as a remedial
measure, and one founded on the pathology of the disease. We
Avish, in addition to lectures, that schools should be established in
every lunatic asylum, and considered an essential part of an amelio-
rating and curative plan of treatment. Attention to geography,
history, arithmetic, natural philosophy, composition, drawing, &c.,
under the care of a competent and judicious teacher, avIio acts under
the orders of the medical superintendent, leads the patient to exercise
the partially atrophied, bloodless, or else congested organs of faculties
that have long been dormant; and this, we think, in many cases, is
essential to improvement. It is not always enough to be mere
listeners to what others say, or passive recipients of the ideas of
others; but the patient should be induced by kind and persevering-
attention to exert his own mental powers, and thus ' minister to
himself.' The mind thus becomes invigorated, and not unfrequently
the circulation; and the general health is improved, and a desire
created for bodily exertion."

Arrived at Washington, the travellers discover, to their surprise,
that there is no asylum for the insane, who are for the most sup-
ported by public charge at the Maryland Hospital, Baltimore. After
visiting many places of interest at Washington, particularly the
Senate and House of Representatives, the Supreme Court, the Con-
gressional Library, Patent Office, and calling on the heads of depart-
ments, attending the levee at the president's, the travellers left
Washington, and passing through Virginia, North Carolina, South
Carolina, Georgia, and Alabama, arrived at New Orleans. There
are two State Lunatic Asylums in Virginia?one at Williamsburg
and one at Staunton. There are none in North Carolina; but one
at Columbia, South Carolina, and one at Milledgeville, Georgia.
Upon arriving at Mobile, our travellers had an interesting conversa-
tion with Dr. Nott, distinguished by his writings on " The Natural
History of the Caucasian and Negro Races." He is of opinion
[observes our note-taker] that?

" That the white and negro races are distinct species, and inclined
to consider the mulattoes as hybrids, a degenerate unnatural
offspring, doomed by nature to work out its own destruction. He
says:

" 1st. That the mulattoes are intermediate in intelligence between
the blacks and whites.
" 2nd. That they are less capable of undergoing fatigue and hard-
ships than the blacks or whites.
" 3rd. That the mulatto women are particularly delicate, and
subject to a variety of chronic diseases.
" 4th. That the women are bad breeders and bad nurses; many
do not conceive; most are subject to abortions, and a large portion
of the children die young in the southern states.
" 5th. That the two sexes, when they intermarry, are less prolific
than when crossed on one of the parent stocks.
" 6th. That negroes and mulattoes are exempt, in a surprising
degree, from yellow fever.
" He says the mulattoes, derived from the mixture of the Spanish
or French with the negro, are more robust, finer-looking, more
prolific, and longer-lived than those from the union of the Anglo-

Saxon race and negro. He thus accounts for the healthy appearance,
fine forms, and agreeable countenances of many of the coloured
Creoles of Mobile and New Orleans."

Arrived at New Orleans, they found much to attract the attention
of travellers, but little to interest respecting the insane. There was,
in fact, no state asylum for their reception, although one was build-
ing at Jackson, about one hundred and fifty miles above New
Orleans. The insane of the state were kept in a building in the
rear of the Charity Hospital; and the following graphic account of
the inconveniences attending the inadequate provision for the insane
needs no comment:?

" At the time of our visit, there were about seventy insane
patients, mostly old and demented cases, under the care of the house-
surgeon, Dr. Wedderstrandt, who devotes himself with benevolent
zeal to their comfort and welfare. Many of these assist about the
hospital; but it is a poor place for the insane. They are annoyed
and injured by the patients in the General Hospital, and there are
no suitable grounds for exercise. We saw one man walking in a
small yard with iron fetters on, to prevent his running away. We
noticed that many slept in dormitories with musquito nets attached
to the bedsteads. The irritation occasioned by musquitoes in this
region must be great to those who are so deranged that they cannot
make use of such nets. We saw here a padded room. Notwith-
standing the pads were made of very strong cloth, it had recently
been torn by a violent patient, and the hair scattered about the
room. A very large proportion of the admissions into the lunatic
department are cases of mania a potu. The total number of admis-
sions into this department, including cases of mania a potu, for 1847,
was 678. Discharges, 541; deaths, 25.


" Dr. W. told us that Indians, though drunk half of the time, did
not have mania a potu; and he thinks the Spanish, French, and the
negroes, when exposed to the same causes,' far less liable to this
disease than the English, Irish, and Germans.

" The reception of patients into the General Hospital has been
very great the past year?viz., 11,690; of which number 9369 were
discharged; 2037 died; and 828 remained January 1st, 1848.
" One hundred patients were received in one day, nearly all of
whom were foreigners?mostly Irish, suffering from ship fever.
Many of the medical and other assistants suffered from fever thus
introduced. Twenty of the Sisters of Charity were affected by it,
seven of whom died. Ten of the medical students, who acted as
assistants, had the fever, and remained in the hospital; but none
died. . . .

" We visited the United States Barracks, now mainly a hospital
for sick and wounded soldiers, under the care of Dr. Wood, to whom
we were indebted for valuable information and many civilities. He
is the son-in-law of General Taylor, and has long been connected with.
the army, and now resides with his family at the barracks. We
here saw some of the sad results of war. Men of robust frames
broken down by long-continued disease, caused by irregular diet,
change of habits, and exposure in a bad climate; others with loss
of limbs, and suffering from severe wounds. We also saw here two
deranged soldiers; one was probably insane when he enlisted. We
understood that application had been made for their discharge, and
that probably they would soon be removed. We have known four
instances of insane persons enlisting. Two were soon discharged;
but two others, Avho had been patients here, and not fully restored
when they left and enlisted, have served two or three years in the
army. We have had several letters from them. One complains
much of his hardships, and wishes to be discharged; the other seems
delighted with the opportunity afforded him of seeing new countries,
and makes no complaint."

Leaving New Orleans, the travellers proceeded by steam down the
Missouri, in St. Louis, a distance of 1230 miles. They found no
state lunatic asylum in Missouri, but one building at Fulton, Gallo-
way County, near the centre of the state. But whether by steam-
boat or railway, we cannot afford space to continue en route; and
therefore take farewell of our travellers at Columbus, where we are
informed that the Ohio Lunatic Asylum is highly creditable to the
state.

We had marked numerous articles in the American Journal of
Insanity for analysis, and a variety of passages for quotation. We
have, in fact, been perplexed by an embarras de richesses ; but we
shall have frequent occasion to return to interesting matters con-
tained in these volumes; and in the meantime, we must avow that
to Dr. Brigliam and his able coadjutors, the medical profession, on
this as well as on the other side of the Atlantic, are deeply indebted.
To the Association of Medical Superintendents connected with insti-
tutions for the insane in America, we are also under manifest obliga-
tion. To the conjoint labours of such men, animated by a spirit of
independence and true love of science, we look forward with the
highest feeling of interest; their researches will, Ave doubt not,
advance our knowledge of the pathology and treatment of insanity,
and throw light on the most obscure of all sciences?that which we
designate in modern language, the science of psychology.
