Duality of the Mindful
=======================

THE JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
OCTOBER 1, 1849.
gtnalgttcal $lebfetos.
Art. I.?
The Unpublished MSS. of the late 
:Author: Alfred Wigan,
M.D.,
of the " Duality of the Mindful.

It is difficult to form anything approaching to an accurate estimate
of the loss which has been sustained by the somewhat premature
death of the late Dr. Wigan. How is it possible to calculate, within
our own time, the importance of the great psychological truths which
he enunciated 1 Generations may roll away ere a just appreciation
will be made of the suggestions contained in his celebrated treatise
on the " Duality of the Mind." England is not so rich in medical
psychologists that such a man can pass from among us without
giving rise to serious and painful reflections. Without desiring for
a moment to exaggerate the mental calibre of Dr. Wigan, or to form
an extravagant idea of the extent of his erudition, we feel that we
are only echoing the sentiments of the profession, and particularly
of those who had the high privilege and honour of his personal
friendship, when we observe that this physician possessed a mind of
no ordinary standard. N~o person could be long in his society with-
out being impressed with the conviction that he was gifted with no
inconsiderable powers of thought, reflection, and observation. He
had not passed through the world, but had lived in it. He not only
saw but observed. He occupied during the earlier part of his life the
agreeable position of a "travelling physician," and he had thus
afforded to him ample opportunities of becoming a citizen of the
world, and of thoroughly acquainting himself with men and things.
His knowledge of the human mind and heart was great. His capa-
bility of accurately estimating character was generally admitted.

He was undoubtedly a man of original thought, and, like his fellows
in this respect, he occasionally allowed his originality to overstep the
bounds of prudence, and at times he appeared as the advocate of a
paradox. But who is without his faults 1 Is it not the peculiar
province of genius to be erratic? Dr. Wigan must not be the ex-
ception to the general rule. It was not until he had well studied
the great book of nature that this physician thought of submitting
his views to the profession, and laying before the public the fruits of
many years' cogitations. He was not anxious to " rush into print"
before he had well considered the grounds of his belief. Having
had, during the latter period of his life, the honour of his most inti-
mate friendship, we have often heard him dwell upon the patient,
cautious, and inductive process he pursued for many years, with the
view of satisfying his mind as to the truth of certain views he enter-
tained, before finally resolving to appear before the world as their
expositor. It would be fortunate for the cause of truth if all took
a lesson out of his book, and endeavoured to ascertain the univer-
sality of a fact before proceeding to the process of generalization.
We must not be understood to have assented to all the speculations
of Dr. Wigan. Combined with much valuable psychological truth,
there is a fair sprinkling of fallacies; but it is not our intention to
dwell upon these. It is to the beauties, the great truths, which this
psychologist has developed, that we are anxious to direct public and
professional attention.

It affords us much pleasure to have an opportunity of gratifying
the taste of our readers in this matter. Through the politeness of
Dr. Wigan's family, all his unpublished MSS. have been submitted
to us for publication. We have carefully examined them, and intend
to select from the documents before us the facts and observations
that have a bearing upon the more abstruse, important, and practical
points of medical psychology.

We feel the greater pleasure in following this course, on account of
the deep interest which Dr. Wigan took in the establishment and
success of this journal. Although he never wrote but one short article
for it, lie invariably spoke to the editor and others in the warmest
terms of hope and encouragement; and if it had pleased Providence
to have prolonged his valuable life, he had pledged himself to
zealously co-operate with others in furthering the objects of the
journal, in endeavouring to create and perpetuate a taste for the more
abstruse, but not less interesting and valuable, speculations of medical
metaphysics. The MSS. before us contain only desultory thoughts
on various points of psychology. The subject of the education of
the young occupied much of Dr. Wigan's attention. We had
frequent conversations with him respecting what he termed the
" motiveless crimes of the young." His views on this important
subject were peculiar. During the period we had the pleasure of
knowing this physician, we had several consultations with him in
cases of children who manifested at a very early period the most
extraordinary abnormal condition of mind, not amounting to what
might be considered as insanity, but very closely allied to it. The
cases referred to made a very strong impression on Dr. "Wigan's mind.
Our criminal records, Dr. Wigan maintained, are full of examples
of atrocious acts of wickedness, committed without any assignable
motive by young persons of both sexes, between the ages of sixteen
and twenty-one or twenty-two. Setting fire to houses, poisoning,
wanton cruelty to animals and to children, and sometimes murder.
The ages of the culprits are generally observed to be from sixteen
to eighteen with girls, from seventeen to twenty-one with boys. It
is extremely rare that motiveless crimes are committed by those who
are either older Or younger than the ages above stated. In cases of
insanity there is generally a motive, however erroneous and absurd;
but the instances of wickedness, to which Dr. Wigan referred, have
not the character of insanity, not even of monomania.
Previously and subsequently, as well as during this period, it is
obvious that acts of equal wickedness may arise from adequate
causes?jealousy, revenge, hatred, slighted affection, cupidity, and
sensual and especially sexual gratification. But crimes arising from
such causes (known or not known) have no connexion with the present
topic, they belong to another category. It is the absolutely motive-
less crime of which Dr. Wigan proposed to attempt an explanation.
The instances are numerous where such persons have administered
poison or set fire to the house of their employers without entertain-
ing the slightest animosity towards them; and such instances are
most numerous among domestic servants, and especially farm ser-
vants, and persons of limited intellectual development.
Two or three examples which occurred at a very early period of
Dr. Wigan's career, made a strong impression on his mind. Sir
Charles Bell was then occupied with his investigations which led to
his great discovery of the composition of nerves. Dr. Wigan was
young and sanguine, and, like most enthusiasts beginning the study
of anatomy, believed that we should catch nature in the fact, and
discover the connexion between mind and matter.
The first thing which attracted his notice in these cases of motive-
less crime was, that the culprit had been subject to haemorrhage from
the nose, which, in some instances, even in males, assumed almost
the periodicity of menstruation. The crime had generally been com-
mitted after a temporary cessation of the habitual discharge. There
was always a dull, heavy, languid look, and in no case an animated
countenance, nor one with the harsh lineaments of vice. On the
contrary, the expression was often mild, placid, and good, though
torpid, and in some instances the face had so amiable a character,
that jurymen were tempted to resist the clearest evidence, and bring
in a verdict of Not Guilty, on the ground that the act must have
been the immediate inspiration of the devil, in a mind naturally in-
nocent and good.
"When the culprit was asked by friends or by a medical man to
explain his motives?if it were said to him, " Why did you do this
act of wickedness? Avhat advantage, what gratification, what benefit
to yourself or to others did you contemplate?"?the answer was,
generally, " I don't know; I had no reason ? I thought I would do
it." Further explanation they could not give than that they felt an
impulse to do something. What that something should be was gene-
rally decided by mere accident on the casual view of the means of
doing it.

He had often endeavoured to extract a different reply, but even
where the interest and sympathy he expressed for a person under
the influence of an ungovernable impulse, led to a strong expression
of gratitude, even where an intense remorse induced the culprit to
seek for any possible means of alleviation, the answer was still the
same?" I had no motive; I thought I would do it."
Now it seemed to him that this ungovernable impulse depended
on a local and peculiar congestion of the brain of which he at-
tempted an explanation; whether true or not, it was an hypothesis
which harmonized perfectly with the fact, and which appeared to
be established by the success of a remedy founded upon it.
It will be observed that the status Dr. Wigan spoke of did not
take place at the period of puberty, but generally about two years
afterwards. This is an important thing to bear in mind; but the
same causes, did they exist, might produce it at a much earlier
period.

Any man whose attention has been called to the subject, and
especially a man conversant with anatomy, sitting behind a stranger
whose head is not concealed by a profusion of hair, can pronounce
boldly the age of the party before he sees his countenance. The
change which takes place in the shape of the cranium, as well as in
the bones of the face, about the age of seventeen is remarkable.
Generally about sixteen this alteration commences; the countenance
and the whole contour of the head lose their feminine aspect, and
assume a harsher shape. The change is more or less retarded in
different individuals, but the deviations are few.

At this period of life, the mind alters entirely, and almost sud-
denly: a change to be attributed, our author believed, to the rapid
growth of the organ of thought; and if subjected at this period to
proper moral and intellectual discipline, guided by a rational phreno-
logy, all the best qualities of which that specific individual brain is
capable are brought to maturity.

The consequences of neglecting this duty are recorded in the regis-
ters of our criminal courts.

An analogous state of brain, which, from the different position iu
life of the parties led to acts apparently dissimilar, often came to
his knowledge in private life among families of the highest respecta-
bility, and where every pains had been taken to inculcate good prin-
ciples by education and by example. There was, he thought, no man
who has lived much in the world who could not call to mind many
instances of the kind.

The spirit which Dr. Wigan spoke of is sometimes manifested in
cruelty to the younger members of the family?in bold defiance of
the decorum of civilized life?in wanton and unnecessary exposure
to shame?in reckless disregard to the feelings of others?and in a
stolid exposure to risks and evils which the slightest care might
avoid, and which brought neither profit nor pleasure.

Another modification of the same feeling, where the natural dis- \
position is good, and the mind well cultivated, displays itself in
acts of foolhardy daring ? taking the boldest leap, walking the . |
nearest to a precipice, incurring the greatest risk of illness from
unnecessary exposure, and an hundred other manifestations of violent <;
animal impulse, which neither arose from a spirit of emulation nor
of morbid vanity, for in the greater number of cases the things were
done without a witness, and only discovered by the accidents to
which they gave rise, or were acknowledged to the medical attendant
in the mollia tempora fandi.

Nay, among the intimate friends of the author's youth, during
the war in the early part of the present century, he had known
acts of daring, unreasoning, audacious bravery, which excited the
highest admiration and applause, yet which were not done from
generous rivalry, from a love of glory, or a wish to obtain applause
/t>
502 MOTIVELESS CRIMES OF THE YOUNG.
and admiration, nor even from the feeling of animal pugnacity, but
from the same stupified, headlong instinct to do something. Under
this temporary, constitutional impulse, they have shown a courageous
defiance of danger, of which they were not capable at sixteen, and
which they looked back upon at four-and-twenty with a sort of vague
alarm and horror. The state of brain which led to these acts being
in the former case not yet arrived, and in the latter passed over.
It frequently happens that the relief experienced from bleeding at
the nose, and the intense distress produced by the compression which
renders such an evacuation necessary, will induce a youth to give
himself a violent blow 011 the nose, or ask another boy to strike him
for the purpose of producing it; innumerable examples of this have
been cited to us by gentlemen with whom we have conversed on the
subject, and every man brought up at a public school must recollect
instances of the same kind. When bleeding can be thus freely in-
duced, the disposition seems to change instantly. This severe self-
infliction has been for the sole purpose of getting rid of that dis-
tressing impulse to do something, which is the only definition they
can give of a state of mind that renders study impossible.

To state the slow process of reasoning and observation through
which Dr. Wigan arrived at his convictions, and to give the examples
which afforded his premises, would occupy a volume.

His firm belief was, that the immediate cause of the state of brain
previously referred to, is the insufficiently rapid enlargement
OF THE BONY CAVITY TO GIVE FREE PLAY TO THE RAPID GROWTH OF
the brain. That there is a permanent state of compression more
or less severe, that the congestion is venous, and chiefly at
THE BASIS OF THE BRAIN AND IN THE CAVERNOUS SINUSES, through
which passes all the venous blood of that part.

This compression may be of every degree of intensity, from that
which merely produces languor and dulness, to that which brings
on fever or epilepsy; it may be indefinitely modified by medical and
moral means, and is almost always controllable by art. One of the
grounds of his belief that this was the true rationale of the disease,
was the uniform success of a practice founded on this theory.
Youths of this age?more especially females?do not bear bleeding
to any considerable extent. Hysterical symptoms are easily set up
by large depletion, even in males, which mystify the diagnosis, and
it requires a large depletion to produce any effect on the venous cir-
culation of this part of the brain.

If we had access to the internal jugular vein without danger1 of
injuring the pneumo-gastric nerve, it is probable that the loss of a
very small portion of blood might suffice, without any shock to a
constitution which is at that age so mutable and so impressionable.
Bleeding from the external jugular is the next best resource, as
from its large anastomosing branch through the parotid, we do at
the same time abstract from the internal jugular; this, however, can
only be done by abstracting at the same time from other sources.
Nevertheless, it is an excellent remedy.

In necks tolerably covered with fat, however, many men have a
difficulty in bleeding from this vein, and the patient and the friends
have generally a great horror of an operation which looks so like
cutting the tliroat.

Bleeding from the temporal artery does not answer the purpose,
except where the congestion is general and the habit full and
vigorous; whereas, in the cases to which I specifically allude, there
is often a deficiency of physical power, the congestion being rather
relative than positive.

Fortunately there remains a safe, easy, and effectual remedy?
leeches to the inside of the nose,?a mode believed to be uniformly
successful. Two or three leeches to each nostril (the part having been
previously well fomented by drawing up warm water and forcibly
throwing it out again) enable us to obtain any quantity of blood we
may desire to take away, and to produce an influential impression
on the part, with the least possible expenditure of the vital fluid, or
shock to the constitution. By leaning the head forwards the bleeding
continues, and by lying down it ceases. Should this not be the case,
a dossil of lint at once puts an end to it.*

The moral treatment is a separate consideration ; but in order to
anticipate the censure of those who might draw the inference that he
considered such persons not responsible for their actions, let me add
that, so far from entertaining such an opinion, he proposed as the
most appropriate and effective punishment, flogging, or, at least,
some modification of corporeal suffering; but he set his face most
strongly against moral mortification, and still more strongly against
solitary confinement and compulsory silence.

It requires but a moment's reflexion to be convinced that, at an
age when sexual desire is most intense, solitary confinement without
incessant occupation is about the most mischievous kind of punish-
ment that could possibly be devised. It often terminates in idiocy.
* Can the congestion we speak of be influenced by the tying up of the neck in
boys about this time, and the tightening of the stays in girls, either from vanity
or from the increase of the bust? These things may at least aggravate the
mischief, by adding general to local congestion.

The change which seems to take place in the whole mind of the
individual after the free application of leeches to the nose, is equal to
any in the animal economy. Calmness, tranquillity, and composure
are accompanied by a clear view of past events, and strong remorse
for the misconduct to which the state of headlong impulse had led
its victim.

The above is the substance of the views propounded by Dr. "VVigan.
Could a more deeply interesting question occupy the patient con-
sideration of the medical philosopher 1 Is there a man who has
passed through the busy scenes of life without meeting with cases
somewhat similar to those referred to by Dr. Wigan 1 The tendency
to crime, manifested early in life, with or without a motive, is a sub-
ject which forces attention upon the legislature. It must seriously
be considered by those whose peculiar duty it is to grapple with
such questions. The following observation on the supposed exist-
ence of a spasm of the nervous fibre is of a suggestive character:?
" I am fully aware how entirely hypothetical is the idea, but
myself I most firmly believe that in many of the cases of concussion
of the brain, especially from blows, the fibres of the convolutions are
thrown into this state of spasm, which, if its violence do not produce
physical mischief, (as the spasm of the gastrocnemii, a rupture of the
tendo-Acliillis,) may cease as suddenly as it was produced. It may
be thought a very extravagant supposition, but I also firmly believe
that the sudden restoration of reason before death, alluded to by Dr.
Holland, and which is not a very rare occurrence, is to be attributed
to the sudden cessation of the spasm which had interfered with the
exercise of the understanding. This might be only in certain fasciculi
of fibres, (called organs by the phrenologists.) or in one brain only
That moral causes may produce a similar state of spasm is quite con-
ceivable?that excessive exertion of the mental faculties may also
produce it is also conceivable."

The doctrine propounded by some distinguished theologists as to
insanity being often the result of the influence of sin on the human
mind, appears to have engaged the attention of Dr. "VVigan. He
observes?

" Heinrotli, whose numerous writings display an extraordinary
mixture of mysticism, amounting almost to positive insanity, with
the soundest common sense and acute observation of facts, whose
ample experience in a vast establishment for the insane must have
furnished him with abundant materials for correct judgment of the
different forms, causes, progress, and treatment, of mental aberration,
is yet so bewildered by religious enthusiasm, as boldly to assert that
sin is the cause of mental disorder. Confused by the mixture of in-
sanity and reason in some of these unhappy beings, instead of seeing
different and contradictory states of two minds, two organs of
thought, he thinks the opposition to be between the natural mind of
man and the spirit of evil. It is a horrible doctrine, yet like some
other theological monstrosities, it cannot always annihilate the
natural goodness of a man's disposition. It did not induce him to
act according to the principles which would necessarily result from
it?-just as clergymen who believe in predestination will yet make
great efforts to save the soul of a sinner, or the fatalist strive to
escape from a conflagration. Fortunately this belief is wearing out
even amongst the lowest vulgar, but that it influenced the treatment
of the insane a few years ago is certain, and was one of the most
powerful of the motives which subjected them to the horrible tor-
tures that now excite general indignation. It is a subject on which
I cannot write or even think with calmness, when reflecting on the
atrocities which I have myself witnessed at the beginning of the pre-
sent century, and which then excited no indignation?scarcely even
the casual notice of a philanthropist."

The following observations on the subject of senile dementia will
be read with interest:?

" The form of defective brain, commonly, but inappropriately
called senile dementia, is by no means peculiar to old age, for we
often see it in men of forty, who have been subjected to great
anxiety, or who have indulged in sensual excesses. Nothing remains
in the mind of such men but what has been studied?that is, has
occupied the conjoint, continuous and uninterrupted attention of both
brains, a thing now almost impracticable. The ordinary occurrences
of life are forgotten immediately: a man tells a story which rests
perfectly in his memory, but he forgets that he told it to the same
persons not half an hour before. I remember a physician, now dead,
with whom I was very intimate, who said to me, ' They tell me my
memory is failing. How absurd! Why, I could at this moment
repeat eight hundred lines from Homer.' And he began to inflict
them upon me, forgetting that within a few hours he had twice
before told me the same thing, and begun the same proof of his un-
failing powers.

" It is, however, sheer waste of time to speak of a subject like
this, unless there be some distinct and useful object to be obtained
by it; and I now recommend, as the best means of re-establishing
the power of concentration, to learn by heart pieces of oratory or of
poetry, especially the former, which is a severer exercise, because the
memory is not aided by rhyme. Do not be discouraged by the
headach, which for a time accompanies the process; this will cease,
and the sufferer will be surprised at the increase of power he will
gradually acquire?a power which he will discover to be accompanied
by increased mental vigour in matters quite unconnected with his
studies.

" In the extreme cases, accompanied by the torpor of old age, the
brain seems to be in a state resembling that produced by concussion.
The sympathetic system is carrying on the business of life vicariously
for the brain; but in both these examples, if a loud sound be made
to draw the attention, and a question then asked in a powerful tone
of voice, the brain is capable of being roused into distinct perceptions.
Much observation convinces me that many aged persons are left to
go into the sleep of death for want of this stimulus. There are
occasions where the prolongation of the life of an old person for
a single week may make the difference of poverty or competence
to the survivors. I remember one case where a gentleman died at
eleven o'clock on the 28th of September, and left his family in great
distress, when had he lived a couple of hours more he would have
been entitled to another year's income, which would have placed
them in comparative ease. It is so very natural to consider it cruelty
to rouse them from their state of calmness and repose, that I have
been more than once out-voted on such occasions. But it is like the
torpor of persons benumbed with cold; if they sleep, it is the sleep
of death. One brain always 'goes out' before the other; but pre-
vious to its extinction in this gradual manner, it may obey the com-
mands of its more energetic brother when thoroughly roused, long
enough to dictate a will which may save a family from destruction.
I have the satisfaction of thinking that on an occasion of this kind I
was the means of conferring a very important benefit on a meritorious
widow and helpless children, and defeating the hopes of a brutal and
unfeeling heir-at-law."

Schoolmasters and psychologists are somewhat at variance on the
question of corporal punishment. It is not our intention to enter
the arena, and defend the system pursued at many establishments
for the education of the young. It is a difficult point to decide
whether the cane and strap can be dispensed with. On a somewhat
kindred subject, Dr. Wigan propounds his views. "We need not say
that they meet with our cordial acquiescence.

" To subject to equal punishment the little untaught child of the
streets, all whose worst animal propensities have been not merely
left unrestrained, but have been cultivated into precocious perfection,
while his moral sense has never had presented to it any better motive
than the fear of punishment?to subject such an animal to equal
punishment with another, whose conscience has been carefully culti-
vated, seems a violation of justice. Society ought not to permit the
possibility of such neglect; and in spite of the maudlin humanity of
sickly sentimentalists, these neglected beings should be shipped off
to colonies, where rigid discipline, new motives, habits of industry,
and careful moral cultivation, may enable the creature to grow up
into a useful and moral member of society: but it is not till you
have carefully presented good motives that you have strictly a right
to punish severely bad actions. Having done this for some time on
a consistent plan, you may justly and usefully inflict any degree of
punishment which will supply the deficiency of better motives, and
make the creature feel that it is his interest to conduct himself
justly.

" In the case of monomaniacs, as it is the fashion to name
criminals, like Oxford, both brains are not suggesting evil deeds at
the same time; there is one clearly capable of controlling the other
if adequate motives be presented, and fear of punishment is the
strongest. They no doubt feel the morbid desire to do something
wrong, but they feel also that they have the power to abstain from
it; and society has the right to inflict punishment of any degree of
severity short of death to serve as an example to others, and a motive
to retain their self-command. One instance of severe corporal
punishment will operate as an electric shock to the faculties of thou-
sands, and rouse them from the moral torpor which lets the diseased
propensity take the lead. If you punish for such things, punish
severely."

The following fragment on the subject of anxiety Ave give without
any abridgment. The author and the editor of this journal had
often referred in conversation to this interesting matter.
" Anxiety !?Is there a human breast in which this awful word
fails to produce an echo??from the youth who fears to be super-
seded in the affections of the object of his love, or the parent who
watches with alarm the blush on the cheek of his child, lest its vivid-
ness indicate latent consumption, to the old man worn down with
years and sorrow, who tries to estimate the commercial convulsions
that threaten to swallow up the hard earnings of a long life of priva-
tion, and reduce him to beggary.

" To specify the subjects of this corroding care would be to
enumerate all the classes of society. The man of poetical imagination
might give a series of individual pictures whose vividness would
excite universal despair. Like the ' single captive' of Sterne, he
might so harrow up the feelings of the reader by the representation
of social misery individualized, that the whole world should seem a
charnel liouse of wretchedness, unworthy of the benevolence of the
Great Being who called it into existence.

" It is hard to believe it in times of despondency and alarm; but
the man who stands aloof from the turmoil of the world, and occupies
the higher station of independence, knows ' that all worketh together
for good;' that God does not leave to a future state the expiation of
many of our errors and sins, but that even in this world the}' work
their own punishment. If we suffer for the faults and crimes of
others when acquitted by our own conscience, we must endeavour to
consider the misfortunes inflicted on us as part of the moral dis-
cipline by which it is His purpose to work out our improvement and
fit us for final happiness.

" This view of the case, however, is appropriately left to the
clergyman. It is in the capacity of physician and man of the world
that I put myself forward on the present occasion, in the conviction
that it is in my power to offer important consolation to the afflicted,
to show how misfortune may be best borne?how its physical and
moral consequences may have their force turned aside, and be ren-
dered comparatively innocuous?how inevitable bodily ailments may
be modified or cured?how some admit of great alleviation, and
some of entire removal, that even by acting on the body we may
render important service to the mind, and enable it to rise elastic
from the pressure that, if left alone, would have crushed it to the
earth.

" It is not that I would evade the consideration of other forms of
unhappiness?on the contrary, I hope, sincerely and confidently, to
render a service to my fellow-creatures by showing that in all cases we
may anticipate and prevent, or give considerable relief to the ailments,
disorders, and diseases produced by mental causes, even when it is
obviously impossible to alleviate or remove their source and origin.
The mind?that is, the aggregate of the functions of the brain, (for we
are not here speaking of the soul,) can only produce disease by some
sort of action on the physical structure and functions of the body.
We see, however, that as accidental injury to the body (an extensive
burn or scald for example) can produce a very serious effect on the
mind, so also the diseased or disordered states of body, directly
caused by mental emotion, act reflexly on the functions of the brain,
and very often paralyse all the efforts of the sufferer, and render him
incapable of using in its full power the intellect which would have
otherwise shown him a mode of extrication from his embarrassment.

" Men who have mighty cares on their mind?statesmen whose
confidence of retaining their position, and further ambitious hopes of
personal advancement, depend on the slender and fragile thread of
popular favour, or the less capricious opinion of a monarch, or whose
patriotism looks forward with honourable fear to the result of a deep-
laid scheme for the advancement of their country's welfare, liable at
every moment to be defeated by malevolent rivals, and the un-
executed purposes rendered suspicious to those who judge by results
alone?merchants who have staked vast sums on the issue of an un-
certain speculation?gentlemen of fortune who have perilled their
whole possessions and their honour on the result of a horse race,?
such men will, perhaps, look down with contempt on the petty
details of the cares of humble life which are to be found in the fol-
lowing pages, but?

' little things are great to little men.'
" The medical philosopher looks with as much interest on the
anxiety of the petty tradesman, or the publican Avhose wealthier
neighbour is gradually depriving them of the income created by un-
tiring industry with scanty means, as on a great leviathan of the
Stock Exchange, whose vast speculations involve the fate of nations.
There is as much real dignity in the sufferings of the one as the other,
if sanctified by a feeling of religion. Except in so far as the wish
for wealth is modified by the desire to possess the means of bene-
volent power and the exercise of an enlightened beneficence, the
hopes, fears, motives, sentiments, and feelings of the different classes,
as well as their mental and corporeal sufferings, are essentially the
same; and, if regarded from the heights of pure reason and philosophy,
are equally deserving of honour or contempt.

" I shall, however, generally draw my illustrations from that middle
class, so numerous in this country, who, possessing property, educa-
tion, and refinement, are yet engaged in the incessant labour of
earning the means of maintaining their position?which is all that
the vast majority desire; the cares of the very ambitious are objects
of less interest.

" It requires 110 argument to prove that anxiety affects the health
?it is an object of daily experience; our libraries are full of books
of counsel on the subject; medical works, in the enumeration of
causes of lingering disease, are crammed with cases arising from this
source alone, and there is scarcely a disorder wherein this state of
brain is not assigned as one of the most prominent agents in disturb-
ing the bodily health, and establishing disease. Fevers, jaundice, gout,
consumption, insanity, dyspepsia, and a hundred other diseases, are
so often thus created, that it would almost appear to be the sole agent
in their production. And yet with all this profusion of advice and
description, I cannot call to mind a single writer who has attempted
to explain the mode in which these innumerable effects are produced;
yet, till this be clearly understood, we are not in possession of half
the available means of modifying or removing them.

" The distress brought on by this inability to guide the thoughts
?a frequent consequence of great anxiety?this inability to use the
two brains concurrently, that is, to exercise attention or study, is one
of the most pitiable states of mind that can be conceived. Happy
those who have never had personal experience of the infliction.
The utility of works of imagination is thoroughly appreciated in such
cases, and the sufferer would be always reading. In following the
ideas of another man he can generally leave his own intellectual
organs in quiet; the discordant action of the two brains may thus
subside perhaps into repose, and on resuming their duties they may
have re-established the unison and consentaneity which is necessary
to the tranquil exercise of the mind. On such occasions, if there
be no object of tender fondness, whose soothing blandishments can
turn the current of the thoughts?if a man look only with terror
to the time when
" Shall dawn tlie dreary morrow; and the toils,
The cares, the ills of life, with scarcely hope
To brighten the involving gloom, and save
The fainting spirit,"?

" on these occasions, Ave feel acutely the value of such a writer as
Walter Scott?a man whose medical services, if I may so term them,
would have been cheaply purchased by the nation at the price of the
largest fortune ever possessed by an individual. How many a
harassed brain has been soothed by his delightful fictions ?how
many a lingering disease has been rendered endurable?from how
many has he not diverted the dismal prospect of inevitable death?
to how many an aching heart has he brought consolation and comfort,
and the temporary oblivion of sorrow?how many a suicide has he
prevented?and how many a bewildered brain placed in repose1?
Such men have their mission,?they are sent into the world by a
benevolent Deity for a specific purpose, and they may be compared
to the blessed medicaments which have been created for the relief of
suffering. I do not hesitate to say that I attribute the recovery of
many a patient to the mental composure produced by reading his
admirable romances, in which there is nothing to detract from the
entire satisfaction and assent of a virtuous mind."
Dr. Wigan entertained strong views on the subject of capital
punishment, as well as upon the indiscriminate infliction of legal
penalties. Much might be said on both these important points, but
as it is our intention shortly to consider the Science of Crime psy-
chologically, we defer our observations on these matters until the
proper period arrives for their consideration. There is much truth
in Dr. Wigan's remarks relative to the mental training of most
criminals. Their hereditary predisposition to crime, their early
education in crime, and want of religious and moral instruction, are
points which a wise and humane legislature ought duly to consider
in its award of punishments.

" The inferior animals have two brains, like man, and the intel-
lectual portion of these brains, however defective as compared with
ours, can control their natural propensities. The dog can wait for a
time of safe revenge, or for an opportunity of stealing with impunity,
but we have not the slightest reason to believe that they can think
of their own thoughts, the point of mental development at which
begins a responsibility for the actions. If, from naturally defective
formation of the organs of thought in a human being, this degree of
ratiocination is beyond his powers, surely no one would hold him
otherwise responsible for his misdeeds, than we hold the spider re-
sponsible for the lingering death he inflicts upon the fly; we may
still, if it be our object to preserve the flies, destroy the spider, and
we may remove the barely human being where he can do no further
mischief. A few years only have elapsed since it was believed that
Ave had the right to put them to death, but a more humane practice
now prevails. (In the ' Annual Register,' of the years 1784 and
1785, I observe that the number hanged in one morning at the Old
Bailey varied from ten or twelve to five-and-twenty; there are
numerous instances of batches of sixteen, eighteen, and two-and-
twenty, strangled together, many of them for crimes which, in the
present day, would be thought sufficiently punished by a few years
at the hulks.) In like manner, if the individual, from the want of
moral training, has never been taught the art of self-control?if he
has been brought up in a moral atmosphere so polluted as to stifle
the growth of moral feeling?or from long indulgence of depraved
habits and propensities, has become incapable of exercising a faculty
once acquired, he must be judged very differently from the man who,
with all the motives to good conduct carefully cultivated, deliberately
prefers vice to virtue?his immediate gratification to his future ad-
vantage?and the indulgence of his own vile passions to the welfare
of society."

It appeared to Dr. Wigan that, in some of the ordinary forms of
insanity?of continuous or permanent insanity, the mantal condition
of the patients much resembled the condition of children?sensation
and perception active, but reasoning powers (judgment) defective?
and often (like the absence of one sense giving greater activity to
another,) that the faculties particular to childhood were more acute
than when they had the full possession of their reason. Some mad
people, like children, have an extraordinary power of penetrating into
character, and possess a sort of freemasonry which enables them to
test even the sincerity of a tone of voice with a miraculous instinct.
A young child can distinguish the assiduities dictated by interested
motives from those which arise from a real love of children and
tolerance of their vagaries. The bland and soothing tones of the
doctor impose on the mother, but the child is not deceived by them.
The existence, the status of the child is more complete in its kind
than the status of the adult?the faculties it possesses are more
perfect than the same faculties when the reason is fully developed.
Like most young practitioners, Dr. Wigan was, in the outset of
his career, exceedingly anxious to please, and we dare say that his
anxiety led him, as it so often leads others, into a little exaggeration
of manner. He had visited a young child not very seriously ill, and
had made his inquiries in so gentle and soothing, indeed so affec-
tionate a manner, that it was quite evident he had made his way
into the very penetralia of the mother's heart, and that there was
little chance of so kind and good a man (so very fond of children)
being superseded by any other person. Whatever might be the pro-
gress of the case, he came away quite satisfied with his own skill,
but with a slight inkling of self-contempt at his obsequious demon-
strations, and not a very exalted opinion of the lady's understanding
who had been so infatuated with them. He had scarcely descended
the steps, when he was called back to hear a few more last words, and
was shown into a room adjoining the children's playroom; while
waiting the coming of the mother he had the satisfaction of hearing
the whole scene acted over again by them; one was the mamma,
another the baby, and another himself; and all his words and tones
were mimicked in perfection. It was quite clear that the children
who had been present at the consultation, had all seen through the
sweet artifices which the mother had accepted as perfectly genuine
sympathy.

So it seems to be with some of the insane; they must be treated
with perfect candour and veracity. They must be answered boldly
and clearly, without the least subterfuge or deception. The physi-
cian ought to be exceedingly careful never to break a promise, or
hold out a delusive expectation; he must behave to them with a re-
spect which seems to arise from a real deference for humanity, even
in that humiliating position.

We must for the present bring our article to a conclusion; on
some future occasion, we may again revert to the unpublished views
of Dr. Wigan.
