The Journal of Psychological Medicine and Mental Pathology
============================================================

JULY 1, 1849.
&nalgtfcal 3?Utmfos.
Art. I.?
The Closing Years of Dean Swift's Life, with an Appendix,
containing several of his 'poems, hitherto unpublished, and some remarks on Stella.
:Author: W. R. Wilde, M.E.S.A., F.H.C.S.
Dublin. Hodges and Smith. 1849.

The progress of scientific investigation clearly proves that the most
extraordinary, and apparently erratic phenomena in nature, are v f" '
dependent on certain fixed laws, and that no event, however remark-
able it may appear, ever occurs which is accidental or irregular, or
contrary to the prescribed order and harmony of the universe. If
this be true, which it undoubtedly is in the material world, it is not
less certain that every mental manifestation, whether of thought or
feeling, which governs human conduct, and determines the character
of mankind, is also dependent on psychological laws, which it is our
province, in this department of science, to investigate. It has been
said by Madame de Stael, that " man is complete in every individual
man." Were this aphorism strictly true, the type of humanity
Avould be so simplified, that the task of the psychologist would be
comparatively an easy one; but it is far otherwise: the human mind
passes through such an infinite variety of phases, and its perceptions
are so modified by its organic relations with the nervous system in
health and in disease, that the analysis is always attended with
great difficulty. Within the whole range of biographical literature,
there is no character so perplexing?none upon which a greater
variety of opinion has prevailed, than that of Dean Swift. Who can account for the enormous incongruities which he exhibited in
his profession, disposition, and in the conduct of his daily life 1 No
comet, asteroid, or aerolite, ever puzzled astronomer more than his
eccentricities and inconsistencies have perplexed the biographers who
have attempted to describe the orbit in which he moved. But is
there no clue or thread to guide us through the labyrinth in which
he apparently, from some strange perversity of purpose, chose to
wander 1 Are there no extenuating circumstances to mitigate the
severe censures that have been heaped upon his memory, and which
might perchance appease the shade of poor Yarina, or be offered up
in atonement upon the shrine of the ill-used and unhappy Stella 1
Or, worse perhaps than either of these cases, can no redeeming
apology be suggested for his apparently indefensible conduct towards
the most unfortunate of his victims?the impassioned and broken-
hearted Vanessa 1 We answer affirmatively; for it is our belief
that the wrongs which he inflicted on others as well as upon himself,
" blighting his life in best of its career," are explicable upon the
simple principle that he was hurried away by morbid?we should
rather say, insane?impulses which he could not resist, and which
eventually assumed the ordinary form of dementia, terminating in
fatuity and death :?

" From Marlborough's eyes the tears of dotage flow,
And Swift expires a driveller and a show."
But we would fain enter our protest upon the very threshold of
this inquiry against the discussion which is provoked by Mr. Wilde's
book. Why, at this distant period of time, should the question of
Dean Swift's insanity be mooted 1 Cui bono ? It would appear as
if Mr. Wilde conceived insanity to be a stigma upon those who un-
happily are so afflicted, wherefore he sets to work with great in-
genuity collating evidence, positive and negative, with a view of
relieving the memory of Swift from this imaginary opprobrium.
But surely insanity, or, to speak pathologically, cerebritis, whether
acute or chronic, or any other morbid condition, whether organic or
functional, of the brain, deranging the mind, is no more a stigma
upon the unhappy sufferer than hepatitis or gastritis, pleuritis, or
any other physical disease incident to humanity. Such a notion
is worthy only of the superstition of the darker ages, when con-
vulsive diseases were supposed to indicate demoniacal possession.
Again: in order to appreciate fairly the evidence laid before us by
Mr. Wilde, we are inevitably called upon to consider and test the
rationality of Swift's conduct by reviewing certain incidents and
passages in his life, better, infinitely better, consigned to oblivion.
" Save lis from our friends," tlie living may well exclaim, wlio need
no unwise feat of chivalry to vindicate the honour of their escut-
cheon ; and save us, we would implore, from that species of post-
humous knight-errantry which would fence with moonlight shadows
round our tomb.

The retrospect of Dean Swift's biography is throughout singularly
cheerless and unsatisfactory; his life altogether would appear to have
been a mistake. His political career was a notorious failure;
neither Whig nor Tory would trust him; he wrote, it is true,
slashing libels, and his pen was feared, but he forfeited, by his ter-
giversation, the respect and confidence of all parties. His position
in the church was equally anomalous; celebrated, like his clerk,
Roger Coxe, for his facetious humour and the violence with which he
indulged in party-spirit, rather than respected for the attributes
which become a clergyman, it is not surprising that all his prefer-
ment ended in his obtaining the deanery of St. Patrick's, which he
himself professed to consider as at best an " honourable exile."
His literary success was equally anomalous; for he Avas known in
his own day only as an anonymous pamphleteer and coarse satirist;
and although it may be true that the " Talc of a Tub," " Gulliver's
Travels," " The Battle of the Books," and " Martinus Scriblerus,"
have survived, and will always maintain their popularity from the
wit and ridicule with which they abound, still all his more serious
productions, which should belong to a higher order of literature?
his political essays, tracts, and epistles?have long since been forgot-
ten, and can now be regarded only as literary curiosities. " Cousin
Swift," said Dryden, " you will never be a poet." Swift never for-
got or pardoned this offence; but the prediction was fully verified,
for Swift never rose above mediocrity in that higher description of
poetry which affects the imagination and the sentiments, and has
succeeded chiefly in those satirical touches which have secured for
some of his isolated minor poems only an appropriate niche in the
parlour of Joe Miller rather than in the Temple of the Muses.
Dean Swift was born at No. 7, Hoey's Court, Dublin, on the 30th
of November, 1G67, and we may remind our readers that he died on
the 19th of October, 1745. After his death every minute circum-
stance connected with his biography, and especially with the disease
under which he died, was carefidly collected from the friends with
whom he associated, and from Mrs. Wliiteaway and the attendants
who were with him throughout his long and lingering malady. We
cannot, indeed, conceive clearer and more unimpeachable evidence
upon any subject than we find upon the life of Swift, as recorded by

Delaney, Sheridan, Hawkeswortli, Lord Orrery, Johnson, and more
recently, by Sir Walter Scott. Besides which, his own journal to
Stella, and his epistolary correspondence with Bolingbroke, Pope,
Steele, Addison, Gay, Prior, Arbuthnot, and with many other of his
illustrious contemporaries, to whom he expressed himself freely and
unreservedly, have so elucidated almost every passage in his history
that we have always considered that the portrait we have been
accustomed to behold as that of the Dean was a true and perfect
likeness. We therefore did not expect or wish to see any unskilful
limner cleaning and touching up the picture, bringing shadows into
relief which time and forgetfulness had mellowed down, restoring
features which cannot be contemplated with satisfaction or pleasure,
and resuscitating the recollection of many sad and painful events.
But as we have premised, the dead, it would seem, are not permitted
to rest quietly in their sepulchres. Upwards of a century has gone
past, and we now find Mr. Wilde starting up to defend the memory
of Dean Swift, undrawing the curtains, which, in the midst of his
sufferings, concealed the aspect of his lunacy from the afflicted by-
standers, and insisting, with a strange perversion of reasoning, that
the Dean never exhibited any symptom of insanity.

This is not all. With more enthusiasm than judgment, Mr. Wilde
describes Swift to have been a model of propriety, "the greatest
genius of his age," and " one of the brightest ornaments of his
country;" nay, with true Irish zeal, he calls upon " the lovers of their
country to stand by him (p. 90) and defend his memory from the
slights thrown upon it by the Jeffreys, Broughams, Macaulays, and
De Quinceys of the day. All this sounds very chivalrous, but we
are afraid that Dean Swift scarcely merited so much patriotic love,
for it is well known that he disliked being considered an Irishman,
and somewhat ungratefully repudiated the land of his birth. He was
frequently (observes Lord Orrery) heard to say, " I am not of this
vile country?I am an Englishman;" and Pope was so far deceived by
his misrepresentation that, in one of his letters to Swift, he speaks of
England as if it had really been the place of his nativity.'"'' Johnson
states that, " during his life the place of his birth was undetermined.
He was contented to be called an Irishman by the Irish; but would
occasionally call himself an Englishman."+ Sir Walter Scott also
remarks that when the die was cast for him to close his days in the
* Remarks on the Life and Writings of Swift, by John, Earl of Orrery.
London, 1752. P. 7.
f Johnson's Life of Swift. Collected Works, by Arthur Murphy. London,
1810. P. 2
country of his birth, his dislike to Ireland had abated nothing of its
acrimony.' We think, therefore, that Mr. Wilde's patriotic appeal
to his warm-hearted fellow-countrymen is somewhat misplaced; but
biographers, like painters, are apt to become enamoured of their
subject, and hence Mr. Wilde, in amiable forgetfulness of Swift's
foibles and irregularities when at college, assures us that " in early
life he was of remarkably active habits, and exceedingly sober and
temperate," (p. 9;) but we fear that the history of Swift's academical
career by no means justifies this encomium.

In order to appreciate fairly the sanity or insanity of Dean Swift's
conduct, while the malady under which he eventually succumbed was
only yet in its initiatory stage, Ave must?however reluctantly?review
some of the most prominent incidents of his life, which, in a medical
and psychological point of view, are of great importance in the
history of his disease.

In the year 1682, when he was fifteen years of age, Swift was
admitted into Trinity College, Dublin, and we learn from Dr Barrett,
who was provost of the college, and who in 1808 published an essay
on the earlier part of the life of Swift, the materials of which he
collected from the Records of the University, that Swift was addicted
to the vices which are too frequently incidental to a college life, at
an age when young men give way unthinkingly to the indulgence of
their passions, and are incapable of resisting temptation. The com-
panions with whom Swift associated were, Dr Barrett states, " lads
of dissipated habits," and the entries in the College books show that
Swift was repeatedly admonished and censured for his misconduct by
the academical authorities. Between the 14th of November, 1685,
and the 8th of October, 1687, he incurred, for non-attendance at
chapel, neglecting lectures, and town haunting, penalties and punish-
ments for upwards of seventy weeks. These various offences were
succeeded by other delinquencies, which were considered to be so
reprehensible that, on the 30th of November, 1688, the vice-provost
and senior fellows issued a decree (which Dr Barrett has extracted
from the records) pronouncing Swift and three of his fellow-students
guilty of exciting insubordination, using contemptuous language, and
contumacy, for which offences their academical degrees were ordered
to be suspended, and they were directed to crave pardon on their
knees in the public hall of the college.'"' Sir Walter Scott seems to
think that there is no absolute proof that Swift submitted to this
* An Essay on the earlier part of the Life of Swift, by the Rev. John
Barrett. D.D., and Vice-Provost, College, Dublin. London : Johnson, 1808,
Pp. 10, 12, 14.

despotic infliction; nevertheless, Dr Barrett throws out no doubt
upon it, hut emphatically adds that " this degradation alienated
Swift's affections for ever from his Alma Mater." The result of all
this irregularity, negligence, and dissipation was, that when he pre-
sented himself as a candidate to he examined for the degree of
Bachelor of Arts, he was found deficient, and eventually obtained
the degree only by special favour, speciali gratid?" a phrase which,
in that university, (says Lord Orrery,) carries with it the utmost
marks of reproach. It is a kind of dishonourable degree, and this
record of it, notwithstanding Dr Swift's at present established
character throughout the learned world, will always remain against
him in the academical register at Dublin."* The reckless and dissi-
pated life which Swift led at college suggested an opinion to Dr.
Bcddoes that the vertigo from which he suffered in after years was
to be ascribed to habits of early and profligate indulgence, and he
further argued that his conduct towards Stella and Vanessa, and the
tone of gross indelicacy which pervades his writings indicate that degree
of physical imbecility which is often consequent upon the premature
exhaustion of the nervous system. Withdrawing from the university
of Dublin under these discreditable circumstances, Swift determined
upon obtaining the degree of Master of Arts at Oxford, and to
retrieve his disgrace resolved that he would study eight hours daily.
" This part of his story," observes Dr Johnson, " deserves to be
remembered; it may afford useful admonition and powerful encourage-
ment to men whose abilities have been made for a time useless by
their passions or pleasures, and who, having lost one part of life in
idleness, are tempted to throw away the remainder in despair."
On the 5tli of July, 1692, Swift succeeded in taking his Master's
degree at Oxford. It is stated by Johnson that in the testimonials
which he produced on this occasion, " the words of disgrace were
omitted;" and Lord Orrery alleges that the heads of the university,
by a singular misapprehension, supposed that the words speciali
gratid signified a degree conferred in reward of extreme diligence
and learning, instead of one attended with a dishonourable compro-
mise; but this we can scarcely conceive, and rather believe that
Swiit, by unremitting industry and study, fairly qualified himself
for examination.

Having obtained his academical degree, Swift entered upon the
active business of life. He resided for some years with his patron
and friend, Sir William Temple, went with Lord Berkeley to Ire-
* Lord Orrery, op. cit., p. II,
ON THE INSANITY OF DEAN SWIFT. 355

land, obtained the livings of Laracor and Rathbeggan, returned to
England, took a prominent part in the political skirmishes of the day,
and, after propitiating the smiles of court favour, and winding his way
through the sinuous paths of ministerial interest, succeeded?but not
without a delay which weighed heavily upon his mind, and which he
endured with the greatest bitterness of feeling?in obtaining his
Church preferment. He was, in the year 1713, appointed Dean of
St. Patrick's. " In point of power and revenue," says Lord Orrery,
" such a deanery might be esteemed no inconsiderable promotion;
but to an ambitious mind whose perpetual aim was a settlement in
England, a dignity in any other kingdom must appear, as perhaps it
was designed, only an honourable and profitable banishment." Before
leaving Trinity College, Dublin, Swift became attached to the sister
of one of his fellow-students, whose name was Jane Waring, with
whom he corresponded for many years under the fictitious appellation
of Varina. The young lady, it appears, acknowledged a reciprocity
of affection; but prudential considerations induced her to delay giving
her consent to an immediate union with her lover. Two of Swift's
letters only are preserved, which afford a striking commentary upon
that description of passion Avhicli, being founded upon no permanent
principle of honour or affection, whiffles with the wind, and is ever
ready to transfer its pretensions to the next object of attraction.
" Varina's life," exclaims Swift, "is daily wasting, and though one
just and honourable action would furnish health to her and unspeak-
able happiness to us both, yet some power that repines at human
felicity, has that influence to hold her continually doting upon her
cruelty, and me on the cause of it. * * By Heaven, Varina, you
are more experienced, and have less virgin innocence than I. * * *
if you still refuse to be mine, you will quickly lose, for ever lose, him
that has resolved to die as he has lived, all yours. Jon. Swift."
This is something in the Ercles vein, for he neither died, nor married,
nor broke off the connexion for four years afterwards, during which
period he became acquainted with Miss Esther Johnson, whom he
apostrophized in his poetry under the name of Stella. And now
came the difficulty, which was, how to get rid of his Varina? His
affections were estranged from her, but how were his impassioned
professions of love to be cancelled 1 The pen of a ready writer is as
easily converted into an instrument of deception, as into one con-
veying sentiments of disinterested generosity, purity, and love, so,
with all the ingenuity of a lawyer, Swift taxed his wit to concoct a
letter which should on the one hand hold out a profession of his
readiness to fulfil his engagement honourably with her, and which,
on the other hand, should stipulate upon conditions which he knew
well she would feel obliged to reject. " Instead of either fairly
avowing his inconstancy (observes Jeffrey), or honourably fulfilling
engagements from which inconstancy, perhaps, could not release him,
he proceeds to write to her in the most frigid, insolent, and hypo-
critical terms, undervaluing her fortune and person, and finding fault
with her humour, and yet pretending that if she would only comply
with certain conditions, he might still be persuaded to venture
himself with her into the perils of matrimony. The lady, as was to
be expected, broke off all correspondence after this, and so ended
Swift's first matrimonial engagement, and first eternal passion. What
became of the unhappy person whom he thus heartlessly abandoned
after a seven years' courtship, is nowhere explained."* We have a
shrewd suspicion that the breaking off of any marriage ought never
to be regretted, because the fact in itself proclaims the mesalliance
which was contemplated; but this, which is an assumption, by no
means excuses or even palliates the conduct of Swift, who, while in
the act of deserting his former lady-love, now invoked the Muses
to assist him in winning the affections of her rival, Miss Esther
Johnson.

An air of romantic interest and mystery is attached to the fate of
this lady. She was the daughter of a Mr. Johnson, a London merchant,
who died soon after her birth, upon which Mrs. Johnson with her two
daughters, on account of her intimacy with Lady Giffovd, Sir William
Temple's favourite sister, became resident at Moor Park, where un-
fortunately Swift lived. The education of Stella had been neglected,
and Swift soon took upon himself the office of St. Pierre, and began
instructing his nouvelle Ileloise in the arts of spelling, grammar, and
rhetoric. He soon won the confidence of a pupil affectionately dis-
posed, and when they separated, or were no longer in each other's
company, he maintained his influence and ascendancy over her
feelings by the studied assiduity of a confidential and elaborate cor-
respondence, which, when Swift was in the meridian of his fame,
could not do otherwise than flatter the pardonable vanity of a young
and generous mind anxious for its own intellectual improvement,
and sensible of the pleasures and gratifications which may be derived
from literary pursuits. Describing her mental accomplishments,
Lord Orrery observes, "she had an elevated understanding with all
the delicacy and softness of her own sex. Her voice, however sweet
in itself, was rendered more harmonious by what she said. Her wit
* Edinburgh Review, vol. xxvii., 1816, pp. 39, 40, et seq.

was poignant, Avithout severity. Her manners were humane, polite,
easy, and unreserved. Wherever she came, she attracted attention.
As virtue was her guide in morality, sincerity was her guide in
religion. She was constant hut not ostentatious in her devotions.
She was remarkably prudent in her conversation. She had great
skill in music, and was perfectly well skilled in all the lesser arts
that employ a lady's leisure." When Swift first knew her, she was
about eighteen years of age; her personal appearance is described to
have been very prepossessing. " Her hair," says Sir Walter Scott,
whose description is derived from the best authorities, "was of a
raven black, her features were both beautiful and expressive, and her
form, which was of perfect symmetry, inclined to embonpoint. To
those outward graces were added good sense, great docility, and
uncommon powers both of grave and gay conversation, and a fortune
which, though small, was independent." It is not surprising, therefore,
that she should have received an otter of marriage from the Reverend
Dr William Tisdale, a clergyman of talents and respectability, with
whom Swift lived upon a familiar and friendly footing. The pro-
posals of her lover were made to Swift, as the lady's guardian, by
whose wishes and advice she was determined to be guided, and from
the evidence which Sir Walter Scott himself gives, it appears that
Swift insisted on such unreasonable tenns for Stella's maintenance
and provision in case of widowhood, that his rival was unable to
accede to them, and necessarily withdrew.

From this period Stella appears to have considered her destiny
was united to that of Swift, who, having nevertheless secretly deter-
mined never to make her his wife, now cast in his mind how he
could enjoy the pleasures of her society, under the roof of his own
parsonage, without violating public decorum. An expedient soon
suggested itself, for as necessity is proverbially the mother of in-
vention, so vice notoriously proves itself prolific in devising a host
of plausible and ingenious contrivances to conceal its own deformities.
It occurred to Swift, that the presence of a third party who should
never be absent when Stella was in his company, would protect the
integrity of his own clerical character, of which he was exceedingly
jealous, and effectually silence the whisperings of suspicion. Ac-
cordingly a Mrs. Dingle, who is described to have been a person of
limited income and ordinary understanding?and who was of middle
age and creditable character, was engaged to accompany Stella to
Ireland; and it is believed that Swift never had an interview with her
excepting in the presence of this Mrs. Dingle, to whom he pretended
to pay equal attention. In the company of these two ladies he now
passedall liis leisure liours?to tliem lie unbosomed all his secrets;
and under the specious name of friendship he succeeded in exciting
a feeling of love in the breast of Stella, which remained pure, fervent,
and unshaken to the last hour of her life. That Swift promised Stella
that their Platonic intimacy would be terminated bj their marriage,
is admittedto be more than probable; in the meantime it is certain that
the conduct of Stella Avas strictly virtuous, and that she reconciled
herself to her inexplicable and painful position by looking forward
to, and cherishing, dreams of future conjugal felicity, which were
destined never to be realized. " After Swift had obtained church
preferment" (observes Jeffrey, severely but truly) " it is impossible
to conceive any plausible excuse for his not marrying her; she was
twenty-seven, and he thirty years of age, and their conjoint income
was certainly ample for the support of their establishment." But,
alas! the star of Swift's evil genius had again risen in the ascendant,
and, forgetful of the ties that bound him to his faithful Stella, a new
attachment sprang up, in which he betrayed all the heartlessness and
want of principle which had already characterized the perversity of
his disposition.

Upon being recalled from Ireland in 1710 to adjust a political
schism between Lord Harley and Mr. St. John, afterwards Lord
Bolingbroke, Swift found the family of the Yanhomrighs,'x* with
whom he Avas previously acquainted, living in Bury street, St.
James's. Their house Avas conveniently situated, being in the
neighbourhood Avhere he lived; and here, received as an intimate
guest, he passed the intervals of his political labours, displaying all
those conversational charms for Avhich he Avas eminently distin-
guished, and Avliicli rendered him the admiration of society. Mrs.
Vanhomrigh Avas a AvidoAV lady, Avho had two sons and tAVO daughters,
one of Avhom, Esther Vanhomrigh, soon attracted the attention of
SAvift. She Avas at this period not tAventy years of age, graceful,
full of vivacity, and of an enthusiastic and romantic temperament.
Fond of reading, she upon all occasions shoAVed a desire for mental
cultivation, Avhich was a fatal attraction in the eyes of SAvift, Avho,
less faithful than Avas St. Pierre to his beloved Heloise, readily
resumed the functions of preceptor; " a dangerous character,"
says Sir Walter Scott, " for him Avho assumes it, Avhen genius,
docility, and gratitude are combined in a young and interesting
pupil."+ This intercourse gradually became more frequent and
familiar; he directed all her studies; and if not seated by her
* The name is pronounced Vannummery.? Orrery.

Sir Walter Scott. Life of Swift, prefixed to his Works, vol. i. p. 120.
side as her literary Mentor, lie was from a distance writing to her,
and throwing round her confiding spirit the snares of a studiously
conducted and flattering correspondence. It would seem as if Swift
had discovered the secret of moving the sympathies of the female
heart through the medium of the intellect; and certainly it must be
confessed, that talent so evinced in the dictation of letter-writing,
is apt to throw a graceful, yet dangerous charm over the emotions
which may he so excited. " Believe me," he exclaims, expressing
himself in French, (May 12, 1719,) " if there be anything to be
accredited in this Avorld, I think everything you can possibly wish
of me, and all your desires, will be obeyed as commands, which it
would be impossible in me to violate."* Then, again, he deified her
in song under the name of Vanessa, and at length succeeded in in-
spiring an affection, which in so generous a nature proves always
fatal if it does not meet with the reciprocity upon which it relies.
Swift, it will be observed, was now in the forty-second year of his
age; he had seen much of the world, was a shrewd observer, and
knew human nature well. He could not have been ignorant of the
influence which he had acquired over the destiny of Vanessa, who,
in the buoyancy of youth and happiness, little dreamed that a rival,
to whom his honour was pledged by obligations, if possible more
sacred than marriage itself, was in the background. At length,
harassed by doubt and anxiety, giving way to the impulse of her
strong feelings, sbe determined to rend the veil, and reveal to him
the intensity of her love. Nothing could exceed the anguish and
supplications of her breaking heart. It was, as Coleridge finely
describes?

" The voice of woman wailing for her demon lover."
Few of Vanessa's letters have been preserved, and most of
Swift's, which is a significant fact, were destroyed. " Believe me,"
she exclaims, in a letter of remonstrance, dated Cellbridge, 1720,
" it is with the utmost grief that I now complain to you, because I
know your good nature is such that you cannot see any human
creature miserable without being sensibly touched ; yet what can I
do 1 I must either unload my heart, and tell you all its griefs, or
sink under the inexpressible distress I now suffer by your prodigious
neglect of me. 'Tis now ten long weeks since I saw you; and in
all that time, I have never received but one letter from you, and a
little note, with an excuse. Oh ! how have you forgotten me ! You
? Epistolary Correspondence, in Sir Walter Scott's edition of Swift's Works,
vol. xix. p. 356. Edinburgh, 1824.

endeavour, by society, to force me from you ; nor can I blame you ;
for with the utmost distress and confusion, I find myself the cause
of uneasy reflections to you; yet I cannot comfort you, but here
declare that 'tis not in the power of time to lessen the inexpressible
passion I have for .... Put my passion under the utmost re-
straint, send me as distant from you as the earth Avill allow, yet you
cannot banish these charming ideas, which will ever cling by me
whilst I have the use of memory. Nor is the love I bear you only
seated in my soul; for there is not a single atom in my frame that
is not blended with it. Therefore don't flatter yourself that sepa-
ration will ever change my sentiments, for I find myself unquiet in
the midst of silence, and my heart is at once pierced with sorrow
and love. For Heaven's sake, tell me Avhat has caused this pro-
digious change in you, which I have found of late. If you have the
least remains of pity for me left, tell me tenderly. No, don't tell
it, so that it may cause my present death; and don't suffer me to
live a life like a languishing death, which is the only life I can lead
if you have lost any tenderness for me."* In another letter, dated
Cellbridge, 1720, she declares, " Solitude is insupportable to a
mind which is not at ease : I have worn out my days with sighing,
and my nights with watching. . . . Oh! that I could hope to sec
you here, or that I could go to you. I was born with violent passions,
which terminate all in one?the inexpressible passion I have for you.
Consider the killing emotions which I feel from your neglect, and
show some tenderness for me, or I shall lose my senses."+ To these
and other appeals as impassioned, Swift answered by cold raillery
and unmeaning sophisms, not having the courage to avow the
truth and difficulty of his position, and the impossibility of his
realizing the hopes which he had so cruelly implanted in her mind.
Meantime, the effect of his intimacy with Vanessa became manifest
in his journal to Stella, which evinced a coldness and indifference
that did not escape her observation. Although her letters are not
preserved, it is certain, from the allusions made to them, that they
were filled with the most urgent and affectionate remonstrances. In
the meantime, upon the death of her mother, Vanessa became of
age, and determined immediately upon going to Ireland, for the
purpose of 'taking possession of a small property, which her father
had left her near Cellbridge.

The death of Queen Anne, at this period, broke up the Tory
* Epistolary Correspondence, op. cit., vol. 19, pp. 365, 366>
administration, and Swift, to escape the implacability of triumphant
Whiggism, again returned to Ireland, where party politics were so
keenly discussed, that " the ladies," said Lord Orrery, " were as
violent as the gentlemen; and even children at school quarrelled for
kings instead of fighting for apples."'- The arrival of Vanessa in-
Dublin did not fail to give Swift great uneasiness, for he had stu-
diously concealed from her his intimacy and peculiar connexion with
Stella, and found himself in a labyrinth in which to advance upon
either side was obviously dangerous, and from which retreat was
absolutely impossible. The hour of retribution was now fast ap-
proaching. The health of Stella was visibly declining. Her pale and
haggard countenance too truly depicted the inward grief which preyed
upon her heart. The preference which she felt assured had been
given to her rival by one to whom she had dedicated her life, with
all its silent sufferings of love; the instinctive apprehension?for
there is an instinct in the female mind which anticipates, by a
species of intuition, impending events?with which she dwelt upon
the uncertainty of her long-promised nuptials; the cold, wayward,
haughty capricious mannerism of the Dean, which lacerated the feel-
ings he still imperiously commanded; above all, the consciousness
that she was living under the semblance of a cloud which threw a
shade of dishonour upon her conduct;?these, and many other minor
causes of annoyance, vexation, and disappointment, disturbed her
peace of mind, and augmented the progress of that fatal malady
which was already engrafted upon her delicate constitution. Stella
died of consumption. It is well known to all medical men that the
susceptibility which co-exists with this disease renders its victims
peculiarly liable to be affected by mental impressions. These, when
unfavourable, hasten tubercular development, and greatly aggravate
the intensity of bodily suffering. Such was the lamentable condition of
poor Stella; and Swift himself, with all his morbid acrimony of temper,
did not, we are assured, behold the ruin of her former beauty without
being in some degree affected. " His feelings at witnessing the wreck
which his conduct had occasioned, will not," says Sir Walter Scott,
" bear description. She had forsaken her country and perilled even
her reputation to become a sharer of his fortunes when at -the lowest;
and the implied ties by which he was bound to make her compensa-
tion, were as strong as the most solemn promise; if, indeed, even
promises of future marriage had not been actually exchanged between
* Lord Orrery, op, cit., Letter VI., p. CI.

them. In this dilemma, Swift requested his tutor and early friend,
Dr Ashe, Bishop of Clogher, to ascertain the cause of her melan-
choly ; and he received the answer which his conscience must have
anticipated?it was her sensibility to his recent indifference, and the
discredit which she felt her own character had sustained from the
long subsistence of the dubious and mysterious connexion between
them."*

Willing to alleviate her sufferings, Swift listened to the suggestion
which she made of the only course which could convince her of his
sincerity, and remove her beyond the reach of calumny; and after
much unworthy equivocation, he consented to the marriage ceremony
taking place, upon condition that it should remain a profound secret,
and that they should live separately as before. To these hard terms
Stella subscribed. They relieved her mind from all scruples of the
impropriety of their connexion, and they soothed her jealousy by
rendering it impossible that Swift could ever give his hand to her
rival. They were married in the garden of the deanery, by the
Bishop of Clogher, in the year 1716. That this concession was
made rather to satisfy the conscience of Swift than to ensure the
happiness of Stella, may be inferred from the fact, that after the
ceremony had been performed, he redoubled his precautions of never
upon any occasion seeing her alone. But during this period, how
fared it with the unhappy Vanessa? The rumour of Swift's attach-
ment to Stella had not failed to reach her ears, and having now been
kept in a state of painful uncertainty for eight years, she determined,
with all the promptitude and energy of her nature, to ascertain the
truth from Stella herself. Accordingly, she wrote a letter to her,
requesting to know her position with the Dean; in reply to which,
Stella at once informed her of her marriage; and indignant that
another female should have had the right of making such an inquiry,
she transmitted Vanessa's letter to Swift, and without awaiting his
reply, withdrew to the house of a friend near Dublin. In one of
those paroxysms of rage to which he was subjected from much
slighter causes of offence, Swift rode off to Marley Abbey, and
entered the apartment of Vanessa in a manner so infuriated, that she
could scarcely summon courage to ask him to sit down; upon her
doing which, lie flung the letter down upon the table before her, and
instantly left the house, mounted his horse, and returned to Dublin.
"This," says Sir Walter Scott, "was her death warrant! She sunk
Scott, op. cit., p. 209.

at once under the. disappointment of the delayed yet cherished hopes
?which had so long sickened her heart, and beneath the unrestrained
wrath of him for whose sake she indulged them."

How long she survived this last interview appears to he uncertain;
but she died a very few weeks afterwards, the victim of her own
generous and impassioned nature, which she had not the judgment
or self-possession to control. But we must not judge too harshly of
so confiding and self-devoted a being. To Swift she looked up with
love, awe, and admiration; he belonged, in her sight, to a higher
order of mortals than she had before met with; for the daughter of
Vanhomrigh, the Dutch merchant, had seen little of the world, and
had 110 opportunity of acquiring skill in the interpretation of human
character; therefore he was to her that " bright particular star"
which she loved to watch in her solitary hours, and which she fondly
believed would shed a protecting light over the path of her future
existence. To us, the fate of Vanessa appears to claim even more
sympathy than that of her sister-victims.

One more anecdote, and we must close our references to these
domestic incidents, which are of essential importance in estimating
the peculiar idiosyncrasy of a mind so notoriously difficult to analyse
or comprehend. It relates to the death of Stella. " A short time
before she died, a scene passed between the Dean and her, an account
of which I had," says Mr. Sheridan, " from my father, and which I
shall relate with reluctance, as it seems to bear more hard 011 Swift's
humanity than any other part of his conduct in life. As she found
her final dissolution approach, a few days before it happened, in the
presence of Dr Sheridan, she addressed Swift in the most earnest
and pathetic terms to grant her dying request?' that as the cere-
mony of marriage had passed between them, though for sundry con-
siderations they had not cohabited, in that state, in order to put it
out of the power of slander to be busy with her fame after death,
she adjured him by their friendship to let her have the satisfaction
of dying at least, though she bad not lived, his acknowledged wife.'
Swift made no reply, but turning on his heel, walked silently out of
the room, nor ever saw her afterwards during the few days she lived.
This behaviour threw her into unspeakable agonies, and* for a time
she sunk under the weight of so cruel a disappointment; but soon
after, roused by indignation, she inveighed against his cruelty in the
bitterest terms, and sending for a lawyer, made her will, bequeathing
her fortune by her own name to charitable purposes. This was done
in the presence of Dr Sheridan, whom she appointed one of her
executors."* This anecdote comes so directly from Dr Sheridan
himself, who was an eye-witness of the facts described, that we can-
not conceive any just reason for doubting its authenticity.
We must now proceed to consider professionally, and always in
connexion with the anecdotes and facts recorded in this slight bio-
graphical sketch, the real state of Swift's mind. Was insanity in his
case hereditary] " Certainly not," says Mr. Wilde, who designates
this a most " gratuitous non-medical opinion;" but for our own part,
when we recollect that his uncle, Godwin Swift, was " seized with a
lethargy," after which he " was totally deprived both of his speech and
memory," and died like the Dean himself, we cannot but believe that
it was hereditary; nay, Swift never alluded to the death of his uncle
Godwin without evincing a feeling of melancholy, and betraying an
apprehension that it would be his own fate. The insanity of an
uncle (a father's brother) is quite close enough to establish the pre-
sumption of hereditary transmission in any case; and we therefore
do not understand the scepticism of Mr. Wilde on this point. Again:
it is well known that Swift always harboured a presentiment that he
should die insane. On one occasion, when walking about a mile
from Dublin with Dr Young, the Dean stopped short. We passed
on, says the author of the " Night Thoughts," " but perceiving he
did not follow us, I went back and found him fixed as a statue, and
earnestly gazing upwards at a noble elm, which, in its uppermost
branches, was much withered and decayed. Pointing at it, he said,
11 shall be like that tree?I shall die at the top.' " So also Lord
Orrery remarks, "Swift certainly foresaw his fate. His frequent
attacks of giddiness, and his manifest defect of memory gave room
for such apprehensions. I have often heard him lament the state of
childhood and idiotism to which some of the greatest men of the
nation Avere reduced before their death. He mentioned as examples
within his own time, the Duke of Marlborough and Lord Somers,
and when he cited these melancholy instances, it was always with a
heavy sigh, and with gestures that showed great uneasiness, as if he
felt an impulse of what was to happen to him before he died." But
Mr. Wilde, who appears determined to make out a case in favour of
Dean Swift's sanity, attaches no importance to many facts which are
entitled to much weight. " Various anecdotes," he observes, " illus-
trative of his eccentric habits and singular manners have been related
of Swift; but as we do not think that they in any wise affect the pre-
sent question, they are here altogether omitted," (p. 9.) With all
* Scott's Life, op. eit., vol. i. p, 357.


deference to Mr. Wilde, Ave consider that tlie " eccentric habits," and
the " singular manners" of men alleged to be insane do materially
affect the question; and it is upon this very description of evidence
that commissions in lunacy constantly found their verdict. Who can
read the following anecdote, for example, without supposing that the
principal actor of the scene was somewhat deranged? At a period
when Swift was little known, excepting to Congreve and some few
literary men he had met at Sir William Temple's, he used occasionally
to go into Button's Coffee House, where the most celebrated wits of
that day were accustomed to assemble. " I had a singular account,1'
says Sheridan, " of his first appearance there from Ambrose Philips,
who was one of Mr. Addison's little senate. He said that they had
for several successive days observed a strange gentleman come into
the coffee-house, who seemed utterly unacquainted with any of those
who frequented it; and whose custom it was to lay his hat down on
a table, and walk backwards and forwards at a good pace for half an
hour or an hour without speaking to any mortal, or seeming in the
least to attend to anything that was going forward there. He then
used to take up his hat, pay his money, and walk away without
opening his lips. After having observed this singular behaviour for
some time, they concluded him to be out of his senses, and the name
that he went by among them was that of the ? mad parson.' This
made them more than usually attentive to his motions, and one even-
ing, as Mr. Addison and the rest were observing him, they saw him
cast his eye several times on a gentleman in boots who seemed to be
just come out of the country, and at last advanced towards him as
intending to address him. They were all eager to hear what this
dumb mad parson had to say, and immediately quitted their seats to
get near him. Swift went up to the country gentleman, and, in a
very abrupt manner, without any previous salute, asked him, ? Pray,
sir, do you remember any good weather in the world1?' The country
gentleman, after staring a little at the singularity of his manner, and
the oddity of the question, answered, 'Yes, sir, I thank God, I re-
member a great deal of good weather in my time.' ' That is more,'
said Swift, ' than I can say; I never remember any Aveatlier that Avas
not too hot or too cold, too Avet or too dry; but hoAvever God
Almighty contrives it, at the end of the year it is all very Avell.' Upon
saying this, he took up his hat, and, Avithout uttering a syllable more,
or taking the least notice of any one, Avalked out of the coffee-house,
leaving all those avIio had been spectators of this odd scene staring
after him, and still more confirmed in the opinion of his being mad."
This anecdote reminds us of a story told by Sir William Ellis of a
NO. VII. B B

complaining patient, who, hearing some persons commenting upon
the badness of the Aveather, peevishly interrupted them, saying,
" Yes, it is a very had day; but did you ever know the Almighty send
us a good one1?" This story was related by Sir William Ellis to illus-
trate the morbid feeling of dissatisfaction and discontent which
frequently possesses an insane mind; and the short and abrupt obser-
vations of Swift in the above dialogue appear to us not less signifi-
cant of insanity, than the interrogatory of the poor lunatic in Han-
well Asylum.

The best educated men?politicians, physicians, literary men,
artists, critics?are apt to take up crotchets; but we cannot under-
stand Mr. Wilde contending that " Swift was not, at any period of
his life, not even in his last illness, what is usually understood as
mad;" while he himself has furnished us with such copious extracts
from Stella's journal, and Swift's correspondence, giving a minute
and circumstantial account of the early history and progress of his
malady. We find that he suffered successively from giddiness, deaf-
ness, impaired sight, tremors, muscular twitchings, and loss of power
in the extremities, all which are, as every tyro in the profession
knows, pathognomonic symptoms of cerebral disease; yet because
Swift was " never known to talk nonsense," and was not incoherent,
Mr. Wilde infers that he could not have been insane. This is alto-
gether an erroneous inference. Incoherency is no more a constant
symptom of insanity than shouting and violence. Unprofessional
people will have lunatics to be always like hyenas, laughing, grinning,
howling, and rabid. The picture of Hogarth is ever, it would seem,
uppermost in their imagination. But the truth is very different.
The mind may be diseased, yet no incoherency be present; nay, the
intellectual faculties may retain even a preternatural clearness and
vigour. The proportion of lunatics who exhibit incoherency and
violence, or who even talk nonsense, in large asylums, is much smaller
than is generally supposed; so that under the present humane system
of treatment, even seclusion in padded rooms is not often resorted to.
Again: Mr. Wilde thinks the composition of an epigram by Swift
is an evidence of his sanity; but this Ave feel assured no person will
admit avIio has had any experience in such cases. The Dean in his
lunacy had some intervals of sense, at which his guardians or phy-
sicians took him out for the air. On one of these days, Avhen they
came to the park, Swift remarked a neAv building which he had never
seen, and asked Avliat it Avas designed for 1 To Avhich Dr Kingsbury
ansAvered, " That, Mr. Dean, is the magazine for arms and poAvder
for the security of the city." " Oh! oh!" says the dean, pulling out
his pocket-book, " let me take an item of that." This is worth re-
marking. " My tablets,"?as Hamlet says, " my tablets,"?memory
put clown that?which produced these lines, said to be the last he
ever wrote?

"Behold! a proof of Irish sense,
Here Irish wit is seen;
When nothing's left that's worth defence,
They build a magazine!

And hereupon Mr. Wilde, with an air of triumph, exclaims, " How
far this proves the insanity of its author the reader is to judge."
(Wilde, p. 4G.) This, indeed, is very sorry evidence of sanity. If
Mr. Wilde will only visit Bethlehem, St. Luke's, Hanwell, or any pri-
vate asylum, he Avill discover on the Avails, windows, pillars, and
posts, poetry in abundance, and epigrams too, quite as pithy as the
above?

" The lunatic, the lover, and the poet,
Are of imagination all compact."

So true is this remark of Shalcspeare's, that many asylums have
printed the poetry written by lunatics. It is frequently done at
Hanwell. At Morningside, in Edinburgh, the Cricliton Institution at
Dumfries, literary journals, containing both prose and verse of great
merit, are regularly printed. Nay, there is often in lunacy a morbid
activity of the intellectual faculties; the imagination runs wild; the
perception of wit, the sense of the ludicrous, become preternaturally
acute; and in such states of excitement, the lunatic will express him-
self, both in speaking and writing, with extraordinary vigour and
fluency.

The error of Mr. Wilde appears to consist in his not understand-
ing that insanity is a distinct disease, having its incipient and pro-
gressive stages up to the period of its maturation, or full development,
when some of the intellectual faculties may be left apparently un-
affected, while others are perverted and thoroughly deranged. We
find that the case of Swift was, in the first instance, attended with
all the ordinary premonitory symptoms of insanity; and the account
which Mrs. Whiteaway, who was personally in attendance upon him
throughout his illness, gives of his mental condition, can leave no
doubt in any impartial mind that such was his real state.

The most minute account of this melancholy period, founded upon
the evidence given by Mrs. Whiteaway, as well as upon the testi-
mony of Mr. Deane Swift, and others who witnessed his sad condi-
tion, is given by Dr Delany :?"In the beginning of the year 1741,
his understanding was so much impaired, and his passions so greatly increased, that he was utterly incapable of conversation. Strangers
were not permitted to approach him, and his friends found it neces-
sary to have guardians appointed of his person and estate. Early in
the year 1742, his reason was wholly subverted, and his rage became
absolute madness. The last person whom he knew was Mrs.

Whiteaway, and the sight of her when he knew her no longer, threw
him into fits of rage so violent and dreadful, that she was forced to
leave him; and the only act of kindness that remained in her power
was to call once or twice at the Deanery, inquire after his health,
and see that proper care was taken of him. Sometimes she would
steal a look at him when his back was towards her, but did not
venture into his sight. He would neither eat nor drink when the
servants were in the room. His meat, which was served up ready
cut, he would sometimes suffer to stand an hour upon the table
before he would touch it; and at last he would eat it walking ; for
during this miserable state of mind, it was his constant custom to
walk ten hours a day. In October, 1742, after his frenzy had con-
tinued several months, his left eye swelled to the size of an egg, and
the lid appeared to be so much inflamed and discoloured, that the
surgeon expected it would mortify; several large boils also broke
out on his arms and body. The extreme pain of this tumour kept
him waking near a month ; and during one week it was with diffi-
culty that five persons could prevent him from tearing out his eyes.
Just before the tumour perfectly subsided and the pain left him, he
knew Mrs. Whiteaway, took her by the hand, and spoke to her with
his former kindness; that day and the following, he knew his phy-
sician and surgeon, and all his family, and appeared to have so far
recovered his understanding and temper, that the surgeon was not
without hopes that he might once more enjoy society, and be amused
with the company of his old friends. This hope, however, was but
of short duration; for a few days afterwards lie sank into a state of
total insensibility, slept much, and could not, without great difficulty,
be prevailed on to walk across the room." In this state of hopeless
imbecility, he is said to have remained silent a whole year. In 1744,
he spoke once or twice to his servant, after which he remained per-
fectly silent until the latter end of October, 1745, when he expired,
in the seventy-eighth year of his age.

The curiosity of strangers, we are informed, sometimes induced
them to go and see this extraordinary man in this state of living
death. The father of the late Lord Kinedder was of the number.
He was told that the servants privately took money for gratifying
the curiositv of strangers; but he declined to have recourse to that
mode of gratifying his curiosity. By means of a clergyman?Dr.
Lyons probably?he saw the Dean, who was unconscious of all that
passed around him?a living wreck of humanity.'"*

"We have, in addition to all these particulars, the still more satis-
factory evidence of a post-mortem examination, which disclosed the
pathological appearances which are usually found in such cases.
Upon the head being opened, extensive serous effusion was discovered
in the brain ; and it is generally supposed and affirmed, that there
was also softening of the cerebral substance. The internal surface
of the skull, also, which was lately disinterred in St. Patrick's
Cathedral, presented indications of diseased action in the vessels
and membranes of the brain. " The skull," says Dr Houston,
" was thickened, flattened, and unusually smooth in some places,
whilst it was thinned and roughened in others. The marks of the
vessels on the bone, moreover, exhibited a very unusual appearance ;
the impressions of the middle arteries of the dura mater were un-
naturally large and deep; and the branches of those vessels which
pass in the direction forwards were thick and short, and terminated
by abruptly dividing into an unusual number of twigs; whilst those
of the same trunks, which take their course backwards, were long
and regular, and of graduated size, from the beginning to the end
of their course. We are further informed, that ' some parts in the
occipital fosste, the supra-orbital plates, and other portions of the
skull were so thin as to be transparent. The internal parts corre-
sponding to the frontal protuberances were unequal in concavity;
neither was there any depression corresponding to the great promi-
nences on the outer surface."?(Wilde, p. 59.) We may here remark,
and the fact is anti-phrenologically important, that the immediate effect
of pressure within the skull is to attenuate the internal table without
producing any corresponding elevation of the external table of the
skull; hence the deep pits formed by the glandulie paccliioni, which
are sometimes considerably enlarged, and the sulci occasioned by the
immediate apposition of the larger blood-vessels, are limited to the
internal surface of the skull, without producing externally any in-
dication of their size or presence. In the year 1835, it becamc
necessary to make some alterations in the aisle of St. Patrick's
Cathedral; several coffins were exposed, and among others, those of
Swift and Stella, which lay side by side. The following account,
which Mr. Wilde has cited from Dr Houston, of the exhumation,
will probably be read with interest:?

Sir \V, Scott, op. cit. p. 403.
" The coffin, [of the Dean,] which was of solid oak, and placed
transversely beneath the pillar supporting the tablet erected to his
memory, and bearing the celebrated and well-known inscription
written by liimself, lay about two feet and a half below the flags; it
was surrounded by wet clay, and nearly filled with water. All the
bones of the skeleton lay in the position into which they had fallen
when deprived of the flesh which enveloped and held them together.
The skull, with the calvarium by its side, lay at the top of the
coffin; the bones of the neck lay next, and mixed with them were
found the cartilages of the larynx, which, by age, had been converted
into bone. All the rings of the trachea, which had undergone the
same change, were equally in a state of preservation and order. The
dorsal vertebra? and ribs occupied the middle of the coffin; the bones
of the arms and hands lay as they had been placed in death, along
the sides; and the pelvis and lower extremities were found towards
the bottom. The teeth were nearly all gone, and their sockets were
filled up with bone. Six of the middle dorsal vertebrae, and three
of the lumbar, were joined together by anchylosis. Several of the
ribs were united to the sternum by ossification of the intermediate
cartilages. The whole were evidently the remains of a very aged
man. The bones were all clean, and in a singularly perfect state of
preservation. When first removed, they were nearly black, but on
being dried, they assumed a brownish colour. The water in which
they were immersed, was remarkably free from putrefaction, and
even the wood of the coffin was perfectly sound and unbroken.
" The cranium of Stella was exhumed from the vaults of St.
Patrick's Cathedral, along with that of Swift, in 1835. The coffin
in which it lay was of the same material, and placed in the same
relation to the pillar bearing the tablet to her memory as that of the
Dean; and the bones constituting the skeleton were in equally per-
fect preservation, though interred ten (seventeen) years earlier. The
outline of the skull is the most graceful we have ever seen; the teeth,
which for their whiteness and regularity were in life the theme of
general admiration, were, perhaps, the most perfect ever witnessed
in a skull. On the whole, it is no great stretch of the imagination
to clothe and decorate this skull again with its alabaster skin, on
which the rose had slightly bloomed; to adorn it with its original
luxuriant dark hair, its white expanded forehead, level pencilled
eyebrows, and deep, dark, lustrous eyes; its high, prominent nose,
its delicately-chiselled mouth, and pouting upper lip; its full rounded
chin, and long but gracefully swelling neck; when we shall find it
realize all that description lias handed down to us of an intellectual
beauty of the style of those painted by Kneller, and with an outline
and form of head accurately corresponding to the pictures of Stella
which still exist."?pp. 57, 11G.

When this exhumation took place, which appears to have been
accidental, and occasioned by the repairs required in the cathedral,
the British Association was holding one of its meetings in Dublin,
and the skulls of Swift and Stella, as a matter of course, became
eacli the subject of curious phrenological discussion. On the autho-
rity of Mr. Hamilton, we are informed by Mr. Wilde that the skull
of Swift presented an extremely low frontal development, while
" the parts marked out as the organs of wit, causality, and comparison,
were scarcely developed at all." This statement we do not exactly
understand, because each phrenological organ is supposed to consist
of a bundle of fibres representing an inverted cone, with its apex in
the medulla, and expanding until its base reaches the surface of the
brain, therefore every organ must have some development. Indeed,
it is only fair to state that, from the engravings which Mr. Wilde
has given of Swift's skull and bust, the organ of causality appears to
us decidedly large, while that of benevolence is extremely deficient?
a development which we think corresponds very much with the
character above described. But after all, the success or non-success
of a phrenological interpretation, will depend very much on the skill
and ingenuity of the expositor, which was clearly evinced in the case
of Raphael, upon a cast of whose supposed skull Spurzlieim and
Combe lectured for many years, showing how the organology pre-
cisely corresponded with his artistical genius, his conduct to the fair
Fornarina, and even the disposition of his property in his last will
and testament; after which it was discovered that they had been
lecturing upon a wrong skull, for the skeleton of Raphael, with the
cranium connected with it, was recently disinterred in the Pantheon
at Rome, and the mistake officially admitted. There is no difficulty,
therefore, in reconciling any given character with any given develop-
ment ; and in this case the cast from the fictitious skull illustrated
Raphael's character just as well as the cast from the original skull.
To revert to the psychological views which we alluded to in the
commencement of these observations, it appears to us that the
insanity of Swift is clearly and conclusively proved; and it is evi-
dent that the manifestations of the mind, in a state of aberration,
cannot be governed by those normal principles which otherwise
regulate all human actions. The constitution of the mind, when
unclouded by disease, comprehends, and is influenced by certain
definite psychological laws; and when these become deranged by
cerebral disease, the most incongruous manifestations of thought and
feeling necessarily arise. The eccentric conduct of Swift in early
life indicated, we believe, that early stage of incipient insanity which
unprofessional persons are always sIoav to recognise; for unless a
man be absolutely incoherent or raving mad, the world in general,
like Mr. Wilde, will not allow that he is really insane. The line of
demarcation, between extravagant eccentricity and positive insanity,
it must be allowed, is sometimes difficult to determine; and yet
it is in this initiatory stage of the malady that the disease is
most curable. We have no hesitation in ascribing the acerbity of
disposition and impetuosity of temper, frequently exhibited by Swift,
to morbid impulses, which he had neither the inclination nor power
to control; and this view of the case we find corroborated by an
able critic (probably Southey) in the Quarterly Review. " The
Dean," he observes, " was not certainly a man to be envied. He
had in him from his birth the seeds of the insanity in which, as he
himself foresaw and foretold, his life was to end."'"' The conscious-
ness and apprehension of the existence of this malady is often
pathognomic of its being impending, if not absolutely present. The
whole question at issue is, indeed, somewhat inadvertently conceded
by Mr. Wilde in the following observations:?"We only wonder
that Swift did not become deranged years previously; with a mind
naturally irritable, a political intriguer, peevish and excitable; his
ambition disappointed, his friendships rudely severed, his long-
cherished hopes blighted; outliving all his friends, alone in the
world, and witnessing the ingratitude of his country; while, at the
same time, he laboured under a most fearful physical disease, in the
very seat of reason, the effects of which were of the most stunning
character, and serving, in part, to explain that moodiness and
moroseness of disposition which bodily infirmity will undoubtedly
produce;?we repeat, we only wonder that his mind did not long
before give way.?p. 7 3.

We fully concur with these remarks; and although we differ from
Mi-. Wilde in the conclusions which he has drawn, it is nevertheless
fair to state that his book is very interesting. It presents us with
many new facts which throw light upon the history of Swift, and
deserves a place in every well-appointed library.
* Quarterly Review, vol. H. p. 292. 1834.
