Transient Insanity
===================

We copy the following observations from tlie Spectator of March 10th,
a paper which has always taken a prominent and praiseworthy posi-
tion among the newspaper press of this country in its advocacy of
philosophical and psychological truths. The poor woman who was
represented to have been, when she threw her son into the Regent's-
canal, in a state of " wild excitement," undoubtedly was suffering
from an attack of transient insanity, using the term insanity as in-
dicative of that condition of mind so often associated with loss of all
power of self-control. Cases of this nature are not of uncommon
occurrence. Many a man commits suicide under the influence of an
attack of insanity, of the existence of which his most intimate friends
have not the slightest idea. Persons labouring under the effects of
terrible delusions have been known to conceal the fact for months.
Those most closely allied to them?on terms of intimate and close
association?apparently possessing their confidence, have been kept
in ignorance of the existence of anything resembling a morbid state
of mind. We have been consulted by persons who have confessed
to us that they have been struggling unknown to any one but them-
selves for months with a morbid desire to take away human life!
Others under the influence of concealed false perceptions have mani-
fested strong suicidal impulses. Many a man destroys himself whilst
in a state of insanity, giving no indication of any morbid condition
of mind. We have often been amazed at the degree of control which
many lunatics are capable of exercising over their delusive impres-
380 TRANSIENT INSANITY.
sions. Wo have no right invariably to conclude, in cases of self-de-
struction, that the mind is unclouded and free from insanity or delu-
sion, because the party has given no clear proof, prior to death, of the
presence of mental aberration. We have no doubt that many crimes
?for which the severest penalty of the law has been inflicted?many
suicides, have been committed under the overpowering influence of
some terrible delusion known only to the parties themselves! The
brain is subject to occasional attacks of temporary disturbance, during
which the mind, for a short period, is thrown off its balance, the
person so affected being insane. This is what Ave understand by the
term transient insanity. A gentleman who had been exposed to
great anxiety of mind, impairing his general health, became affected
with melancholia. Apart from his depression of spirits, the party
in question gave no evidence of insanity. This gentleman was sitting
one day with his wife, when he suddenly jumped up from his chair,
exclaiming, in wild excitement, " Fly, for your life! Fly!" His poor
wife, without saying one word, instantly left the room. He felt a
sudden and, to him, unaccountable impulse to beat his wife's brains
out with a poker. In a few minutes the attack subsided, and he
reflected with horror on the dreadful position in which he had been
placed. Not many months back, a gentleman of fortune, happy in
his domestic circle, apparently without a care or anxiety to annoy
him or ruffle his temper, deliberately stood before the glass and cut
his throat! Who would be so bold as to declare that this unfor-
tunate man's mind was free from disease? We purpose, in an early
number, to consider the important subject of transient insanity more
in detail.
" A verdict at the Central Criminal Court exemplifies at once the
great advance made in the right understanding of matters that come
within the cognizance of the criminal law, and the very imperfect
state of the law itself. Anne Mallandine was tried on the charge of
attempting to murder her son. She was an unmarried woman,
twenty-eight years of age; the child was a boy of six or seven. She
was seen to throAV him into the Regent's-canal, at Haggerstone; and
she would have plunged in herself, but a passenger came up and pre-
vented her. The boy was rescued, and she was detained. She then
proved to be in a state of wild excitement, brought on by distress.
Her counsel, Mr. Cooper, suggested to the jury, that the evidence
disclosed such a state of mind as did not amount to actual insanity,
but prevented her from being aware of the effect of what she was
doing. On that argument, apparently, the jury pronounced a verdict
of acquittal.
" The ground on which Mr. Cooper obtained this verdict has the
merit of going to the kernel of the matter; and the decision of the
MEDICAL JURISPRUDENCE. 331
jury is as near an approach to the true conclusion as our law will
permit; but still it is a very imperfect approach. It comes nearer
than a verdict of ' guilty,' with c a recommendation of mercy,' because
that hands the prisoner over to the discretion of the judge, who
sometimes pays no attention to the qualification. And it is evident
that the jury did not hold the woman to be so accountable for her
act as to deserve punishment. Yet there are grave objections to a
simple acquittal in the case of a person not insane, but proved to
have attempted murder. It opens a wide and difficult question as
to the line between criminal passion leading to a criminal act, and
excitement originating in an innocent cause but resulting in a
criminal act?between the brief madness of anger and the brief mad-
ness of despair. If the jury had adopted Mr. Cooper's view?and
the evidence left no alternative except that view or a verdict of
guilty?they had come to a conclusion which the state of the law
did not empower them to record. Multiply such verdicts, and you
open the door of release to a dangerous class of persons who are
excitable to the perpetration of outrage: on the other hand, a wiser
perception of truth and justice will more and more forbid juries from
affirming guilt where there is no moral accountability, or accounta-
bility in a very imperfect degree. They ought to be enabled to
make a true record of the right judgment, and to hand over the
prisoner for a treatment suitable to the case."
Is
