Remarks on The Causes and Morbid Anatomy of Mental Diseases
============================================================

483
JtfitsceUaneous.

:Author:  John Webster, M.B., F.R.S., &C.*
(From the Lancet.)

The author commenced his paper by observing, that having had two of
his communications already published in the 26th and 28th volumes of
the Society's Transactions, on the Statistics and Pathology of Mental Dis-
eases, he presented the present as a further exposition of the subjects then
discussed. He then stated, in illustration of the comparative frequency
of madness in the two sexes, that out of 1798 lunatics admitted into
Bethlem Hospital, during six years, ending the 31st of December last, 1094
were females, and only 704 male patients. He next alluded to the causes
apparently producing insanity, which he divided into moral and physical,
besides hereditary tendency to mental disease. Of the male lunatics,
nearly one half, or 346, became mad from moral causes ; whilst the pro-
portion of females was not quite so considerable, being 489 of the entire
numher. By physical causes, less than one-fourth of the male lunatics,
or 156, became insane; whereas, amongst the female patients, the pro-
portion was rather larger, being 282. Hence, speaking generally, moral
causes produced half the total cases ; but physical causes only one-fourth.
The principal moral influence which occasioned insanity amongst males
was reverse of fortune, whereby 86 examples are recorded. Next, anxiety,
which furnished 69 instances; then religion, giving 45 cases ; lastly, love,
which caused the loss of reason in 18 men. Amongst female lunatics,
anxiety was the most frequent moral cause, producing 79 instances out
of the 489 patients classed under the above category ; whilst 69 cases arose
from religion ; 62 from the loss of relatives; and 57 from the more power-
ful influence of Cupid's tender passion upon the susceptible feelings of
women. Fright caused insanity in 50 cases; reverse of fortune in 49;
whereas, amongst men, as already stated, the same cause produced nearly
treble that amount, speaking comparatively. In regard to physical causes,
of the 156 male lunatics so affected, 80 originated from intemperance;
and of the 282 female lunatics, similarly classified, 117 arose from puer-
peral disease. Other physical causes were subsequently mentioned by the
author, before passing to the examination of hereditary tendency to mental
complaints. Of 704 male lunatics previously enumerated, 219, or 31.10
per cent., had hereditary tendency to mania; but of the 1094 female insane
patients, the proportion was larger?namely, 390, or 37.47 per cent. The
author, amongst other remarks respecting the influence of hereditary ten-
dency in producing mental disease, said, such an important fact, wherever
it exists, should be always well considered by parties forming matrimonial
engagements ; especially, when both families are unfortunately so tainted.
He next adverted to the age at which insanity is most likely to super-
vene. In males, he stated the most susceptible time of life was from 30
to 40; but in females it was earlier, being from 20 to 30. Ihe author
subsequently noticed the two sections of psychological physicians now
dividing the profession?namely, the " vitalists" and the " anatomists,"
of which latter body he is himself a disciple, since he considers their
doctrine the most rational, and in a greater degree consistent with the
* Read before the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, Tuesday, May 8,
1849, Dr. Addison, president.

present advanced state of pathological knowledge respecting mental dis-
eases. The author afterwards gave a synopsis of sixty-seven dissections
made at Bethlem Hospital, of which the following is a summary of the
diseased appearances observed in the brain and membranes. In 53 cases,
effusion of water had taken place in the ventricles ; in 53 cases, also, there
was infiltration of the pia mater; in 38, turgidity of the cerebral blood-
vessels ; in 30, the arachnoid membrane was thickened and opaque; in 26,
the colour of the brain was altered from its natural tint; in 15, there was
an effusion of blood within the skull, besides other alterations of structure,
as mentioned by the author. The organs of the chest were likewise more
or less diseased in as many as 62 of the patients; whilst in 30, morbid
changes were likewise noticed in the abdominal viscera; so much so, in-
deed, was this the case, that the immediate cause of death, in a number of
the insane patients referred to in the present communication, was appa-
rently disease in these parts; but more especially, affections of the organs
of respiration. Dr. Webster then alluded to the long period during which
some of the lunatics had laboured under mental aberration, particularly
females, one female lunatic having constantly resided in the incurable ward
at Bethlem Hospital for upwards of half a century, or actually fifty-four
years; thereby showing, that the loss of reason is sometimes not incom-
patible with longevity. After again referring to the deductions contained
in his previous papers communicated to the Society, the author concluded
by remarking, that the facts and statements now brought forward, fully
confirmed his former observations, and he hoped they might prove useful
to students of medical psychology.

Mr. Solly, whilst he complimented Dr. Webster on the value of his
paper, could not help regretting that no account had been given of the
appearance of the cortical substance of the brain?that portion of the
cerebral mass which was essentially connected with the intellectual mani-
festations. He thought we were in error in our dissections of the brain,
to view the organ as one whole; but that we should, as we did with the
contents of the chest or abdomen, examine and describe each individual
organ and part. Dr. Bright had referred to the colour of the cortical sub-
stance of the brain in some dissections of insane patients; and he (Mr.
Solly), in examinations at Hanwell and elsewhere, had, as a general rule,
found this portion of the brain higher coloured when excitement preceded
death, but pale if the insanity had been of long continuance, and without
excitement. He (Mr. Solly) had called this portion of the brain the
" hemispherical ganglia," for want of a better term, and regarded its
appearance after death as most essential to be mentioned in cases of insanity.
One interesting fact was mentioned in the paper, and that was, the fre-
quency with which the pia mater and arachnoid were found injected ; these
only acted in insanity, of course, by influencing the brain in their imme-
diate neighbourhood. He therefore assumed that the brain so situated
was affected, as this condition of the membranes was not sufficient to pro-
duce the insanity.

Dr. A. J. Sutherland was sure that the Society must feel much in-
debted to Dr. Webster for bringing under their notice much important
information relative to the causes and the pathology of insanity. He did
not know any subject so difficult as that which Dr. Webster had chosen.
The causes of insanity were in many cases difficult to be ascertained; the
friends themselves were frequently mistaken as to the real cause of the
illness; and it was only now and- then that we were able to correct the
mistakes of the friends, from the symptoms of the case. But again there
were these difficulties which beset us when we investigate the causes of the
disease: what obtains in hospitals, such as Bethlem and St. Luke's, did
not always obtain in other places; what prevailed among the patients of
one class of society, did not equally prevail among those of another. Thus,
the hereditary predisposition to insanity was, as stated in the paper, one-
third ; as stated by others, one-sixth among the lower classes, whereas it
was as much as one-half among the higher. With respect, also, to sex, a
greater proportion of females in the lower class, and a greater proportion
of males in the higher classes of society, become insane. Therefore we
were likely to be misled, if we took any particular class of patients as
examples of what prevailed generally; for not only were there differences
in the proportion, but there were differences in the species of insanity, in
different places. Thus, in the agricultural districts of this country, the
proportion of the insane to the sane, was as 1 to 800; while in the manu-
facturing districts it was as 1 to 1200. But not only the occupation, but
differences in climate and diet appeared to have an influence in the pro-
duction of this or that species of nervous disorder. Dementia and imbe-
cility were supposed to be common in marshy countries; hypochondriasis
abounded in Iceland; and in the Western Islands of Scotland, the nostalgia
of the Swiss, the cretinism of the Vallais, and the pellagra of Lombardy,
were also familiar instances. He differed in some respects with Dr.
Webster, as to what he had observed relative to the pathology of insanity,
not, he meant, with regard to post-mortem examinations, which formed
but a small part of the pathology of any disease, but with regard to patho-
logy in its widest sense, drawn from the symptoms during life, as well as
the appearances after death,?drawn from the causes, even from the treat-
ment of the disease. He thought that Dr. Webster had done well in not
considering the pathology of insanity apart from its causes; for as there
were distinct causes, moral and physical, so there were distinct origins of
the disease. The disorder might take its rise primarily from the nervous
centres, or the different organs of the body. The liver, the uterus, and the
stomach, might affect the brain, and insanity might be the consequence.
Insanity, therefore, might be said in one sense to be idiopathic; in another
sense, symptomatic; but whether the one or the other, it was the seat of
the intellect and the affections which was deranged; and therefore we
looked with peculiar interest to the cerebrum, to throw some light upon
these difficult investigations. With respect to post-mortem examinations,
his experience corresponded with the facts recorded in the paper. He had
never found the results of acute inflammation in the brains of lunatics, and
what Mr. Solly had stated with regard to the cortical structure was cer-
tainly correct?viz., that there is, for the most part, a state of hypersemia
in acute cases, a state of atrophy in chronic cases ; there was also a dis-
position to venous congestion in some brains, to active congestion in others;
but the effusion into the sub-arachnoid tissue, and into the ventricles spoken
of in the paper, and so frequently found in these cases, was rather the
effect than the cause of the disease ; in the acute stage it was probably the
result of venous congestion, and in the chronic stage it was due to atrophy
of the brain, just as the spinal marrow becomes atrophied in tabes dorsalis.

But he apprehended there were few who would think that what we saw
after death was all that had occurred during the progress of the disease,
and therefore the pathologist would be inclined to apply to the symptoms
which he had seen during life, and to the analysis of the different fluids of
the body, to help him in his investigations. With respect to the former,
the symptoms which the intellectual faculties furnished were those of
undue activity on the one hand, and of extreme dulness on the other, while
the physical symptoms were generally those of irritation, sometimes of
congestion, never of acute inflammation. From the analysis of the blood
of insane patients, we knew that there was no excess of fibrin, while from
the analysis of the urine we obtained sometimes a plus quantity, sometimes
a minus quantity of the phosphates, thus confirming, as far as it went, the
evidence which we derived from other sources. With respect to the
analysis of nervous matter, L'Heritie had shown that there was a minus
quantity of phosphorus in the brains of idiots; and Couerbe asserted that
he had found a plus quantity of phosphorus in the brains of maniacs. But
not only was it a matter of importance for us to ascertain the quality of
the blood, but it was also requisite to estimate the quantity which circu-
lated in the brain. Not only had we examples of insanity from the poison
of other diseases from bad blood, but we had examples from local conges-
tion of the brain, and from ana;mia. Many patients were admitted into
St. Luke's, whose disease had originated in low diet and starvation, in
whose brains might be supposed to have commenced that process of oxida-
tion which Liebig called " eremacausis." But we should also feel inclined
to examine into the condition of that subtle fluid, the nervous force, which
ministered to those influences by which the mind manifested its ideas, and
which, when disordered, counteracted and obscured its development.

These were the heads of some of those subjects which he trusted at no
distant period might throw light upon the pathology of insanity.
Dr. Webster said, that in reference to Mr. Solly's remarks respecting
the morbid changes in the cortical substance not being sufficiently dis-
tinguished from the appearances observed in the medullary; this arose
froni the fact, that only a summary, not the particulars, of the various
autopsies were detailed to the Society. Had the synopsis been read en-
tirely, the points adverted to by that gentleman would have been explained.
All the morbid changes noticed were accurately mentioned, and when it
was remembered that most of the dissections had been made by so dis-
tinguished an anatomist and physiologist as Mr. Lawrence, this must be a
sufficient guarantee of their value and accuracy. Dr. Sutherland had
alluded to the influence which climate, geographical position, and the civil
condition of individuals exerted in the production of insanity. In many of
these remarks he fully concurred, and would even affirm that the religious,
political, and social status of the inhabitants in particular countries, mate-
rially affected the results produced by ordinary exciting causes. For
instance, insanity is a much more common disease in cold climates than in
temperate or warm countries. In Sweden and Norway a larger proportion
of the inhabitants become mad than in any other part of Europe. The
disease is more frequent in North Germany than in the southern part of
that empire. Mania prevails more in Belgium than France, in the
northern departments of which latter country it is met with in a higher
ratio than amongst the natives of the south. In Spain the disease is less
common than in France; whilst in Northern Italy, insanity is reported to
be twice as common as in the southern part of the Italian peninsula. Again,
on the southern shores of the Mediterranean, the disease is still less frequent
?as in Egypt, Syria, &c.; and in Arabia, mania is so rare, that it is seldom
observed; indeed, a chief physician to the great hospital at Alexandria has
stated, that during ten years he had only met with one insane Arab, not-
withstanding the number of Arabians in Egypt, and the large population
of that city. To show the influence which agitation and great mental
excitement produce amongst the inhabitants of a country in reference to the
disease under discussion, he (Dr. Webster) might mention that madness
was frequent amongst the Crusaders, whilst the disastrous effects of this
enthusiasm continued long afterwards. During the reformation in Ger-
many, the Low Countries, and in Britain, insanity became common;
likewise during the civil wars of England, and the domination of puritanism
under the Long Parliament and Cromwell. The first revolution in France
caused many cases of insanity, and when Napoleon upset dynasties, made
kings, queens, and titled personages, almost by wholesale, imaginary sove-
reigns and princes were numerous in the asylums of France and Germany,
of which Pinel gives examples, and tells us that in Bicetre there were, at
the same time, three Louis-the-Sixteenth maniacs under treatment. As
stated in the paper, the recent revolution in Paris had produced most
melancholy results on the minds of many individuals of that formerly gay
capital. He (Dr. Webster) could say so from his own personal observation,
verified by the experience of physicians attached to lunatic establishments,
private as well as public, of that country, where political excitement,
clubbism, and the late bouleversement of public institutions and private
fortunes, have occasioned very lamentable consequences. Dr. Sutherland
remarked, although more females became insane in the lower ranks of
society than men of the same class, still, amongst the higher grades of
people in Great Britain, more men than women were affected with madness.
This was certainly true to some extent, especially as hereditary tendency
to mania appears more prevalent in the upper than the lower classes, and
purity of blood, as it is erroneously called, often influences matrimonial
engagements to a greater extent than amongst the commonalty. This
was formerly well exemplified amongst the old noblesse of France, the
clans of Scotland, and the sangre azul, or blue blood of the Spanish gran-
dezza, in all of whom mental and physical qualities were then transmitted
to offspring in greater purity, whether for good or evil, than amongst the
more mixed blood of common people. Notwithstanding the facts alluded
to by Dr. Sutherland, insanity was generally more common in women than
men throughout England, as shown by the recent report of the Lunacy
Commissioners, and as the patients treated at Bethlem Hospital were not
paupers, but often persons of education, such as governesses, clergymen,
merchants, and many others of a similar situation in life, but broken down
by disease as well as poverty; and as they come from all parts of the
country, are not confined to the metropolis, but often the reverse, the results
thus met with respecting the two sexes, therefore, constitute a good cri-
terion, and support the conclusions stated in the present paper. Religious
persuasion exerts considerable influence in this malady; at least, it seems
to be more common among Protestants than Catholics, and prevails to a
greater extent in converts and proselytes, than in persons of confirmed
steady faith, whilst it is oftener met with in countries where religious con-
troversies are common, than elsewhere. Many other points might also be
mentioned, bearing upon the question of insanity; but although interesting,
he would not trespass upon the time of the fellows further than to observe,
that the chemical investigations alluded to by Dr. Sutherland were most
important, and deserved the attention of practitioners: that physician had
already done much to elucidate this subject, and he hoped soon to see more
accomplished in the above branch of medical science, as applied to mania.
The field was both rich and extensive, and now that the profession gene-
rally had begun to study mental diseases, their nature and treatment, in
the way they deserved, much benefit would thereby accrue, as well to
medical men as, through them, to the community.

Mr. Stkeeter considered the Society deeply indebted to Dr. Webster
for the large amount of information, drawn from the records of Bethlem
Hospital, which he had placed before its fellows. No one had taken so much
pains as Dr. Webster to make the experience of that institution available
to the profession; and his papers certainly afforded valuable materials for
the study of insanity. When, however, Dr. Webster called upon medical
men to apply themselves to the study of this disease, he begged to inquire
where the facilities for following out that study existed ? They were cer-
tainly not to be found in the general or special hospitals of this metropolis.
It might be truly said that means were not afforded to the members of the
profession for qualifying themselves for the duties they were called upon
to perform in domestic life, and in civil and criminal courts, in the ques-
tions that continually arose in reference to insanity. The consequence
was, that they were far from being so highly prepared as the bearings of
this disease upon many of the most important interests of society rendered
desirable. Dr. "Webster had certainly omitted much that was required for
the complete study of insanity; but when Mr. Solly alluded to his omitting
to describe the colour of the hemispherical ganglia, or, more popularly
speaking, of the cineritious exterior of the cerebral lobes, knowing the
belief which Mr. Solly entertained of this part comprising a series of
ganglia, each performing separate and independent functions, and not being
a single organ, he felt disposed to ask, why, in the account of his dissections
at Han well, Mr. Solly had spoken of the cineritious structure generally,
and without any attempt to localize its morbid appearances. On several
occasions he had seen the morbid appearances of the cineritious structure
localized. In puerperal mania of rapid termination, the point of the pos-
terior lobe had acquired a much deeper colour; and in many instances,
where the convolutions were carefully unfolded, one after another morbid
changes of colour and structure would be detected, that would otherwise
escape observation. And here chemical and microscopical investigation
promised to be useful. It was, however, in that stage of insanity which
was most interesting to the family medical attendant that these communi-
cations were most defective. He meant, the approach and incipiency of
insanity?that stage in which the disease was most amenable to medicine?
that to which Dr. Winslow had given the term of incubation. He had
heard, with pleasure, the distinction pointed out by Dr. Sutherland, of
centric and excentric cases?a distinction of great practical value, as he
believed the excentric, as in other nervous diseases, were more easy of
cure. As an illustration of this, he would mention the rapid removal, in
many cases, of the excitement and delusions of delirium tremens by the
influence of opium on the stomach and intestines. He might also adduce,
as proofs, the cases of curable insanity connected with uterine disease,
which Dr. Lever had recently brought before the profession. He himself
considered that the foundation of intemperance and insanity, in after life, in
females, was often laid by the prevailing opinion, that vaginal and uterine
discharges always indicated weakness, and a state of system requiring sti-
mulation and fermented liquors. Great caution was required before remov-
ing them by local means. He thought Government must, at no distant
period, insure the means and enforce the study of insanity upon the pro-
fession generally, since all were called upon to perform duties connected
with it. In conclusion, he alluded to the set which had for some time past
been made against doctors, by the higher grades of lawyers, in reference to
generally-received opinions upon insanity. He would say, that if it was
the province of their profession to hinder crime from escaping punishment,
by simulating insanity, it was the high calling of ours to prevent insanity
from being visited and treated as crime.

Dr. Sibson said it was remarkable that in Dr. Webster's paper so few
cases of rumollissement or of induration had been enumerated. The blood
that had been found in some cases, the fluid in others, and in others, again,
the thickening of the arachnoid and pia mater, were the most commonly
observed changes which were found in cases of diseases in which insanity
was not present. He regarded the chemical results as the most definite in
this inquiry. But we need not look at the brain only in our investigations
into the pathology of insanity. The internal organs required to be exa-
mined also. The effects of conformation had their influence in the pro-
duction of this disease. The condition of the stomach, the uterus, and of
the heart, required to be looked to. He considered that at the present
moment we were not in a condition to saj^ that we had been able to trace
a clear and distinct connexion between the brain and insanity; at all ?
events, all the changes which had been enumerated, might exist in the
brains of those in whom insanity had not been present; and when met
with in the brains of the insane, he thought they were only the conse-
quences of the insanity. Besides the inquiries into the effects of climate,
and the other points mentioned by Dr. Sutherland and Dr. Webster, he
thought we should extend our observations to the texture of the skin, the
hair, &c. Muscular conformation, the size of the lungs, the power of the
heart, the condition of the abdominal organs, and of the digestive apparatus ;
indeed, the state of every limb and of every fibre in the body constituted
an element of inquiry in cases of insanity.

Dr. Webster remarked, as it seemed to be implied from the observa-
tions of previous speakers, that he had omitted to notice the symptoms and
treatment of mental diseases, he must state, to prevent any misconception
of his object in the present communication, that this was done purposely,
his remarks being confined to the causes and consequences of the above
class of affections. The subject was too extensive to admit of any other
proceeding; and in respect of the remarks made by Dr. Sibson as to tem-
perament, physical conformation, colour of the hair, texture of the skin,
and so forth, these points had by no means been overlooked by psycho-
logists ; on the contrary, great attention had been recently given to similar
inquiries, and much valuable information thereon collected. Some physi-
cians have also even shown that the colour of the eyes was important; and
M. Foville, recently physician to the asylum at Charenton, but from which
he was displaced by the late red republican government, considered the
configuration and structure of the external ear as often indicative of
insanity. This peculiar appearance of the ear, M. Foville had pointed out
to him, (Dr. Webster,) when lately visiting Charenton, and he had since
seen the same thing in this country ; indeed, it had been noticed by others
previously. The observation of Dr. Sibson respecting the importance of
studying the connexion of symptoms with the pathological appearances
met with after death, could not be over-rated ; and although nothing was
said in the paper, for the reasons already adduced, there could not be any
doubt respecting the advantages of such an inquiry, and he hoped subse-
quent investigators would supply this deficiency. Reverting again to the
causes producing insanity, it might be interesting to state, that intem-
perance, owing to the improved habits of the people in this country, did
not seem to be so frequent an exciting cause of that malady, as formerly ;
on the other hand, the now prevalent habit of smoking tobacco had very
much taken the place of intoxicating drinks ; and in America, where intem-
perance, chewing opium, and smoking, were enumerated amongst the causes
producing mental disease, considerable attention had recently been directed
to the subject. In his (Dr. Webster's) opinion, this filthy custom was
most injurious, as well to body as mind; and whether intoxication was
produced by spirits, opium, or by tobacco, all were abominations, and he
believed physicians, conversant with mental maladies, were every day
becoming more and more convinced of the bad effects arising from this
narcotic weed; whilst in some asylums its use amongst the lunatics was
strictly prohibited. If he (Dr. Webster) did not farther advert to other
points connected with the subject under discussion, it was not through
want of inclination, but from the desire to confine his remarks to questions
mooted in the present communication. However, as the study of insanity
was now assuming the place in medical education which its great impor-
tance deserved, he had not a doubt but in due time every information
would be supplied by the diffusion of sound practical knowledge.

.THE NEW COUNTY ASYLUM FOR MIDDLESEX, COLNEY HATCH.

The crowded state of the Hanwell Asylum, the daily applications for the
admission of new patients, which are necessarily refused, the number of
pauper lunatics scattered through the different workhouses of the metro-
polis and its neighbourhood, have at length rendered the erection of another
asylum for the county of Middlesex no longer a matter of choice, but of
imperative necessity; for although several parishes somewhat selfishly held
meetings and drew up petitions against the proposed measure, which they
objected to on account of the increased assessment of the county rates
thereby rendered necessary, still the cause of humanity has triumphed,
and the foundation-stone of the Colney Hatch Lunatic Asylum was laid
on the 8th of May, by his Royal Highness Prince Albert, in the presence
of the Lord Mayor of London, the Lord-Lieutenant of the County, a
numerous body of magistrates, and an august assemblage of noblemen and
gentlemen.

The site selected for the new asylum is within a mile of the village of
Southgate, at Colney Hatch, within the parish of Friern Barnet, about ten
miles north of the metropolis. The situation is airy and healthful, the
surrounding scenery cheerful, and perhaps, as beautiful as may be found
in any part of the county; it will also have the advantage of being adja-
cent to one of the stations of the Great Northern Railway, which is now in
course of construction. The building, we are informed, will be in the
modern style of Italian architecture; and it is expected that it will be
completed, and ready for the reception of lunatics, by Michaelmas, 1850.
The attention which has during the last few years been paid to the
subject of lunacy?the psychological and pathological investigations which
have only recently rendered this study a recognised and legitimate branch
of medical science?the improvements which have been introduced in all
the practical details of the treatment of the disease?and especially the
opportunities we now enjoy of comparing many admirable institutions
of the kind with each other both at home and abroad?these, and a
variety of other considerations, induce us to expect that this new asylum
v/ill be built upon the most approved principles, and that it will com-
bine within its walls all the advantages which our present advanced
state of knowledge and practical experience can command. Not only do
we apply these remarks to the architectural structure and plan of the
building, but to its internal organization, medical and moral. And here we
are struck, in limine, with one important fact?the average number of
pauper lunatics in the county of Middlesex is stated to be 2400, and the
disease is with the population notoriously progressive. If, therefore, 1000
patients be located at Hanwell, and accommodation be provided at Colney
Hatch, even for the remaining 1400, there will still, it is to be feared, be
in a very few years, a surplus number of pauper lunatics encumbering their
respective parishes. We entertain, therefore, some doubt whether such
enormous establishments are expedient, and whether district lunatic
asylums, capable of holding 500 patients each, would not be more desir-
able. Hanwell was, in the first instance, designed to admit only 300
patients; the building was afterwards extended, at an enormous expense,
so as to enable it to receive the present number of inmates; and we feel
very much inclined to predict that a similar fate, notwithstanding the
extent of the accommodation contemplated, will await Colney Hatch
Asylum. It occurs also to us that there are many objections to so vast a
number of patients being congregated under one roof. The extreme
length of the new building, we are informed, is to be 1883 feet 6 inches;
its extreme breadth, in the centre, 143 feet 10 inches; and there will be
wings on the right, for females, in length 586 feet 6 inches; and on the
left, wings for men, in length 500 feet 6 inches. We are well aware that
the male will be separated, as at Hanwell, from the female department;
but we cannot help thinking that it would have been better for each sex
to have been located in a distinct and separate building. If the Com-
missioners in Lunacy find it expedient, for moral considerations, not to
license any more houses for male and female patients of the better classes
conjointly, but insist that such establishments shall be appropriated exclu-
sively to the one or other sex, how much more reason, a fortiori, is there
for having pauper male and pauper female lunatics located in separate
asylums? We know that notwithstanding the interposition of walls
between the two departments in these large buildings, irregularities are
said to arise from having the two sexes under one roof.

One of the great inconveniences in Hanwell is the great circular stone
staircase in the centre of the building, and other staircases and steps,
which are, for many reasons, clumsy, if not dangerous, which will, it is
stated, be avoided in the new asylum, by the basement story being ap-
proached by a corridor going down to it upon an inclined and level plane,
which will supersede the necessity of steps. The proportion also between
single cells and dormitories should be well considered. There are certain
cases in which the separate cell system is advantageous to the patient; but
it should not be forgotten that solitude, even during the hours of night, is
in many other cases very objectionable. The disposition of the lunatic
upon the invasion of his malady, is generally to be anti-gregarious; and
to make him associate with his fellow-men, and draw his mind out of the
cloudy solitariness in which it preys upon its own delusions, is one of the
most obvious indications of cure. Besides which, during the silent hours
of night, in the solitary cell, patients will often indulge in vices which the
presence of their fellow-patients in a dormitory may check. We do not,
of course, refer to inveterate cases, in which every mode of control is some-
times set at defiance; but we affirm that the single cell system, in the
beginning of this malady, is favourable to the indulgence of this morbid
propensity, at a time when the moral sense of doing wrong is susceptible
of being influenced by the presence of those around, and that a dormitory
is therefore preferable for such patients. It is alleged, we are aware, that
the atmosphere must in every dormitory become, during the night, impure,
but all we can say is, they "manage these things better in France;" if
the ceiling be lofty, and the ventilation good, no such unpleasant conse-
quences would arise. Moreover, it is well observed by the Commissioners
in Lunacy in their Report in 1844, that the dormitories in many of the
county asylums " accord better with the pauper's previous habits than
sleeping alone in a solitary cell, with a single window; and the companion-
ship of others in the same*room does not seem to interfere with their nightly
rest. We rarely (they continue to observe) visit a licensed house without
asking some of the patients how they sleep at night, and we are generally
answered that they sleep well. These persons almost invariably occupy
sleeping-rooms containing several beds. In many good licensed houses,
also, private patients of a superior class frequently sleep, to the number of
four or five, or even more, in separate beds, in the same room. Upon the
whole, we are of opinion that dormitories containing several beds are much
preferable as a general arrangement to cells or single-bedded rooms,
although a limited number of the latter is doubtless necessary in every
large asylum for the use, amongst others, of violent, noisy, and mischievous
patients, and for such as are labouring under a paroxysm." Our own ex-
perience and observations accord with these remarks of the Commissioners;
besides which, it might be added, that dormitories are the safest for suicidal
patients, with whom the constant presence of companions has a sanative
effect.

While it is promised that the external aspect of the new asjdum will
present us with a cheerful Italian style of architecture, the internal walls
will not, we hope, be permitted to remain so dead and prison-like as those
we find at present in our public asylums. The plain whitewashed surface
surely would admit of some little decoration or relief, even by being
papered, as also the corridors and passages, which are as blank and cheer-
less in many asylums as those in the interior of Newgate itself. There is
another and a still more important object which, we trust, will be kept
steadily in view. The dreary interior of these buildings seems to accord
well with the notion that their unfortunate inmates are inaccessible to
happier impressions and associations from surrounding objects, and that
they therefore are consigned as absolutely incurable to the
" Vast lazar-house of many woes,

Where laughter is not mirth, nor mirth the mind,
Nor words a language, nor even men mankind."
But we would fain hope that these gloomy days have passed away, and
that the new county asylum of Colney Hatch will be essentially a curative
institution, and provided above all things with an efficient medical staff.
Indeed, now that the progress of mental and cerebral pathology has clearly
demonstrated that insanity is, in its early stages, as curable as any other
disease incident to humanity, we anticipate that, with the advantages which
this asylum can command, it will soon acquire an European reputation.
With th:s anticipation in our mind, we return to the imposing ceremony,
the details of which it is our pleasing duty to record as a matter of history.
On the 8th May, 1849, his Royal Highness Prince Albert arrived at
Colney Hatch, a few minutes after twelve o'clock, and was received by the
Lord Lieutenant of the County, the Marquis of Salisbury, the Lord Mayor,
Sir James Duke, the county magistrates, Benjamin Botch, Esq., and
Henry Pownall, Esq., and a large number of the county magistracy, and
clergymen and gentlemen of the district. A procession was then formed,
and the Prince was conducted to his seat opposite the stone. On raised
benches around him were a large number of ladies and gentlemen, who
gave his Royal Highness a most enthusiastic reception. It may be stated,
that the foundation-stone of the new institution has one peculiarity, which
is, that instead of being hidden from sight, it will henceforth form one of
the principal features in the entrance hall. It is a large piece of freestone,
having on its front a magnificent sculptured marble entablature, with the
following inscription:?

"This foundation-stone was laid by Field-Marshal his Royal Highness
Prince Albert, K.G., her Majesty's Consort, on the 8th day of May, a.d.
1849, and in the 12th year of the reign of her Most Gracious Majesty
Queen Victoria. May God bless this work of charity.

" Committee of Visitors.?Benjamin Rotch, Esq., chairman ; Lord
Robert Grosvenor, M.P.; James Bentley, Esq.; J. H, Bluck, Esq. ;
C. S. Butler, Esq.; E. H. Chapman, Esq.; C. H. Cottrell, Esq.; J. W.
Freshfield, Esq.; John Garford, Esq.; T. B. Herring, Esq.; M. H.
Kempshead, Esq.; Henry Pownall, Esq.; Hector Rose, Esq.; John
Simpson, Esq.; Arthur Smith, Esq.; Edward Stock, Esq.; C. B. Stut-
field, Esq.; J. B. Walesby, Esq.; Henry Warner, Esq.; John Wilks,
Esq.; and Joseph Wilson, Esq.

" J. S. Scaife, clerk to committee; S. W. Daukes, Esq., architect;
Mr. George Myers, builder; C. J. Shoppee, clerk of the works."
The usual preliminaries having been settled?

Mr. B. Rotch addressed his Royal Highness in the following terms:?
As chairman of the justices entrusted by the court of quarter sessions with
the erection of this asylum, your Royal Highness will perhaps allow me
to say a few words, and to draw your Royal Highness's attention to the
vast extent of foundations, comprising the officers' residences, the airing
courts, the workshops, and the chapel, now lying maplike before us. When
completed, it will be the largest lunatic asylum in the United Kingdom,
and will be capable of accommodating upwards of a thousand patients. It
must not be supposed that the necessity for this additional asylum has
arisen from any increase in the malady itself, disproportioned to the in-
creasing population of Middlesex; far from it. It has only become neces-
sary in order to relieve the rate-payers of the county from the heavy
burden imposed upon them by the extra expense they are now put to by
being compelled to keep more than 1000 pauper lunatics in private asylums,
at a cost so greatly exceeding what they would be kept for in a county asylum,
that when the thirty years over which the cost of this building will be
divided, have expired, the saving will have exceeded the expenditure by
several thousand pounds, and every year afterwards will secure a very
large annual saving to the rate-payers of the county. It will be gratifying
to your Royal Highness to hear that what were formerly the horrors of
lunatic asylums will be totally unknown here. None but moral restraints
will here be imposed; the ray of reason's light, however small, which it
ever pleases the Almighty to leave to these poor sufferers, even in the
worst phases of their malady, will here be tenderly cherished, and made
sufficient to guide them in peace and gentleness in their path, however
darkly shadowed by the clouds of their erring intellect, while that system,
first carried out in its fullest extent at Hanwell, (the non-restraint system,)
at once the pride and boast of our metropolitan county, will have facilities
afforded to it here, from the experience of the committee, the talent of the
architect, and the extent of the grounds, which, we trust, will enable us
still further to develop its efficiency and its humanity ; to draw the veil of
oblivion over the melancholy times that are passed, to avail ourselves of all
the real improvements of the present day, and to look forward, under
Divine blessing, to secure happier results in times to come. Such will be
the institution raised in a few short months (owing to the activity and
energy of our contractor) of which your Royal Highness is now about to
lay a foundation-stone; but before doing so, I am charged to convey to
your Royal Highness (and I can only regret my inability to do it in
adequate terms) the humble and grateful thanks of the committee of visitors,
whom I have the honour to represent this day as their chairman, and also
of my brother justices of the county of Middlesex generally, for your
Royal Highness's gracious condescension in thus giving the high sanction
of your countenance to our labours, by aiding us with your own hands to
raise up this mighty building?a monument for future ages of the philan-
throphy of the age we live in, and of your Royal Highness's great con-
descension?a building which will, when completed, be entirely devoted to
the great cause of Christian charity and humanity.

His Royal Highness Prince Albert replied (addressing Mr. Rotch) in
the following terms : I thank you, sir. I trust you will find that the
excellent s}rstem you are about to adopt may prove successful. The
greatest credit is due to you and the other magistrates for your noble
exertions.

Mr. H. Pownall, (the Chairman of the Sessions,) in presenting to his
Royal Highness the current coins of the present reign, which were closed
in a glass receptacle hermetically sealed, said : May it please your Royal
Highness, we hail your Royal Highness on this most auspicious occasion
with every feeling of respect and affection, not only in consideration of the
exalted rank enjoyed by your Royal Highness as consort of our beloved
Sovereign, but also as desiring to evince our sincere admiration of the
great liberality and untiring zeal displayed by your Royal Highness in
promoting and encouraging all those institutions and undertakings which
have for their object, the moral, social, and religious elevation of this great
empire. To the county of Middlesex belongs the honour of having already
provided an asylum for 1000 of the afflicted lunatic poor, and we are met
to-day, under the encouraging circumstance of your Royal Highness's
presence, further to carry into effect a wise and enlightened enactment of
the imperial legislature, which has enacted that every county in England and
Wales shall provide an asylum for their lunatic poor. This law, so wisely
framed and so benevolently intended, has not been carried into effect with
that zeal and alacrity which the urgency of the occasion seemed to demand.
The magistrates of the metropolitan county rejoice this day to see your
Royal Highness aiding them in this work of mercy, and cheering them
onward in the path of benevolence. They rejoice not only in the encou-
ragement afforded by your presence here this day to themselves, but for the
zeal which it is likely to diffuse through the magistracy of other counties
who have not yet provided an asylum for their afflicted poor. We have
reason to rejoice in the zeal manifested by your Royal Highness for the
advancement of science and learning in our country, for the interest you
take in all that concerns our commercial greatness, and for the efforts made
in behalf of those institutions whose object is to mitigate the sufferings of
the poor. We have rejoiced in similar benevolent and enlightened efforts
made by princes of the royal house on former occasions, but it remained
for your Royal Highness to stretch the cords of Christian sympathy from
the palace to the abode of the afflicted labourer, and prove, by a generous
and personal service, that there is no class of her Majesty's subjects who
do not share your regard and derive benefit from your enlightened and
well-directed efforts. The magistrates of this county have for years con-
ducted the largest lunatic asylum for paupers in the country, and, with the
assistance of able and willing officers, have introduced a system of manage-
ment which has called forth the approbation of some of the most eminent
medical men in Europe, and which has divested this afflicting malady of
the mind of all those cruel and brutal usages which formerly characterized
the treatment of the insane. No longer coerced with leg-locks and chains,
the patient becomes calm, and if not restored to perfect tranquillity, is left
free from mechanical restraint. May the conductors of this asylum far
surpass the happiest results which have followed the labours of their brethren
at Hanwell, and so long as this building shall last, may this act of your
Royal Highness be remembered with gratitude, and when time shall have
closed upon us and your Royal Highness, may your robes be as white, and
your palm as verdant, and your crown as radiant as those who are now
enjoying their eternal felicity above. (Loud cheers.)
Prince Albert (taking Mr. Pownall by the hand) : Mr. Pownall, I am
much obliged to you for your excellent address. I hope the institution
may prosper, and that the admirable system of which you have spoken
may work in your new institution to your perfect satisfaction. (Loud
cheers.)

His Royal Highness then deposited the coins which Mr. Pownall had
handed to him; and immediately afterwards some specimens of standard
weights and measures were handed to him by Mr. Cottrell.

The Rev. G. Ii. Thompson, M.A., Rector of Friern Barnet, having in-
voked a blessing on the work,

His Royal Highness laid the stone, with the usual formalities.
The Marquis of Salisbury, Lord-Lieutenant of the County, said he had
received her Majesty's commands to announce that her Majesty felt the
greatest interest in the success of the institution, and the fullest con-
fidence that the results would be of a most important and beneficial cha-
racter. (Cheers.) Her Majesty, had also commanded him to say, that she
would commence a fund for the relief of those who were discharged from
that institution cured. (Renewed applause). He was sure the magistrates
present knew how much benefit had been derived from such institutions in
different parts of the country; and one of the principal features in such
asylums was a fund such as that her Majesty had expressed her intention
of setting on foot. Her Majesty the Queen Dowager commenced a
similar fund at Hanwell, and her Majesty Queen Victoria munificently
contributed to it. They would now have a fund in their new institution,
and he had no doubt it would be a useful one, to be called, " The Victoria
Fund."

It is calculated that by the erection of this asylum, the county will save
at least 7000/. per annum in its provisions for pauper lunatics.
The police arrangements, under the direction of Mr. Inspector Becker-
son, were perfect. During the whole of the proceedings, although so
many thousands of persons were present, there was not the slightest sign
of confusion.

Thus terminated the proceedings of a day which we hope will be not
less memorable in the history of the county in which it took place than
in the history of the science, which such an institution is, we trust,
destined to advance.

In previous numbers of our Journal, allusions were made to recent im-
provements at Bethlem Hospital, towards facilitating the acquirement of
practical knowledge respecting the nature and treatment of insanity.
When adverting to this important department of medical science, we stated
that the authorities of the above-named noble charity had resolved to
render the ample means at their command of more use to the profession
than hitherto, by admitting medical students to attend the physicians' prac-
tice, when visiting the insane patients, on the payment of a moderate fee,
which was also to include clinical lectures. Respecting the working of the
new measures now in operation, it may be interesting to transcribe from
the Physicians' Report for 1848, recently printed, and circulated among the
governors, the following paragraph relating to the medical pupils admitted
last year at Bethlem Hospital:?

" There has been a considerable increase of attendance and much intelli-
gence displayed on the part of the pupils. The proposed formation of a
more regular school at Bethlem will accomplish all that can reasonably be
expected; and it is distinctly understood that the physicians will deliver a
course of lectures during the spring season of each year, commencing as
shall be most agreeable to the wish of the governors; and they will have
great pleasure in exerting their best endeavours to render the lectures
effective."

During the current season, we understand the attendance of pupils has
been more numerous than previously; that Sir A. Morison has delivered
several interesting clinical lectures; and further, that Mr. Lawrence will
also aid this movement for the promotion of so useful a branch of medical
education, by giving three lectures on the pathology of mental diseases,
illustrated by dissections made at the hospital, which cannot but
prove most valuable, seeing that eminent surgeon is both an accomplished
physiologist and an excellent anatomist. Next year, we trust Dr. Moijro,
the senior physician, who has had great experience on the subject of mania,
will also give clinical lectures, in the same manner as his colleagues have
done recently; in which case, the profession cannot then say the medical
officers of Bethlem Hospital have not fulfilled their promise, or that students
do not possess ample opportunities of now obtaining information and ex-
perience respecting diseases of the mind; more especially, as not only that
institution, but likewise St. Lute's Hospital, are open to pupils, where Dr.
Sutherland is most zealous in imparting information to the gentlemen in
attendance.

Besides the above means now available for studying insanity, Dr.
Conolly, both at Hanwell and at the College of Physicians, has, by his
admirable lectures, materially contributed towards the same desirable
object; and if the examining medical corporations of Great Britain would
require all applicants for their diplomas to possess a competent knowledge
of diseases of the mind, as they do at present in regard to those affecting
the body, great progress would be then made, by all ranks of the profession,
in the study of medical psychology. If this were the case, no practitioner
need ever be unwilling to undertake the treatment of insane patients, still
less should he feel the least difficulty when called before a jury, empanelled
by a writ " de lunatico inquirendo," there to be severely cross-examined
by an astute member of the long robe, or even badgered by a counsel
experienced in such matters. This occasionally happens; and it is well
known that legal gentlemen are often delighted if they can puzzle a medical
witness; nay, they consider it quite fair, if made to give contradictory
evidence regarding the afflicted subject of inquiry. When medical prac-
titioners have, however, practically studied mental diseases, such exhibi-
tions will seldom or ever occur; at the same time, whilst psychological
science is thus promoted, philanthropy will be extended, and a very un-
fortunate class of the community must thereby be materially benefited.
