Memoirs of Mad Philosophers, Mad Kings, &c.Torquato Tasso?
===========================================================

Art. IV.-
Crichton Institution Biographies; or,
No. 1. Dum-
fries, 1849
A great?we were on the eve of saying an inspired?poet, lias
pointed out the close relationship existing between genius and
insanity. We will not quote the apophthegm; it is to he found in
every copy-hook. Philosophy, history, physiology, psychology, and
pathology, attest the truth of the observation. Who will presume
to draw the line of demarcation between the highly wrought and
gifted mind and the disordered intellect? Who is capable of distin-
guishing between the creations of genius and the wanderings of
insanity? We dare not venture with Aristotle to state that it is
essential for a good poet to be mad; but so much we will maintain,
that the development of brain and nervous system on which the
poetical temperament depends, is more nearly allied to that cerebral
condition so often associated with insanity, than many are disposed
to believe. That excessive expansion of nervous matter?great sensi-
bility?acute sensitiveness?quickness of apprehension?and vivid-
ness of imagination, etc., are all indications of a state of brain border-
? ing closely on the confines of disease, who can doubt?
\/
THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS. 263
The attempts which psychologists have made to define insanity
have all signally failed. That there is in this condition of mind a
want of balance between the representative faculty and the judgment,
is clear; in such Avise we may presume to define the visions of slum-
ber-dreams, which may be said to differ from insanity only in degree
or in duration.
It is true that slight shades of this want of balance may be daily
witnessed in our intercourse with men; may we not therefore con-
clude that madness is a question of degree, and not of hind, and so
cut the Gordian knot, or adopt in despair the wise saAV of old
Polonius, " to define true madness, Avhat is it but to be nothing
else but mad1?"
The truth is this : the errors or contrasts of our definitions do not
so much consist in our notions of insanity, as in our dilemma in
drawing the hair-line of demarcation betAveen sanity and insanity.
If Ave could contemplate the progress of aberration in a mind, from
simple abstraction doAvn to drivelling idiocy, or to
" Moody madness, laughing wild,
Amid severest Avoe,"
Avhere should Ave draAV this line? Will the rules of psychology
determine the question, and help us out of our dilemma1? Or, on
the conviction that there is imperfection in the most perfect mind,
must avc confess that there is none sane but the Deity, and content
ourselves Avitli quoting Gregory?" Nulla datur linea ciccurata inter
sanam mentem et vesaniarn "?
If a true or accepted definition of madness is so difficult, the
manifestations of insanity are no less vague and uncertain, especially
in the expression or action of that form termed monomania. Hoav
often have Ave known the acuteness or tact of a patient, on Avliom a
jury Avere sitting, completely hoodAvink these twenty-four Avise men?
ay, and eke the three learned Tliebans in commission?until the
string Avas touched Avhich Avas " jangled and out of tune," and then
the mens insana Avas as clear as the noonday sun!
A case is recorded of a gentleman of large possessions, avIio Avas
convinced that Queen Charlotte of England Avas enamoured of him.
His family, to induce the chancellor to grant a commission of lunacy,
invited him to dine in company Avitli the monomaniac. But the
chancellor Avas deceived by the brilliant Avitticisms and conversational
poAvers of the patient, avIio Avas indeed the life of the party, so that
the learned judge congratulated him on his poAver of mind, and
expressed his surprise at having been informed that the gentleman
believed the Queen in love Avith him. "What!" exclaimed the lunatic
264 THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS.
" am I to be considered crazy for giving credit to lier most ample
and repeated avowal of that being the case?" The commission was
directly granted. Lord Erskine has related two similar cases. In
both, the most rigid examinations had been tried in vain to establish
insanity, until the one was accosted as the Saviour of the world, and
the other was reminded of his amour with a princess, with whom he
corresponded in cherry-juice, when the gentlemen instantly gave
unequivocal evidence of insanity. A fine young officer, in whose case
we attended a commission at Rochester, some years ago, had almost
disproved our opinions by his rational answers, until, as lie was
retiring, he took a paper with great solemnity from his pocket, and
read, Home, sweet home/' which he assured the jury he had that
morning composed for their entertainment. We may add, also, that
a gentleman committed suicide by dividing the brachial artery, after
having passed the morning in professional visits, during which he
evinced the most perfect judgment and self-possession. His illusion
was the notion that his bones were decaying from the poison of
syphilis. On this he cut his artery?but the evidence of the patients,
without our own, would have established felo de se. Now, Ave may
not be very far wide of the mark, if we affirm that every mind is
prone to stamp those which think, speak, or act differently from
itself, with the stigma of aberration: an hour scarcely passes in
extensive association, without our hearing the expression, ' what
folly!'?? why the man is mad !' &c., ?fcc. This clearly evinces the
estimation in which we are held by our fellow-beings who pride
themselves on being, in Hamlet's phrase, " infinite in reason."
If these opinions are so constantly formed of the common herd of
mankind, the ' profauum vulgus,' how much more closely may they
apply to those,
" Whose minds are dolpliin-like, and soar
Above the elements they live in"?
the children of Genius.
The thoughts and expressions of these gifted beings are essentially
eccentric in the truest sense of the word, and therefore are they oc-
casionally worshipped or reviled?contemplated with wonder, o
regarded with pity. Like Beattie's precocious boy,
? Some think them wondrous wise, and some believe them mad."
That deeply interesting, we may write sublime subject, in which Ave
have engaged?the insanity of genius, itself a psychological problem,
comes before us Avith the most awful contrasts: a spectral " life in
death." " The light that leads astray, is light from heaven," and
THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS. 205
while we contemplate these Rembrandt shadows of the mind?this
chiaroscuro of the soul of man, we at once confess their salutary but
painful influence in curbing the pride of the heart, and teaching
mankind, in most miraculous language, a practical lesson of humility.
"VVe may learn, even in this, that the wisdom of the Creator has
ordained in animate nature something like a balance of happiness.
We know excess of pleasure is succeeded by depression, while the
apathetic moves on through life in one cool, monotonous, yet con-
tented course. So has the light of learning, its shadow. Even
Bacon's almost divine mind was not unalloyed with debasement.
In intellect, we scarcely read of one child of genius who has not
sooner or later displayed the ravages which the struggle and labour
for his fame, have worked in the organ and manifestations of his
mighty mind.
In commenting on the aberrations of intellect, we must trace the
malady to its source?to that degree or stage which is not yet, but
which may be madness; for insanity, like other diseases, has its incu-
bation and its development.
The very infancy of genius is often marked by such eccentric
courses ; as Samuel Johnson would almost term madness. He
writes?" Madness itself merely discovers itself by unnecessary de-
viations from the usual modes of the world." Even enthusiasm has
been stigmatized as insanity. Richardson termed Michael Angelo the
'?'divine madman," and Oliver Goldsmith was designated "an inspired
idiot." The eccentric pencil of our own Fuseli traced conceptions so
out of the pale of common life, that we have often overheard very
learned comments on the vagaries of mad Fuseli; and Turner, who
produced such magical effect with gamboge, vcrmillion, white lead,
and verdigris, is annually arraigned as a fit subject for a keeper, by
the wiseacres in the rooms of the Royal Academy.
This eccentricity of genius often betrays itself by mere abstraction
?a sort of brown study?in which the mind is so absorbed with the
intensity of its creations, that impression of a sense does not impart
such impression to the sensorium. The current stories of Pliny,
Archimedes, Parmegiano, Marino, Newton, are very interesting
illustrations of this passive eccentricity?this reverie of genius.
The vagaries of active eccentricity are displayed in the anccdotes
of Hogarth, Geo. Harvest, and Sir Isaac Newton, with a degree of
terseness, certainly, which savours somewhat of exaggeration; for if
these sons of genius were so utterly regardless of their persons, how
could they guard their purses? Still we know quite enough to be
26G THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS.
sensible of the absence of the common modes and courtesies of life
in many of those whose works will live in glory, long, long after
their eccentricities arc forgotten.
These eccentric causes are sometimes developed even in infancy,
and they are often the halcyons of intellect. But they do in reality
also indicate a predisposition to aberration, if undue excitements be
administered to or encouraged in the ill-fated subject of precocity.
We cannot peruse the letters of Lord Dudley, one of those unhappy
spirits who was never a child, to the Bishop of Llandaff, without a
very sorrowing sympathy Avith his fate, and regret for the errors of
his tutors, in forcing the germ of his intellect, and, as it Avere,
Avearing out his brain. We may look with pity too on many other
more brilliant stars of literature, endowed Avith the so often fatal
gift of genius, in Avliom intellect not only began to groAV, but burst
forth into blossom Avhile yet its organ Avas in the bud. In some,
vitality Avas protracted someAvhat beyond the half century, but
melancholy had marked them for its own long before their earthly
course Avas finished. Such Avere Ariosto, and Dante, and Tasso, and
Alfiei'i, and Pope, and Collins, and Cowper, and Swift. Others, in
AAThom sensibility Avas in excess, and the organ of their intellect of
more attenuated mould, " burned out quickly." Such Avere Burns,
and Keats, and unhappy White?
" Like sunbeam which on billow cast,
That glances, but it dies"?
and Byron, avIio, in the " English Bards," Avrote that beautiful
apostrophe on White's early fate.
We cannot Avonder that illusion should form one prominent
characteristic of genius, inasmuch as the Avorkings of the imaginative
mind are but one continued and protracted course of ideal creation,
ere the contemplation of nature and reality be Avell commenced, and
judgment and comparison are matured by study, and the reading of
the minds of others. Of this illusion, liOAvever, when the mind is
conscious, it does not constitute insanity, any more than it can be
termed disease, for the Avandering may be under the control of the
will, and the systematic functions and their organs also in a state of
perfect integrity.
Our immortal Shakspeare has argued that the lunatic, the lover,
and the poet
" Are of imagination all compact."
This seeming poetic licence has been sometimes proA-ed to be a
truth. Nat. Lee illustrated the three qualities in his oavii person.
His poesy Avas highly eulogized by Addison; but if Ave read the
THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS. 267
thoughts even of one of his lovesick girls, we shall see that his
passion must have been that of a mad lover. Then while he was
confined in his cell in Old Bedlam, we arc told, a cloud passed over
the moon, by the light of which he was writing the scene of a play,
when he cried out, " Jove, snuff" the moon." With all this, Lee
seemed to have well remembered the living pictures around him,
for this is his faithful portraiture of madness, in his "Csesar Borgia:''
" Like a poor lunatic that makes his moan,
And for awhile beguiles his lookers on.
His eyes their wildness lose,
He vows the keepers his wrong'd sense abuse;
But if you hit the cause that hurts his brain,
Then his teeth gnash, he foams, he shakes his chain,
His eyeballs roll, and he is mad again."
" The poet's eye in its fine frenzy rolling," " bodying forth the form
of things unknown," is often thus closely illustrating the real insanity
of genius, the simplest form of which is the unconscious creation of
false ideas, and an absolute dominion of the representative faculty
over the judgment.
This consciousness, then, may form the very link between poesy
and madness?a seeming analogy, though really diametrical contrast
?the one, the inspiration of a poet's reverie, the other, an ever-
during phantom.
Thus the hallucinations of Tasso differed from the conscious
creations of Sliakspeare?the ideal revelations of Blake, (which were
unfolded to us by the late John Varley,) from the wild eccentricities
of Fuseli. Yet Ave doubt not that Sliakspeare and Fuseli saw in
their mind's eye as perfect an Eidolon as Tasso and Blake, but they
knew them to be phantoms.
We will, in illustration, record the contrasted visions of Tasso
and Tartini, the one related from Hoole's Life of Tasso, and the
other by the accomplished maestro himself.
"At Bisaccio, Manso had an opportunity of examining the singular
effects of Tasso's melancholy, and often disputed with him concerning
a familiar spirit, which he pretended conversed with him. Manso
endeavoured in vain to persuade his friend that the whole was the
illusion of a disturbed imagination; but the latter was strenuous in
maintaining the reality of what he asserted, and to convince Manso,
esired him to be present at one of the mysterious conversations.
Manso had the complaisance to meet him next day, and while they
were engaged in discourse, on a sudden he observed that Tasso kept
his eyes fixed on a window, and remained in a manner immoveable;
lie called him by his name, but received no answer; at last Tasso
cried out, ' There is the friendly spirit that is come to converse with
2G8 THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS.
me; look, and you will be convinced of the truth of all that I have
said.'
" Manso heard him with surprise; he looked, but saw nothing,
except the sunbeams darting through the window; lie cast his eyes
all over the room, but could perceive nothing, and was just going to
ask where the pretended spirit was, when he heard Tasso speak with
great earnestness, sometimes putting questions to the spirit, some-
times giving answers: delivering the whole in such a pleasing
manner, and in such elevated expressions, that he listened with
admiration, and had not the least inclination to interrupt him. At
last, the uncommon conversation ended with the departure of the
spirit, as appeared by Tasso's words, who, turning to Manso, asked
him if his doubts were removed. Manso was more amazed than
ever; he scarce knew what to think of his friend's situation, and
waved any further conversation on the subject."
Such was the hallucination of Tasso. This is the reverie of
Tartini:
"One night, it was in the year 1713, I dreamed that I had made
over my soul to his Satanic majesty. Everything was done to my
wish; the faithful menial anticipated my fondest wishes. Among
other freaks, it came into my head to put the violin into his hands,
for I was anxious to see whether he was capable of producing any-
thing worth hearing upon it. Conceive my astonishment at his
playing a sonata with such dexterity and grace, as to surpass what-
ever the imagination can conceive. I was so much delighted,
enraptured, and entranced by his performance that I was unable to
fetch another breath, and in this state I awoke. I jumped up and
seized upon my instrument, in the hope of reproducing a portion at
least of the unearthly harmonies I had heard in my dream. But all
in vain: the music which I composed under the inspiration, I must
admit the best I have ever written, and of right I have called it ' the
Devil's Sonata;' but the falling off between that piece and the sonata
which had laid such fast hold of my imagination, is so immense, that
I would rather have broken my violin into a thousand fragments,
and renounced music for good and all, than, had it been possible,
have been robbed of the enjoyment which the remembrance afforded
me."
The indulgence to excess in this sort of phantasy, or the abandon-
ment to it as a professional study, is replete with peril. To the real
world the visionary is an alien; to his adopted country, a denizen;
he is an outlaw to the beings around him. In the end the brain
becomes a chaos,?a wreck. We will glean a few sentences, in proof,
from the record of a child of genius, to whom we have already
alluded. " When a sitter came I looked at him attentively for half
an hour, sketching from time to time on the canvas. I wanted 110
more. I put away my canvas and took another sitter. When I
THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS. 2G9
wished to resume my first portrait, I took the man, and set him in
the chair, where I saw him as distinctly as if he had been before me
in his own proper person. I looked from time to time at the
imaginary figure, then worked with my pencil; when I looked at
the chair I saw the man. Gradually I began to lose the distinction
between the imaginary figure and the real person, and sometimes
disputed with sitters that they had been with me the day before. At
last I was sure of it; and then?all is confusion. I recollect nothing
more. I lost my senses?was thirty years in an asylum."
Here, then, we see a voluntary deposition of the judgment and
faculty of comparison; they had lost their dominion over the repre-
sentative faculty, and thus was an eccentric illusion converted into
insanity.
Our late friend, Dr. Wigan, has recorded a case of this insane
phantasie, in which the Eidolon was a double of the Seer. It is that
of a haunted man, and might, perhaps, detract somewhat from the
originality of a popular scribbler of Christmas tales:?
" I knew a very intelligent and amiable man who had the power
of placing before his eyes himself, and often laughed heartily at his
double, who always seemed to laugh in his turn. This was long a
subject of amusement and joke, but the result was lamentable. He
became gradually convinced that he was haunted by himself, or (to
violate grammar for the sake of clearly expressing his idea) his self
This other self would argue with him pertinaciously, and to his
great mortification sometimes refute him, which, as he was very
proud of his logical powers, humiliated him exceedingly. He was
eccentric, but was never placed in confinement or subjected to the
slightest restraint. At length, worn out by the annoyance, he de-
liberately resolved not to enter on another year of existence; paid
all his debts, wrapped up in separate papers the amount of the
weekly demands, waited, pistol in hand, the night of the 31st of
December, and as the clock struck twelve, fired it into his mouth."
It is not here that we may discuss the question of unity, duality,
or plurality of mind; we refer our readers to the recent works of
Holland, Barlow, and Wigan, on that abstruse question of psychology.
e cannot, however, on reflecting on the phenomena of hallucination
of genius, believe that mind, as it is manifested to us by its organ, is
one indivisible essence, which itself creates an illusion, and at the
same time informs us that it is so: this would almost imply that the
biain as a unity was at the same time sound and unsound. But if
we can believe that one cerebral organ, or one cerebral hemisphere,
NO. VI. T
270 TIIK INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS.
may be perfect, and the other or the rest imperfect, distorted, or
diseased, the dilemma at once vanishes.
We know, Ave have seen that this partial disorganization, either
from extreme congestion or change of tissues, has been accompanied
by evidences of insanity, and very interesting analogies might be
adduced to prove this. We take the case of a philosopher of extreme
energy and deep learning, in whom this hemispherical disorganization
of brain was discovered.
Dr. Wollaston had long been sensible of the etiology and prognosis
of his case, the onset of which was declared by paralysis of the
finger. Dr. Holland thus writes: " He was accustomed to take
exact note of the changes, progressively occurring in his sensations,
memory, and voluntary power. He made daily experiments to
ascertain their amount, and described the results in a manner which
can never be forgotten by those who heard him. It was a mind
unimpaired in its higher parts, watching over the physical pheno-
mena of approaching death, and what well deserves note, watching
over the progressive change in those functions which seem nearest
to the line separating material from intellectual existence." With
all this spirituality, however, there lurked some leaven of self-interest.
It was on the very approach of death (as we are assured) that he
divulged the platinum secret, and his calculations seemed to imply
that at least his organ, or one of his organs of number, was not
deranged. This homage to Mammon, at such a moment, might
sanction the belief that the diseased hemisphere somewhat interfered
with the spirituality or philosophy of the prevalent indication of his
master mind.
In our discussion of this paradoxical question in psychology, we
must remember that the brain is the organ, not the gland, of the
mind. We do not say the diseased or congested hemisphere secreted
false ideas, and the sound one created the faculties of judgment and
comparison to correct them. We rest on this affirmation, that the
mind cannot be manifested aright through the medium of diseased
structure.
Now, in illustration, Ave will adduce the analogy of the senses.
The soul is an essence, bright, pure, celestial: from its combination
Avith the senses results intellect, Avhich Ave may very justly term one
great sense, or a combination of all.
We knoAV that the senses require their oAvn proper element ere
they can render us conscious of nature. The eye cannot see unless
there be light, nor the ear hear Avithout special undulation, nor the
tongue taste unless sapid substances be applied to its papilla;. But
THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS. 271
sight will not be perfect unless the eye be healthy or entire, and yet
rays of pure light are still playing about its lenses, and penetrating
to the inmost depth of its diaphanous tissues: so if the brain be
diseased, can there be integrity of intellect,?can there be thought,
reflection, judgment, comparison? No. Yet the soul is there : but
its manifestation as the mind is perverted by its diseased organ, as
the ray of bright light is dimmed or distorted by the diseased struc-
ture of the eye. Is it not easy, then, to draw this analogy 1 As
the light is to the eye, so is the soul to the brain; light is the essence
of vision?the soul is the essence, or light, of the brain, the sublime
source of all those phenomena which, as an aggregate element, we
call mind.
We will, in carrying on this analogy, liken the varied tissues of the
brain to the summit of the giant alp, Mont Blanc, and Ave will
assume that the rays of the sun are playing on its peaks ; the rays
which fall on the snow-clad cone are reflected back in the effulgence
of their purity, but those which impinge on a granite rock, on tlieir
reflection present to the eye a dark, rugged, and misshapen surface.
So, the blending of the immortal spirit with a healthy brain will be
evidenced by the higher and nobler sentiments and faculties of our
moral and intellectual nature; but if it is manifested through a
brain, diseased or disorganised, in its totality, or in any of its nume-
rous folds, then are its evidences displayed in the sentiment and
actions of man, more or less clouded or debased.
These hallucinations of genius may assume two contrasted forms,
which, if acute or protracted, become the light or shadow of the
visionary's existence. Cheromania, or the illusion of bright visions,
and demonomania, or belief in the reality of Satanic visitation.
The exact proximate cause of these illusions may long elude the
research of the most anatomical pathologist; the predisposition may
depend on idiosyncrasy or constitution, fostered by indulgence or
habit. Very many of these visions may, however, be referred to
certain conditions of the blood. Hyperoxygenation of this fluid,
whether from inhalation of nitrous oxyde gas, or even pure atmo-
spheric air, will elevate and enliven the feelings and ideas. An
excess of carbon, whether from inhalation or narcotic influence, or
confined atmosphere, will ever induce depression and a gloomy mood
of mind. The essence of cheromania may also consist in hyper-
oxygenation of the blood; that of demonomania, in congestion or
remora of dark blood in the vessels of the brain.
We may observe analogous effects of temperament and disposition
in the contrasted diseases of melancholia and phthisis. In the fluids
272 THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS.
of the former, carbon predominates, in those of the latter, oxygen ;
it may be from rapid circulation, or even from the free admission of
oxygen to the blood in consequence of abrasion. May we assume,
as an example, that from such an influence was developed those
almost angelic traits of character which flung so bright a halo over
the transient existence of our boy king, Edward VI.
To the cheromaniac every vision is gilded by a couleur cle rose?
every voice is the whisper of a seraph.
When the angel appeared to Jacob Behmen, he long listened with
rapture to a voice of celestial modulation. The illusion of Ben-
venuto Cellini was a lofty cheromania, still increased by a mind su-
premely inflated by self-esteem. Thus he records one of these, (a
conversion of natural truth into phantasy) : " This resplendent light
is to be seen over my shadow till two o'clock in the afternoon, and it
appears to the greatest advantage when the grass is moist with dew;
it is, likewise, visible in the evening at sunset. This phenomenon I
took notice of when I was at Paris, because the air is exceedingly
clear in that climate, so that I could distinguish it there much plainer
than in Italy, where the moists are much more frequent; but I can
see it there and show it to others, though not to so much advantage
as in France."
Petrarch was thus blessed with the Eidolon of Laura in his visions.
Among other most interesting illusions of genius we may remember
those of Edward, Lord Herbert, of Cherbury, of Malbranche, and
Descartes. The mind of Shelley, also, (whom Locke would have at
once termed a madman, on his axiom, that insanity is excess of
morbid imagination,) was constantly prone to illusions of deep and
painful sentiment?demonomania: but sometimes, perhaps, from the
influence of surrounding circumstances, he became a cheromaniac.
Percy Bysslie, with whom we wandered in our childhood, Avhen he was
a young Etonian, was a proselyte to spectral realism, especially when
excited by visionary studies. We will glance, as an instance, to one
of his day dreams, recorded by his friend, Williams, when they were
in the isolated paradise of St. Arengo. One evening, after tea, as
they were wandering in the moonshine, he suddenly grasped Williams'
arm, and exclaimed, " There it is again?there f and, closer ques-
tioned, he declared he saw his lately deceased child, naked, arising
from the sea, and then clap its little hands as if in an ecstasy of joy,
and looking on him with the smiling countenance of a cherub.
" I have dreamed of a golden land," said Fuseli in a rapture,
" and solicit in vain for the barge that is to carry me over."
The demon of Socrates (to which even the Satanic epithet of
THE INSANITY OF MEN 01- GENIUS. 273
kuko dmpov lias been applied) was, in reality, a sorb of brownie,
although this spirit, as tlie sage himself confessed, twice with-
held liiin from offering any defence 011 his trial. Of the implicit
credence of Socrates in the preternatural reality of his demon,
we have many curious stories. This is recorded in the " Ban-
quet of Xenoplion" One Timarclius, a noble Athenian, being at
dinner in company with Socrates, he rose up to go away, which
Socrates observing, bade him sit down again, ' for,' said lie, ' the
demon has just now given me the accustomed sign.' Some little
time after, Timarclius offered again to be gone, and Socrates once
more stopped him, saying, he had the same sign repeated to liim.
At length, when Socrates was earnest in discourse, and did not
mind him, Timarclius stole away, and in a few minutes after com-
mitted a murder, for which, being carried to execution, his last
words were,' that he had come to that untimely end for not obeying
the demon of Socrates.'"
Tasso and his spirit were still more congenial, for the inspired
poet seemed to court and welcome his mysterious visitant.
But even religious monomania will sometimes assume the nature
of a bright vision. That devout monomaniac, John Mason, of
Water Stratford, as Grainger informs us in his biographical history
of England, was impressed with the conviction that lie was the true
Elias who was ordained to announce the advent of the lledeenier, and
that when this awful epoch arrived, the millennium was to be com-
menced at Stratford. This visionary parson conversed and acted
rationally on all subjects but those which referred to revealed reli-
gion, when he directly became mad. He died under the belief that
he had just before been visited by the Saviour of the world, and in
a complete faith in the reality of his own Divine mission.
Among others, the celestial visions and visitations of Emanuel
Swedenborg are conspicuous, especially as they have enticed so many
proselytes as to have established a sect which bears his name. The
flights of his sister traveller to the heavenly region, Theresa, were
followed by her apotheosis, and the canonization of her bones. This
accomplished saint was enchanted by the writings of St. Jerome,
and devoted herself to a monastic life. This metamorphosis, in a
delicate frame, warm heart, and vivid imagination, induced melan-
choly, which ended in a cataleptic fit. I11 this trance she saw visions,
and in her ecstasies she was lifted by supernatural powers from the
earth into the presence of Peter and Paul, and even of the Redeemer
himself, who once took her cross from her hands, and changed it
into four large precious diamonds, &c.
274 THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS.
The phenomena of eheromania may persist without the slightest
constitutional disturbance; still it should ever he regarded with
jealousy, as rapid or increased cerebral circulation may in a moment
be induced, and terminate in frenzy. Even the sudden onset of
high spirits, unmarked by illusion, should not be altogether slighted.
We have known cases, especially in which honour and fame have
suddenly been conferred 011 genius, in which the cerebral excitement
has been suddenly followed by extravasation or effusion. In common
minds, Ave have such effect of high spirits often evinced. A lady
whom we knew had been for some time heavy and lethargic, when,
for an hour or two before she attended morning service, she ex-
pressed her delight at feeling so infinitely better than she had been:
she had scarcely entered her pew, ere she dropped apoplectic, and
instantly expired. It was probably this liyperoxygenation of the
encephalic blood which caused the exalted feeling in the cases of
periodical mania related by Willis, in which the patient anticipated
his insanity with extreme pleasure, and that also recorded by Pinel.
The first patient affirmed thus : " Everything appeared easy to me;
110 obstacles presented themselves either in theory or practice; my
memory acquired, all of a sudden, a singular degree of perfection. In
general, I have a great difficulty in finding rhythmical terminations;
but on these occasions, I wrote verses with as great facility as prose."
Pinel refers to a literary gentleman of but ordinary powers who,
during his paroxysms soared far above his usual degree of intellect.
" He declaimed 011 the subject of the revolution with all the force,
the dignity, and purity of language that this very interesting subject
would admit of."
And in what do these phenomena of cerebral excitement differ
from the eheromania of the first stage of intoxication ? In nothing,
save the duration of paroxysms and their exciting causes. Hyper-.
oxygenation of brain-blood is the essence of them all.
But the continuous thought and brooding over ideas by the
brain of genius, in most instances induces a contrasted condition,
which shows us the other side of the picture. Kemora of the blood
is marked by signs resembling the second stage of intoxication.
The false idea, or Eidolon, is often not altogether without the in-
fluence of the judgment; but as this faculty is seldom so potent as
to dispossess the mind of the presence of the phantom, even if it
suggests the conviction of its unreality, that mind is for the time
monomaniacal. Such was the mind of llousseau, when in the com-
pany of his phantom, and Luther, while he conversed, without sus-
picion, with the demon in his sttidy. It induces the penalty of
THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS. 275
Frankenstein; it has raised a monster beyond its control; just on the
principle of our often inducing a pain or action in a part, by con-
centrating the attention on the spot. So Spinello, during his deep
study for his picture of the fallen angels, kept his mind so especially
concentrated on the conception of Lucifer, that the horrible shadow
of the arch-demon was constantly before his eyes. Of these intel-
lectual demonomaniacs, all coming under our category, we have
recorded many very interesting cases. Jurieu, as we are informed
by Dr. Beddoes, locked himself in his study for the deep analysis of
the Apocalypse. The intense thought and heated air soon induced
distressing maladies; these ended in the. horrible illusion that the
Beast of Blasphemy, with ten heads, and ten horns, and ten crowns
011 his horns, was pent up in his body, and was preying on his
vitals!
Our lamented friend, Dr. Johnson, told us of a gentleman of great
science who conceived that he was honoured by the frequent visits
of spectres. TheyAvere at first refined and elegant, both in manners
and in conversation, which on one occasion assumed a witty turn,
and quips and puns and satire were the order of the evening, so
that he was charmed Avith his ghostly visitors. On a sudden, lioA\r-
ever, they changed into demoniac fiends, uttering expressions of
the most degraded and unholy nature. Depletion Avas the cure of
this phantasy.
The physician of an acute Scotch laAvyer had long Avitnessed some
secret horror embedded in the mind of his patient, which, indeed,
at length proved fatal; and at last extorted the confession that a
skeleton Avas ever glaring on him from the foot of his bed. The
doctor once endeavoured to dispel the illusion by standing directly
in the field of the vision, and Avas himself startled, Avlien his
patient declared he saAV the phantom peering at him over his left
shoulder.
Such, too, Avas the " martyr philosopher," in the " Diary of a
Physician," Avho, just before his death, saAV a black figure removing
his books from his study, throAving his pens and ink into the fire,
and folding up his telescope, as if they Avere hoav useless. This Avas
but a memory-shadoAv of his oavh previous occupation.
The solemn figure Avhich induced Mozart to Avrite the " Requiem,"
Avhicli Avas first, indeed, chaunted over his oavii grave, Avas doubtless
but a phantom of his oavii creation. Such, also, AAras the illusion ot
Nicolai, the bookseller of Berlin.
The case related by Dr. Abercrombic may be considered almost
111 proof of our position. A gentleman of high literary attainments
276 THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS.
was constantly annoyed by the intrusion of an old woman in a black
bonnet. She was, however, of the filmy order of ghosts, as the lock
of the door was seen through her. Believing that she had missed
licr way, he arose from his deep study, and courteously showed her
the door, when she instantly vanished. The change of position, by
altering the state of circulation of the brain-blood, 110 doubt dis-
pelled the phantom.
Such are some of the illusions of genius. They may be followed
by disorganization, by membranous adhesion, effusion, &c.; but these
changes are not essential, as the most unyielding illusions may exist
with integrity of systemic function and of general health. Of these,
the two well-known and very interesting stories of John Tilney
Matthews and Simon Browne, may be adduced as illustrations. The
one believed that he was haunted by a gang of pneumatic chemists,
close to London-wall, who incessantly tortured him with an air-
loom ; the other, that " he had lost his rational soul." In both, the
monomania was persistent, yet they were in bodily health; and
although one was needlessly confined, both perfectly harmless in
society.
The etiology of monomania, and of its converse, " folie raisonante,"
is a subject of very deep interest, especially as they usually occur in
contemplative or scientific minds. The questions might illuminate
each other; as, in the one, there seems to be a mad point, in the
other, a sane point in the brain. I11 the highly intellectual mind,
we are presented with a dark spot, or phantom; in a maniacal brain,
we may sometimes observe a lucid spot, from which may emanate
one of the higher faculties of the intellect. Thus, Dr. Rush writes
of a judge and a divine, both confessedly insane, but whose discri-
minating judgment and refined eloquence on the bench and in the
pulpit were admirable. Some of the ablest articles in "Aikin's
Biography" were written by an inmate of a lunatic asylum during
his confinement. We are told, also, that some parts of one of our
national establishments were constructed from the plans of one of its
inmates. Gibber tells us, in his Life of Lee, " I have seen a ship
of straw finely fabricated by a mad ship-builder; and the most lovely
attitudes have been represented by a mad statuary, in his cell."
These questions are of high interest and importance, involving as
they do the points of metaphysical psychology, disordered quality
of blood, and duality of mind; but at present we must control our
discussion and analysis 011 these subjects.
The Irritability of genius is the first link in that series of mental
THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS. 277
phenomena which we may more properly term disease, associated as
it is with the distressing condition of morbid or excited sensation.
The constitution of the mind is often acutely sensitive, shrinking
like a mimosa from the breath of criticism; when such a state is fed
by the wear and tear of brain, the effect may be perilous and de-
structive. Even the common intercourse of life is a fret to such a
mind; there are no thoughts or sentiments in common, and the con-
verse is strained and painful. Then there may be no just appreciation
of talent by unintellectual persons, and hence the petulance that poets
and essayists have displayed?of which Oliver Goldsmith and poor
Cliatterton may be apt examples. Seneca, we remember, affirmed
that genius coidd not be happy with many people, as such association
would rufiie the surface of the mind.
If we glance at the statistics of the comparative mortality of genius,
we may form some notion of the final effect of different studies and
pursuits. At the extremities of the scale, we have the natural phi-
losopher and the poet; the aggregate duration of the lives of the
former may be stated to be 75, of the latter, 57. In the quiet con-
templation of nature, the mind is usually under a calm and devout
influence, which softens the acuteness of feeling. It is the study of
God's book, a search after ineffable truth.
The mind of the astronomer especially, whose enraptured eye
contemplates the "majestic roof fretted with golden fire," is carried
far above the influence of human passion, and the collision of earth?
and is not our mother earth a Moloch, by a thousand secret poisons
sacrificing her own children? Herscliel, Hallev, and Newton were
octogenarians.
But the labour of the poetic mind is a creation. To the Creator,
a world, a universe, is but the work of a will, a wish, a fiat: to the
creature, even the birth of a thought may be an overwhelming
struggle, a convulsive pang of parturition. It is recorded of more
than one poet, that they wrote their verses six times over; Alfieri
writes, " all my tragedies have been composed three times." So
careful was Yirgil to revise and polish his poetry, that he compared
himself to a bear that was constantly licking his cubs into shape. In
some, however, Ave may observe such energy of mind, such firmness
oi brain, and such high moral temperament, as may come unscathed
from the trial. Walter Scott was long enabled, with impunity, to
write nine volumes in as many months, taking still his prominent
position in society; and Johnson, in seven years, compiled his gigantic
Lexicon, and wrote the Rambler, with other minor compositions, and
278 THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS.
went through his routine of society daily. We are told, too, that he
wx-ote forty-eight pages of the " Life of Savage " in sixteen hours; and
our esteemed friend and colleague, Dr. C , the Johnson of medical
literature, may be adduced as one of the literary wonders of the day.
But even these labours may perhaps yield, in the sapping and mining
of brain, to the slavery of periodical literature.
If we contemplate the catalogue of imaginative writers, we shall
discover signs of an irritable temperament in almost every one but
Scott; his mind was cast in the mould of virtue, and his religion Avas
as simple as it Avas sincere. Then Scott possessed a genuine unso-
phisticated love of nature, and raised himself to be a lord of the soil.
Nor Avas he morbidly ambitious of literary victory, or jealous of the
rivalry of other poets; thus he quietly yielded the laurel to Byron,
and doomed his prolific pen to the composition of his more humble,
though universally popular, prose. But let us glance at the genus
irritabile?Cowley?Tasso?Dryden?Alfieri?Voltaire?Rousseau
?Smollett?Pope?Johnson?Collins?CoAvper?Keats?Byron,
and Ave must almost pity the penalties of mighty genius. " Paganini,
too," as our friend Dr. Moore Avrites, " paid dearly for his con-
summate excellence. Speaking to a friend, he stated that he
scarcely kneAV Avhat sleep Avas; and his nerves Avere Avrought to such
almost preternatural acuteness, that harsh sounds often became
torture to him. His passion for music he described as an all
absorbing, a consuming one; in fact, he looked as if 110 other life than
that ethereal one of melody Avere circulating in his veins; but he
added Avith a gloAV of triumph, kindling through deep sadness, ? Mais
c'est un don du ciel.' "
The effect of rapt attention is often derangement of memory?
of Avhich Ave have curious instances on record. Such Avas the
transient oblivion of the acute scholar, (related by Crichton,) avIio
had been deeply absorbed in studies, and at length Avas unable to
Avrite even Avhat his Avill dictated?or to utter the Avords he Avislied.
Thus, for " 50 dollars, being one half-year's rate," Avliich lie intended
to Avrite, he scribbled?" 50 dollars through the salvation of Bra?"
These derangements of the sensitive mind assume a variety of
phases, eliciting, indeed, many of the most discordant passions of the
human heart. Literary jealousy, for instance, Avill sever the most
congenial friendship?as betAvecn John and William Hunter, and
Chaucer and GoAver, and others of less fame. The irritability of the
ardent yet fragile mind will soon Avear it out, especially if it be the
subject of satire or censure. It is affirmed that the " end of Stilling-
fieet Avas hastened by Locke's confutation of his metaphysics;" that
THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS. 279
the Quarterly killed John Keats; and neglect of his genius im-
pelled poor Chatterton to rush madly into the presence of his Maker;
and Tasso, as if he feared his spirit even would feel a lash, begged
Cardinal Cynthio to burn his works after his death, especially his
Jerusalem! Even the poem of the iEneid, which, though never
finished, had cost Yirgil the labour of 11 years, was condemned to be
burned, in the last will of the poet of Mantua. Happily, instead of
throwing it into the flames, Augustus delivered it to Virgil's literary
friends.
This sensitiveness will be roused even by the consciousness of
personal deformity. The curved spine and skeleton legs of Pope,
whose life was one protracted malady, might, perhaps, have much
increased his acute feeling of censure. It is known, too, that the
vanity of Byron was more than once deeply Avounded when he per-
ceived the eyes of a companion fixed on his club-foot; and when,
almost a child, he overheard Mary Cliawortli say to her maid, " Do
you think I can love that lame boy," he ran in the full speed of
passion across the fields from Aniiesley to Ncwstead.
Madden affirms Byron's disorder to have been epilepsy; and indeed
he had many signs of cercbro-spinal disorder, as twitcliings, globus, etc.
on strong emotion. He had himself some notion of this being he-
reditary, as lie tells us he was " cradled in convulsion," and "subject
to a kind of hysterical merriment." A man so constituted as Byron
was, who could write, " the seal of death is the only seal of friend-
ship," must have innately so gloomy a view of society as to be a
constitutional discontent, which he allowed to grow up with his life,
for he was too great for sarcasm or reproof. None could such a mind
endure, but a kindred spirit?a revolving satellite?or a doating
woman. This misanthropy rendered him discontented with all but
sensuality, and thus, much of his poesy, brilliant and triumphant as
it was, was written as a resource against ennui, that " actual despair
and despondency," with which he every morning awoke.
The " Bride of Abydos" was composed to keep him from " going-
mad by eating his own heart." And again he says, " I feel a disrelish
more powerful than indifference. If I rouse, it is into a fury. I
presume I shall die like Swift?dying at top." Byron's life, like his
works, was a sort of Rembrandt study; so dark is all around, that the
light shines out Avith a lustrous magic; the splendid poetry of
" Manfred gilds even the mystification of Astarte's fate, and Ave
scarce pause to inquire its nature?incest, self-immolation, or Avhat??
in our raptures at its poetic beauty. In such a conflict of Avild, mad
passions passed Byron's eventful life.
280 THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS.
A similar morbid sense of critical comments influenced the late
Lord Dudley, whose social position somewhat resembled Byron's;
but he felt consoled by contrast, as when lie knew the Governor-
General of Bengal, with a genius so superior to his own, was not
saved from " errors, humiliation, the taunts of his enemies, and
the reproaches of his own conscience," which he corrects to " dis-
approbation of himself." And again, " W. R., a fellow-sufferer, is
coming to dine with me, and his gloom. ... I look forward with
satisfaction to the tete-a-tete." His irritable susceptibility of brain
was encouraged in his boyhood; he was one of those who never
was a child, and was petted to excess by friends who were proud of
his precocity. Lord Dudley lived with his ciders, and had 110 play-
mates. His organic malformation of brain (as we learn from the
Quarterly Review) was rivetted by the system of his education,
which embittered his whole existence, and buried his bright pros-
pects in the darkness of solitude and insanity. Lord Dudley's
malady was often a conscious illusion; for if mad, he knew he was so,
as he writes, " I am ashamed of what I feel." But there were un-
doubtedly traits of monomania, as in that morbid regret lie felt for
the possession of his great fortune. He seemed to form a contrast
between what he Avas by birth and wealth, with what he should be,
and bewailed his want of power in using his riches as he conceived
that a Christian and philanthropist should do. He concludes one
of his sorrowful letters .to the Bishop of Llandaft' with this severe
sentence, " The iron had entered into my soul deeper than before."
Robert Burns was another of these specimens of the irritability of
mind, in whom, notwithstanding an occasional gleam of splendour,
existence was a penalty; for his life, after the hey-day of his warm-
blooded youth, was one course of intoxication; it was a sort of
champagne vitality; for while his system endured it, his leisure
moments were devoted to the worship of Bacchus and of Yenus; lie
was long the slave either of the thyrsus or the cestus.
It has been affirmed that Burns was, from his leading strings,
hypochondriac. He himself tells us his constitution was blasted
ah orhjine " with incurable melancholy." Alas! how little did he
endeavour to effect its cure, especially after lie left farming, and
became indolent, slothful, and a toper. We grant that, to decide
the struggle aright, between animal and intellectual, is no slight
task; but the sensitive mind of genius must gain such a victory, or
it will in the end cjo mad?we will not qualify the term.
That Burns (like Byron) possessed an hypothesis of morality and
even virtue is evinced in his writings; but the madness of passion,
THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS. 281
tliat physical love which will evev he lord of all, while it inspired
those warm outbreathings of the heart, was far out of the control of
virtue, and thus was that heart reduced to a tainted sepulchre. Yet
without this deep and unholy passion, though Burns would have
been a happier and a better man, the world would have been shorn
of the wild poesy of his sentiments. The amorous eulogies of his
Marys, Janes, and Nancys would never have been penned; but his
life would not have ended amidst the regrets of the libertine and
the delirium tremens of the drinker.
If the assertion of Eeid be accepted, that every nervous disorder is
a degree of insanity, this erethism of the mind must be regarded as no
slight form of it. Yet this madness may be very transient, for
although in all increased actions or functions there is ever vascular
excitement, this may subside, or even long continue without structural
change. Yet this mere erethism must be ever regarded with extreme
jealousy and suspicion; it may be the incubation of severe madness;
if there be, especially, cerebral constitution or development to pre-
dispose, this simple erethism may end in acute frenzy. It has
been decided by Pinel, Antlral, and others, that the hope of recovery
from insanity diminishes in a direct ratio to its previous duration.
It were a wise and a benevolent precept, therefore, even in early youth,
to check and keep down the enthusiasm of genius. But even in
leading strings the most watchful care may be required for its surety.
The precocious Blaise Pascal, even in his nursery, began to trace
mathematical figures on the wall, and however selfish we may be to
rejoice that Pascal was unfettered, yet he was in after life in constant
horror of a yawning gulf before him, and was, indeed, bound to his
chair during study, to prevent him from leaping, like Curtius, into
the chasm.
But when the mind of genius is in its noon-tide of power, where
then the giant arm to stem the torrent ? As well may we attempt
to curb with a nod the wild war-horse at the brink of a precipice, as
to set a bound to the onspring of genius. Galileo, even in his
seventy-eighth year, " could not prevent his restless brain from
grinding on." But few brains possess the endurance of that of the
inventor of the telescope. Alas! even in the dawn of youth many
blaze for awhile and then sink for ever!
And, perhaps, we may exclaim, happy they who are thus early
gathered to their rest, who, like spring violets, die in the fulness of
their odour, but whose bright effusions, had they lived, would have
beamed upon a selfish world, that would little dream of the pangs
of composition by which they were ushered into light! The birth
282 THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS.
of the brain is often what the obstetrician would term a "laborious
labour." If these labours are oft repeated, the systemic energy is
reduced, and the climax may be, according to idiosyncrasy, tempera-
ment, or texture of brain, melancholy, frenzy, or drivelling idiocy.
" Since the ' Essay on Truth' was printed in quarto," writes
Beattie, " I have never dared to read it over. I durst not even read
the sheets to see if there were any errors in the print, and was
obliged to get a friend to do that office for me. These studies came
in time to have dreadful effects upon my nervous system; and I
cannot read what I then wrote without some degree of horror, be-
cause it recals to my mind the horrors that I have felt after passing
a long evening in those severe studies."
The excitement even of a thought in soft and sensitive brains in-
duces various grades of mental disorder, from simple headache to
confirmed mania?an influence highly exemplified in the melancholy
life of Collins.
Hypochondriasis, that?
" Loathed melancholy,
Of Cerberus and blackest midnight born,
In Stygian cave forlorn,
'Mongst horrid shapes, and shrieks, and sights unholy"?
probably really consists of morbid sensibility of stomach, associated
with a predisposed brain; for Ave believe that few who are uncon-
scious that they possess a stomach are really melancholic. The
effect of these two causes is usually debility; the cause of Sydenham:
or if protracted, they may induce hyperremia and inflammatory
action; the cause or condition of Wilson Philip.
We are too apt to tell a patient that he must not lean to his
malady; but it is as wise to tell the leopard to change his spots, or the
/Ethiop his skin, as thus to dispossess the melancholic fiend. The
hypochondriac must feel so long as the condition lasts; and with far
more propriety may we resort to peristaltic persuaders, whether am-
monia, rhubarb, colocynth, brandy, old port, hair gloves, or exercise,
the best of all, than to a moral lecture or a scolding.
We pass by the religious monomaniac, Robert Hall. The two
most interesting instances of religious melancholy were Samuel
Johnson and William Cowper, yet in both the disorder assumed an
especial individuality. The iron frame of the one endured and over-
came ; the other, like the reed, bent down before it.
Johnson was, at one time, constantly in terror as he looked into
futurity, through the jaundiced medium of his malady. He probably
brought from remote regions awful truths by his telescopic mind,
THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS. 283
and tlien even magnified them afresh by tlie lenses of his morbid
imagination.
He said, " he inherited a vile melancholy from his father, which
made him mad all his life; at least, not sober." He often told Dr.
Swinfen that he should go mad; and seemed, indeed, close upon it.
This notion Swinfen unhappily encouraged. Brocklesby would have
acted more wisely. At twenty, his malady assumed a decidedly re-
ligious form; at fifty, he became irritable; at sixty, the dread of
death and futurity again came over him; and he told Dr. Adams he
would have a leg off" to recover his spirits. This thought was ever on
his lip?" To die, and go Ave know not where!" Some years before
he died, Mr. and Mrs. Thrale found him on his knees praying with a
parson that he should not go mad. Yet how shallow was even now
this impression, for a hearty squeeze of the hand, and an assurance
that he looked better, made him directly happy. It is probable that
this mood was much enhanced by morbid imagination; for when his
system sank under disease, his terrors of futurity waned, and he died
resigned.
That the system of Johnson was afflicted with a strumous taint is
certain. He had large scars in his neck, the cicatrices of glandular
suppurations; and, indeed, he was carried when a child to Kensing-
ton, to be touched by Queen Anne for the evil.
We may believe, then, that unhealthy blood was circulating in his
brain. But Johnson had really himself to thank for much of his
melancholy. His habit was to rise late, to sit long, to study hard,
to write voluminously, to wash his stomach out Avith hot tea, to feed
heartily and ravenously, like one of the ferae, scarcely speaking
during his gastronomic absorption, merely uttering a groAvl noAV and
then, while the veins on his forehead Avere dilated, and his face
SAveated copiously with his exertions. We might seek far and Avide
- in the records of etiology ere Ave could light on so perfect a cata-
logue of the exciting causes of hypochondriasis. Indeed, the neglect
of peptic precepts by the deep student or constant thinker is of very
evil tendency. Even Byron, after eating, often exclaimed, " Oh,
fool! I shall go mad!"
During this repletion, the upper circulation is impeded, and the
brain therefore becomes congested?a state favoured also by the
energy of the circulation being expended on the assimilating process
of the stomach. But in deep study immediately folloAving this state,
the organ of intellect is forced, and then begins the struggle of cir-
culation. If the brain beats, and the blood is withdrawn from the
stomach, dyspepsia arises at once, and then reaction may ensue in
284 THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS,
the brain, which may in the end induce even a phrenitic condition
in its varied degrees.
The religious melancholy of Cowper was the offspring of a weak
brain, which teemed with despondent and hopeless feeling. Some
slight ray of hope might, for a moment, break sometimes on his
clouded mind, when he wrote, " Joy of heart is the best of all
nervous medicines," and then, perchance, he penned "John Gilpin."
But the theme of his melancholy was this : " Spring flowers come
after winter's frost, but a soul once slain, lives no more." He was a
being of extremes, as he himself confesses; he was a mimosa in his
youth, afraid even of a shadow, as when he resigned his office of
reading-clerk to the House of Lords, frc m a dread of his public duty.
Cowper, like many others of sensitive minds, unhappily then re-
tired to a world of his own, with pet hares for his companions, and
water-lilies, and alcoves, and hovels, on the banks of the Ouse, about
one of the most sluggish and muddiest rivers in England; all this
tending to increase his malady, especially as he had somewhat
crotchety people to deal with. One of these was his Platonic flame,
Mrs. Mary Unwin, whose jealousy induced Cowper to turn off Lady
Austin, whose cheerful accomplishments had cast a halo of happiness
around him; a second and a third were the well-meaning, yet un-
wise clergymen, one of whom set him to the composition of the
Olney Hymns, while in a state of acute hypochondriasis ! the other,
Dr. Madan, believing him the subject of special visitation, went
metaphysically to work, and by precept and lecturing made poor
Cowper ten times worse than he was. No doubt the Rose of the
Alhambra, or Annot Lyle, would have been, as they were to Philip
of Spain, and Allan Macaulay, by far the best physicians. We must
remember, however, that Cowper himself deemed every effort at
physical explanation of his malady, profanation, and referred one
of his sudden recoveries to the influence of special Providence.
When he was looking down on Southampton Water, he writes?" I
felt the weight of my misery taken off; my heart became light and
joyful in a moment,?the Almighty fiat, not by a gradual dawning
of peace, but from a flash, as it were, of His life-giving coun-
tenance !"
From these glimpses of the life of Cowper, we may gather enough
to comprehend the nature of his insanity. His system also had
signs of a strumous taint, though not so marked as those of John-
son, and his digestion was inefficient: there were two causes of
debility. He was acutely sensitive of atmospheric changes, and on
the sedgy banks of the Ouse, especially in January, when his
THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS. 285
paroxysms were most severe, vapour clouds would be constantly
floating. Thus was tlie atmospheric electricity disturbed, which
might influence the delicate brain of Cowper, and thus cast the
demoniac shadows over all his thoughts and ideas. Each form of
poetic fancy hence became a demon; and this, deepened by the
working of a superstitious mind, not only doomed the poor poet to
a mad-house, but impelled him with the desire to give himself up,
before his appointed time, to that judgment, which he believed would
pronounce sentence of condemnation.
The most painful and distressing aberration of mind is that of a
false religion; it is almost a burlesque of that high and solemn
destiny which, in a healthy mind, ensures peaceful content and
humble adoration; and this especially when the imaginative faculty
of genius presumes to draw aside the veil, and develop the mysteries
of the apocalypse, which must await some gigantic event or revolu-
tion ere the intellect of man can dare to interpret the symbols of
his Creator. Such is the climax of the frenzy of Kan, a student of
Leipsic, whose mind for some time revelled in the deep and holy
mysteries of the Revelation; it is quoted from the record of Pro-
fessor Gruner, of Jena :?
" On the 4th of August, 1779, the neighbours were much alarmed
on hearing Kan abusing his father. Upon knocking at the door, he
opened it, and allowed them to come in : the father lay on the floor
weltering in his blood, murdered by his son, who had stabbed him
in fifteen different places, and had cut his throat. Kan walked back-
wards and forwards to the window, agitated alternately by contrition,
the consciousness of his crime, and ebullitions of insanity. At one
moment, he accused himself of having committed so horrible and
unpardonable an offence; at another, he denied his having murdered
his father, saying it was an old Jew and a cheat whom he had
killed."
This fretting canker of the soul also marked the life of poor
Collins, whose existence was but one continued scene of mental
agony
" He pass'd in maddening pain life's fev'rish dream,
While rays of genius only served to show
The thickening horror, and exalt his woe."
One fertile source of aberration may be in painful contrast?the
wounds of pride and vanity, the failure of that fame which genius
has fondly believed would be his guerdon, or that he cannot realize
his ideal paradise; then, lured by an ignis fatuus, he often flies from
the society of men to solitude, which feeds the smouldering flame
NO. VI. u
286 THE INSANITY OF MEN Oi' GENIUS.
of his discontent, and, in the end, converts him into an amiable
misanthrope?" Homo solns ant Dens aut demon." To this, tsedium
vita? soon succeeds,?its climax, suicide. This was the course to fate
pursued by the ingenious author of " Lacon," and, alas! by many
others.
Haydon was another of those gifted beings who was maddened
by neglect: he had chalked out to himself a course of study in his
art which was unpopular, or unfashionable, and, unhappily, he was
endowed with a consummate conceit of his own exalted powers.
He first wondered at, and deplored the errors of the public taste in
not admiring him; and then, subdued by neglect and want, penned
some wild sentences, painfully illustrative of the mad agony of his
mind, and died by his own hand. It is probable that the etiology
of suicide may depend much on the acuteness of sensibility; Cliat-
terton and Haydon destroyed themselves under its influence. Had
the minds of many other sons of genius been equally sensitive, or
had their sensitiveness not been constantly drowned in oblivion by
excesses, perhaps they might have done the same.
There is sometimes, however, a sort of safety-valve unexpectedly
opened; when genius hits on, or searches for, an illustration of his
own condition, or is impelled to work out his feeling.
One hypochondriac was in some dilemma regarding the author
from whom he was about to quote a passage on the subject of suicide,
and in searching for the lines, forgot his pistol.
Kotzebue, once in a state of melancholy, contemplated suicide;
but this mad impulse was diverted to his pen, and hence the com-
position of his " Misanthropy and Repentance," (" The Stranger.")
When we recollect even the transient effects of emotion during
composition, lio\r deeply do we sympathize with these victims of self-
immolation. We may allude to the "paroxysms and floods of tears,"
and the " weeping and raving" of Alfieri; the " head burning and
face flushing " of Button; the hysterical respiration, the " rapid fire
colouring the face" of Madame Roland; the " violent tumult of
nerves" of Metastasio; these paroxysms are but a degree of that
furor which inspired the mad pythoness of Yirgil.
" Her colour changed, her face was not the same,
And hollow groans from her deep spirit came.
Her hair stood up ; convulsive rage possessed
Her trembling limbs and heaved her lab'ring breast."
Yet it was often during such paroxysms that the muse of Byron was
most propitious; even in his tertian ague, when the fit was on him,
and he was delirious, Count Guiccioli informs us he composed some
THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS. 287
excellent verses. As if frenzy was as essential to qualify for a com-
mand of the Muses, as an Elizabethan Admiral said it was for the
command of a fleet. Well might Machiavel forbid princes to study
deeply, if such be the results.
It is not only intense devotion to science and literature which
leads to acute mental maladies. Those minds which are constantly
engaged in the collisions and jealousies of a political arena, are oft
seen to fail in the struggle. Pitt, Fox, Canning, died in the meri-
dian of life?Liverpool became apoplectic and imbecile?Whitbread
?Romilly?Londonderry?Calcraft?became their own executioners;
not like the Roman stoic, glorifying in the commission of suicide,
as an exalted virtue, but in the thraldom of a mind diseased?under
the dominion of frenzy.
We have elsewhere commented on the lethal influence of black
blood on the brain. In one of these sad cases, the neglect of this
unhappy condition was proved; for the suicide, after opening his
artery, was discovered in the act of stuffing the wound with a
corner of a napkin; the haemorrhage had partially relieved the
frenzied excitement in the brain.
Dryden was more wise. Reflecting, we suppose, on the hyper-
semic brain under deep study, he was wont to let blood, and in fact,
go into brief training, ere he set himself to any great work. How
strange a contrast to the custom of Ben Jonson, who, as Aubrey
states, " would many times exceede in drinke. Canarie was his be-
loved liquor: then he would tumble home to bed; and when he had
thoroughly perspired, then to study."
The acute malady of the brain, phrenitis or frenzy, in its varied
degrees, is but an excess of those conditions on which Ave have been
commenting. Its milder forms may gradually subside?in some
brains it may induce exhaustion, in others, structural change.
Of this distressing malady, Ave may observe several phases. The
signs of fever may be slight or severe. In many cases, Ave ob-
serve that exaltation of the senses, so constantly dependent on
increased action or excitement of the brain?from its undue circu-
lation of scarlet blood. Thus Ave have hyperesthesia of the skin,
and especially morbid acuteness of the sense of hearing, not only
indicated by confused sound, as tinnitus aurium, but by the faculty
of recognising very remote undulations. Dr. T. Thomson, Avhile la-
bouring under a febrile attack, could distinctly hear the conversation
of persons in the basement of his house, although be lodged in one
of its upper rooms. In some, life passes in a state of dreamy
slumber. From Tissot, Ave glean tlie story of many a child of genius
288 THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS.
whose mind has been kept in this state of coma vigil, even for many-
months. Boerliave informs us that after a deep study, he did not
sleep for a period of six weeks. Pope,, after a similar absorption of
mind, lay in a state of protracted mental prostration; and Smollett,
in a condition of half-dreaming wakefulness for the period of half a
year. Zimmerman, in his " Experience in Physic," thus records the
apposite case of a Swiss student.
" A young gentleman gave himself wholly up to the intense study
of metaphysics. In a short time he began to experience an inertness
of mind, which he endeavoured to shake off by renewed efforts of
application. This increased the complaint, and he redoubled his
exertions. This kind of contest lasted six months, during which the
disease increased so fast that both body and mind suffered from it.
The health of the body was soon restored by proper remedies, but
the mind and senses became gradually more and more impaired,
until they at last were subjugated by a complete stupor. Without
being blind he appeared not to see; without being deaf he seemed
not to hear; without being dumb he did not speak. In other
respects he slept, drank, ate without relish and without aversion,
without asking to eat or without refusing to do so. He was deemed
incurable, and all remedies were laid aside: this state continued a
whole year. At the end of this time some one read a letter to him
with a very loud voice; he was agitated, and emitted a murmuring
complaint, and applied his hand to his ear. This was taken notice
of, and the person read still louder. He then gave a cry, and ex-
hibited signs of the most acute suffering. The experiment was again
tried, and his hearing was re-established by pain. Every other sense
was successively excited on a similar principle, and in proportion as
lie regained the use of them, the stupidity appeared to be diminished;
but the prostration of strength which followed, and the pain he sus-
tained, brought him to the brink of the grave. At last, nature,
without the aid of medicine, gained a complete victory. He re-
covered his wonted powers, and is, at this day, one of our first
philosophers."
Tissot (Sur la Sante de Gens des Lcttres) thus writes: " Quiconque
a pense fortement une fois dans sa vie, a fait cette experience sur
soi-meme, et il n'y a point d'homme de lettres qui ne soit sorti plu-
sieurs fois de son cabinet avec un violent mal de tete et beaucoup de
clialeur dans cette partie," &c.
It is, indeed, melancholy to reflect on the intense and enduring
labour of the brain-workers long after severe lieadacli has warned
them to lay down the pen. In bodily exercise we commonly obey
THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS. 289
the dictates of sensation; when fatigued, we vest or repose. But
even where congestion has been induced in the brain, and a state of
indirect debility has ensued, avc allow?nay, Ave urge the brain to
labour on to its OAvn severe detriment and the derangement of every
function of the body.
All this points most emphatically to the Avisdom, nay, the duty, of
periodicity, or alternation, of labour and repose. The strong muscle
or brain may easily recover its suspended poAver or energy after a
judiciously apportioned labour; like Antseus, it may spring up from
its depression in all its pristine vigour. But the asthenia of the
Aveak brain is not so simple a state; thus, Avliile Johnson grappled
Avitli and conquered his malady, the efforts of CoAvper and Collins
ended in a settled melancholy. After the gigantic labours of Burton,
the author of " The Anatomy of Melancholy" became the impressive
and painful illustration of his oavh prolific subject, as we especially
learn from the Latin epitaph 011 his monument in St. Friedeswiede's
at Oxford. In some of our burlesque Avriters and actors is often
Avitnesscd this asthenia of mind, this contrast of grave and gay, in
the closet and in the Avorld. Poor Hood, Avhose facetne kept the
reading classes in a giggle, Avas himself reserved and silent in society.
Liston and Grimaldi Averc melancholy men; and the story of the
French harlequin is, beyond all others, deeply interesting. His pri-
vate moments Avere darkly sliadoAved by intense hypochondriasis,
and he consulted a learned physician on his case. The doctor, after
his investigation, told him that he kneAv of only one remedy for his
disorder, and that Avas to see the tricks of Carlini on the stage.
The patient instantly burst forth Avitli this piteous exclamation,
" Alas! Alas! I am Carlini."
Depression, asthenia, apathy, even oblivion, must then folloAV
excitement as darkness does light, and thus Ave so often have extremes
of psychological manifestations. Great sinners become devout saints
?Unitarians, if they change their creed, Papists?and hence the
laborious intellect so often sinks into a state of abject idiocy, the
lowest grade of intellectual being?that
" Last sccne of all,
That ends this strange, eventful history,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything."
As the slightest and earliest form of senile imbecility is loss of
memory, so also is the primal indication of AA'aning intellect, as
memory is a faculty Avliich seems to require an entire integrity of
brain for its play.
290 THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS.
" Bring me to the test, (says Hamlet,)
And I the matter will re-word; which madness
Would gambol from."
Thus, the suspicion of "Walter Scott of his failing power was first
excited by his complete forgetfulness, want of recognition, of one of
his own songs, at Lord Ellesmere's, and even the Muses, who are
the "daughters of Memory," forsook him. And yet how impressive,
when all around was dark, the triumph of thoughts of heaven over
those of earth?may we write, of his flitting soul over his intellect
?his genius was gone for ever, but the soul, ere it parted, whis-
pered some words like these, as a parting sentiment to Lockhart:?
" My dear, be good, be virtuous?that alone will make you happy
here." And it were well if genius would take a hint from this
dwindling of its creative power: yet Scott, though he confessed his
last compositions " smelt of the apoplexy," still wrote on, each suc-
ceeding work more and more failing in its style and its conceptions.
Byron, on the contrary, " burned out quickly," and therefore lie
died in the zenith of his literary glory.
In glancing at Scott's latter works, the pathologist may form a
shrewd guess at the progress of that flaccid degeneration of tubular
neurine, which probably began with his reverses, kept pace with his
wondrous toil to liquidate his debts, and ended in imbecility. Yet
the early memory of Scott was wonderful, and composition scarcely
deserved the name of effort. It may perchance somewhat detract
from his originality, but memory was the foundation pillar of his
genius, so richly was his mind, like that of Samuel Johnson and
John Hunter, stored with literary treasure.
The brains of Scott, and of him whom, though at a distance, he
resembled more than any other in universality of genius, our own
resplendent Sliakspeare, would probably, under happier circumstances,
have indicated a green old age; but Walter Scott was living, and
William Sliakspeare, although so few knew it, died in the meridian
of his splendour, of a foolish excess, as we gather from the MS.
Diary of Mr. Ward, of Stratford, who was intimate with Sliak-
speare's associates?the Lucys, the Cloptons, and the Coombes, and
wrote his diary, now in the library of the Medical Society of London,
some 40 years after Sliakspeare's death. In this we read the fol-
lowing passage:?" Shakespear, Drayton, and Ben Jonson had a merry
meeting, and, it seems, drank too hard, for Shakespear died of a
feavour there contracted.''
In the brains of imbecility resulting from mental labour, we almost
always discover disorganisation. In that of Swift there were both
THE INSANITY OF MEN OF GENIUS. 291
ramollissemcnt and effusion. Of tlic etiology, however, of this
splendid lunatic, there are so many discrepant conjectures, that we
forbear an analysis of his aberration. If, however, anything can
teach us humility, it is to see the possessor of so line a genius be-
come in the end
" A driveller and a show."
It anything can prove, not only the divine nature of the immortal
soul, it is its intimate and essential blending with an organ ere it
can afford us the slightest manifestation of its existence or its
reality: it is that so pure, so divine an essence, should seem to be in so
abject a state when its organ is rendered unfit for its earthly abode.
Who can believe that mind is the mere result, the consequence of
organization, when he sees intellect so prostrate and debased? Who
can doubt that it is the spirit only, as it speaks to us through the
brain, when he sees the amiable Beattie thus express his dread:
" A deep gloom hangs upon me and disables all my faculties, and
thoughts so strange sometimes occur to me, as to make me fear that
I am not, as Lear says, in my perfect mind;" or, especially, when he
sees the feelings and the moods of the immaterial essence so
changed in a few seconds by the repletion of a feast1 Who can believe,
also, that the soul itself and not its earthly organ is diseased, when
reflection must directly whisper liini that he is thus sapping the very
foundation of the Christian's creed?
No, the insanity of genius is one of the many awful proofs of
immortality; the unfettered spirit, that through its organ once
moved the lips and pen to speak or write the syllables which still
delight mankind, is unchanged?unchangeable; but the phenomena
which our senses perceive, both of intellect and madness, are the
result of health 01* disease in that structure, by its emancipation from
which, the intellectual, yet tainted mind, becomes the pure immortal
soul.
