Supposed Demoniacal Possession
================================

462

[The following article was placed in our hands by the author him-
self for publication. We have endeavoured to establish, to the
writer's satisfaction, that he has formed an erroneous notion of the
imaginary influence exercised over him. It has been our object to
prove to him that he has been labouring under an illusion, the result
of a disturbed condition of the functions of the brain and nervous
system. It is difficult, however, to remove the impression that the
writer lias, that he is the subject of demoniacal agencies. We have
had the pleasure of seeing the party on several occasions, and on all
other points he appears to be a rational, sensible, and intelligent
man. We print the history of his own sensations without the
slightest alteration of our own. It will be of interest to the psycho-
logical philosopher. The author has promised to give us a further
history of his life in connexion with his " illusions," as we designate
them. If he so favour us, the article will appear in the next
number of the journal.?Editor.]
To the Editor of the " Journal of Psychological Medicine
Sir,?It was my intention, some time since, to write a short
account of the sufferings I had experienced, for several years past,
from the possession of evil spirits; but in consequence of having
been constantly pitied or smiled at, and having met with 110 one
who would sympathize with me, whenever I broached such a notion,
and instanced myself as a proof of the existence of such spirits, I
had nearly forsaken my resolution, until I found that the question,
whether demoniacal possession ceased or not at the period of our
blessed Lord's ascension, had really become a matter of importance
and doubt in the church.
Unacquainted as I am Avitli theological discussions, and wholly
unused to argumentative composition, I am at a loss in what manner
to set about an explanation on the subject required. May I trust
that by commencing with a slight sketch of my life, rendering some
detail of the affliction 1 have undergone, with the authority of the
New Testament, I may create the thought and establish the impres-
sion that even at this time the visitation of mortals by evil spirits is
still permitted by the Most High.
I am induced to enter into a narrative of my own life and feelings,
in order to show that I am not a person likely to be influenced by
superstition or bigotry; and by thus developing myself, I hope to
gain the confidence and conviction of the reader, although to me it
is a disagreeable task to be egotistic.
I was born in the East, my grandfather and father both being
officers of some note in the Company's service, and was brought by
SUPPOSED DEMONIACAL POSSESSION. 463
my parents to England for tlie customary purpose of education, and
on their return to India was left by them here, under the charge of
a brother officer of my grandfather, who was then retiring from the
service. He was a very enlightened and good man, and albeit a
Roman Catholic, brought me up to the religion of my parents,
which was that of the Established Church. My father had, however,
I believe, previously to his entrance into the army, belonged, as did
most of his relations and connexions, to the Society of Friends.
Whilst I remained with my guardian, the only book he placed in
my hands on religious topics was the Bible, from which he said I
ought to be able to form my own religion, irrespective of the tenets
of any sect. He would not hold any theological arguments with
me; but whatever simple explanations I required, he was ready to
give, without advancing his own Roman-catholic doctrines.
My father having died in India shortly after his return there,
before I was eight years old, and my mother continuing to reside
there, I remained under the sole care of my guardian during my
minority, in the course of which I was placed at several good schools
in the neighbourhood of the metropolis, where I obtained what little
learning I am possessed of.
Expecting to get an appointment in the Indian army, and having
been disappointed in consequence of my hue, and the prejudice then
entertained by the government to native officers, I chose a liberal
profession, and at an early age was declared competent to follow it,
which, as my mother was then still in India, I intended to enter
into there; but on account of her return to England, relinquished
such idea, and commenced business in this country, which, having
carried on for some years Avitli success, induced me to marry, and I
was blessed with a good partner and several fine children. The
profits from my profession still continuing on the increase, I entered
into some money speculations, which caused me a little anxiety and
some pecuniary embarrassment, but I retained all my usual buoyancy
of spirit .
It was then, whilst taking a quiet walk one evening, far from the
busy hum of men, about five years since, I heard the sound of voices
near me, speaking of me. I looked in every direction, but could
not discover any one; I got over some banks, thinking that, pro-
bably, the persons might have been concealed from view by them;
but no human creatures were there. I walked away from the spot,
still the voices pursued me. I mixed with the thickest of the throng
in the metropolis; the voices still continued to haunt me, and the
words then uttered were?"Who is he??do you know who he is1?"
The response was?" He is Satan's own." These words seemed
continuously to proceed from the persons I passed. I crossed and
recrossed the bridges; still the same voices folloAved me. Every
one appeared to ask the same or a like question, and there was a
similar reply. Other queries and answers succeeded these, relating
to my walking?for my pace was very rapid, as I trusted to escape
h h 2
404 SUPPOSED DEMONIACAL POSSESSION.
the notice or recognition of the passers-by; bnt the " Devil's Own"
was either whispered or shouted to me, apparently by almost every
one; and those from whom the sounds did not emanate, appeared
hastily to get out of my way, or, in my imagination, shrunk from
me with looks expressive of surprise. No doubt, however, that
my strides were those of a possessed person, and caused those I met
or overtook to make ample space for me.
The whole night did I thus perambulate London and its environs,
occasionally dozing as I stood still for a few minutes; and in this
manner I twice accomplished the circuit of the great city, vainly
hoping that daylight would end my illusion. Such hope was, indeed,
vain, and I must mention, that not merely the " devil's own" was
sounded in my ears, but observations and conversations relating to
me incessantly occurred. Yet was I perfectly in my senses. I went
to the place in which the sounds first reached me, and examined it
and the neighbourhood minutely; of course I could not discover
any human power to account for them. I then began to think of
animal magnetism; it was a subject on which I had thought little
before, but not being able in any other Avay to fathom the mystery,
the consideration of it and its effects occupied my mind, and I
reasoned that I might have been magnetized by a nautical compass,
which had belonged to my father, and that I had constantly carried
about me for a considerable length of time. The voices loudly and
clamorously spoke of all my misdeeds, and taxed me with sins of
which I had not been guilty, and I was dared to meet the parties who
charged me with such and with other crimes. I did, accordingly, go
to a friend of mine, who is now dead, and told him how I had been
affected, and that I wished him to be present to hear the voices, if
he could, and the charges to be made against me, which I was
anxious to deny, or to admit, as the circumstances had been.
Several voices then made various accusations against me, and I
appeared to be put on a regular trial. I replied to the charges by
my thoughts, without speaking, but occasionally my tongue could
not refrain from moving within my lips to express my thoughts,
without, however, giving utterance to them. One of the voices was
remarkably clear and loud. It appeared to be that of a being of
authority in conversation with another, and although slightly
favourable in his expressions of my good conduct throughout life,
yet strong and severe were his animadversions on my bad thoughts
and actions; and here everything I had said, or done, or omitted
was elucidated instantly; hidden motives, and thoughts, and actions,
were unravelled, to my great astonishment, and my heart and brain
seemed completely laid open. All was written down, or directed
so to be, and the next day was appointed for a further examination.
I asked my friend repeatedly during this apparent trial, if he heard
any voices. He told me he did not. I mentioned to him what was
now and then said to me, and of me. I smiled at myself, for I knew
I was only, in a room, and that it was impossible foi' any worldly
SUPPOSED DEMONIACAL POSSESSION. 4G5
being to speak or to communicate with me except my friend. I
looked at him?lie was deeply engaged in writing: could there he
any ventriloquism in my case ? I knew that my friend was not thus
gifted. Besides, the voices were with me before I saw him that day.
What could have occasioned the sensation of sound I had experienced 1
?the direct appeal to my heart and brain 1 Iwas entirely in my senses,
and reasoned on the absurdity of my harbouring any opinion contrary
to my own received notion of the ordinary laws of nature. I began
to think of mesmerism?of clairvoyance. I had been sceptical on
these subjects. Could I have been mesmerised 1 How long would
the mesmeric symptoms last? I had a strong mind?how, then, could
I have been affected by any one 1 The more I thought, the less
could I account for the extraordinary ordeal to which I was subjected.
I did not believe in evil spirits. What I had read in the Testament
relating to evil spirits, I had always construed as having reference to
madness or derangement of intellect, that had been cured by our
Saviour. I did not believe in the commonly received notions of hell
?fire and flames had no terrors for me, nor have they now. The
torment that I considered awaited us after judgment, was the sting of
our own consciences?the reflection that we were justly debarred
from the presence of God?the constant remembrance of our misdeeds
?the bitterest, the most poignant remorse.
To return. After this seeming trial, the remainder of which I told
my friend would be deferred till the morrow, when I would see him
again, I left him. The voices still continued to follow me. That
night I also walked about, for I did not wish to return home with
the words, " The Devil's Own," written, as it almost appeared to me,
on my back, or with the sounds of those words preceding me, or
announcing me to every one.
I did not, nor do I put any faith in fatality. I have always been
in the habit of considering, that man would be an irresponsible
being in connexion with fate?that if he were fated or obliged to do
any act, he would certainly not be answerable or accountable for it,
and for this reason I was an advocate for free will. This did not, of
course, exclude the notion of the predisposing gift of grace influencing
us towards what was good and holy; but it would still leave us free
thought and liberty in our actions. My mind now, however, felt
fettered, contrary to my will?my thoughts were carried into channels
that I not only did not desire, but that I studiously and with all the
energy in my power, endeavoured to prevent them rushing into the
stream of. I appeared in the grasp of superior beings.
The next day I went prepared for another examination, but I was
not again put on my trial. The parties seemed pai'tly satisfied with
my mental engagement of compensation, as far as I had the ability, of
any persons I might have injured in thought, word, or deed. My
friend then induced me to lie down to compose myself. I returned
home. Still the voices followed me, and imagination can but slightly
picture the constant wearying sounds of remarks on me?speeches to
466 SUPPOSED DEMONIACAL POSSESSION.
me?alternately on my actions and thoughts, bringing all that I ever
did, or said, or thought to recollection. In the day-time I did not
feel the annoyance so much, on account of the variety of things
and persons I saw, and the occupation I had; but in the stillness of
night, the torments I endured were unutterable?indescribable. . The
hellish sounds; the dreadful impieties that were spoken of?that
were foisted on me; the horrible exclamations and imprecations
which I distinctly heard; the fiendish crimes proposed?were beyond
conception; were such as man, and much more a Christian, would
shudder at the bare mention of. Day after day, night after night,
was I subjected to this visitation, not at intervals, but continually;
indeed, each moment of my life was embittered by these sounds; and
the only respite I had, was when nature was wholly exhausted, and
two or three, or sometimes four, hours' repose were absolutely neces-
sary to renew my existence the following day, under such complicated
sufferings. When I attempted to pray, I could not, for the jeering,
and laughter, and impious reflections that were obtruded on me. I
tried to read, but could only get through a few short sentences at a
time, and those, owing to the voices, I could hardly retain in my
recollection. I asked forgiveness of those I had in any way injured;
I read the New Testament, but I seemed, almost insensibly to myself,
to omit all, except our Saviour's words, which I read aloud; these
gave me more consolation than anything else. I wished to have
prayers read to me, for I thought the evil spirits might quit me in
the presence of a clergyman. One kindly came; I could not pray,
and was obliged to tell him so. I felt that I could not kneel. His
prayers soothed me slightly, but the spirits remained.
For change of scene, and hoping I should get free from the voices,
I went twice to France. I tried the sea coast in England, and all
kinds of amusements, and also the effect of living very well, thinking,
my nerves might be improved by a still more generous regimen than
I had ever been accustomed to. These having no effect, I had
myself cupped, and entirely altered my diet, living chiefly on vege-
tables, and avoiding all fermented liquors. Nothing, however, made
any difference in my sensations. The sounds accompanied me every-
where, and I still continued the prey of the evil spirits. I could
plainly distinguish about seven voices; two of them struck me as
the voices of females; one of these sometimes spoke in over-soothing,
complaisant accents to me, but these were generally used only to
turn me to ridicule afterwards. The seven voices remained with me
many months, when three left me, and four continued to torment
me for nearly a couple of years; and since then I have only had
two, a male and female, who have gradually less and less annoyed
me for the past year. It is now five years and four months that I
have had this visitation from God, and although I have no faith in
dreams, yet most singularly I dreamt of my father's death about the
time it occurred, and I have not dreamt of him since, until the
beginning of this month of September, when I dreamt that I saw
SUPPOSED DEMONIACAL POSSESSION. 467
him interceding with God for the ceasing or suspension of my suffer-
ings from evil spirits, and, strange to say, I have not been troubled
by them since, although I still fancy I hear a slight buzzing in
my ears, from their having been so many years my constant
companions.
It would take me many hours to express all the machinations of
the evil spirits that have possessed me during so lengthened a period
as five years and upwards; but by the power and mercy of God,
through the merits of my Saviour, I was enabled to bear the suffer-
ings to which I was exposed, and also partly to resist the temptations
to which I was subjected; and, as I said before, I did not previously
believe in evil sjDirits, but since my affliction, I have had evidence in
my own person, fully sufficient to satisfy me, that they are permitted
to dwell in persons, or to attend persons in this world, for the pur-
pose of proving them and of tormenting them if they sin.
I can now readily understand the dreadful agony sustained by
those possessed of devils mentioned in the Holy Scripture, and I
would humbly venture to account for our Saviour's temptation in
the wilderness, when having fasted forty days and forty nights,
he was afterward an hungered, and the tempter came to him
and said, " If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones
be made bread." Here I have little doubt that the devil did not
really appear bodily, as it may be termed, but spiritually suggested
or said those words to our Saviour without making his appearance.
" Then the devil taketh our Saviour up into the lioly city, and
setteth him on a pinnacle of the temple." I do not know what the
Hebrew word that is translated " pinnacle" implies, but if, probably,
it was a summit of the temple that was ascendible, it could be
accounted for, as it would then be that, at the instigation of the
devil, our Saviour went into Jerusalem, and to this elevated part of
the temple. Again, it would be similar as regards our Saviour
being " carried up into an exceeding high mountain." The evil one,
in my own case, has never appeared to me. I have had wealth and
power offered by the evil spirits to me, if I Avould give myself up to
or worship Satan; but by the blessing of God, through the mediation
of my Saviour, I was enabled to resist the temptation.
That in the time of our Saviour evil spirits or devils were com-
mon there can be no question, as they are repeatedly referred to
throughout the writings of the evangelists. And there can be as
little doubt that devils or unclean spirits remained after our Saviour's
ascension, as they were cast out by the apostles, as appears in the
Acts, v. 16; viii. 7; xvi. 18; xix. 12. Not having quitted the world,
therefore, at the period of our Saviour's ascension, it is not by any
means probable that evil spirits deserted it on the death of the
apostles; and there is no reason to suppose that they are not now
still allowed to visit the earth. I was wholly an unbeliever in this
respect, but I now entertain no doubt on the subject, from my past
long-tried experience; and it strikes me that many persons who are
468 COMMISSIONS IN LUNACY.
considered and pronounced deranged, are really, instead, possessed
by evil spirits. It may be said that I may myself be in a state of
derangement. To this I would oppose these facts?that I do not
pretend to having had any ocular demonstration of any spirit, nor
have I had any distorted visions or ideas. I have not spoken inco-
herently, nor have I acted contrary to rationality; but I have always
been blessed with my senses, notwithstanding this heavy calamity of
evil possession, with which it has pleased God to visit me, and which
he has now been graciously pleased to remove from me. May all
others, similarly afflicted, experience, in like manner, the mercy and
goodness of God.?I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
