Letter to the Lord Chancellor From the Commissioners in Lunacy
==============================================================

G08
Jtfltscellfmeous.

WITH REFERENCE TO THEIR DUTIES AND PRACTICE, UNDER THE
ACT 8 AND 9 VICT., C. 100.
Office of Commissioners in Lunacy, 19, New-street, Spring-gardens,
July 4, 1849.
TO THE RIGHT HON. THE LORD HIGH CHANCELLOR.
My Lord?Under ordinary circumstances we should not, in this form,
trespass on your lordship's attention. But certain dicta and opinions which
have been recently attributed to the Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer,
relative to the law regulating the care and treatment of lunatics, and the
duties of the commissioners in that behalf, appear to us so seriously to
affect the interpretation and application of the law by which we are
governed, that we feel called upon by a sense of duty to point out in this
letter to your lordship, (under whose authority more immediately we have
the honour to act,) the great evils to society which would ensue from their
acceptance and adoption as a practical rule.
The dicta and opinions now referred to are stated to have fallen from
the Lord Chief Baron on the trial of a cause, Nottidge v. Ripley, at which
his lordship presided, and to have been enunciated, partly by way of com-
ment on the evidence of certain of the witnesses, and partly in his charge
to the jury.
They have attracted much public notice, in consequence of the very
singular circumstances and history of the case; they are not likely to be
subjected to further discussion or review before a higher legal tribunal;
and coming as they did from a judge who holds so eminent a position as
the Lord Chief Baron, it becomes peculiarly important that we should lose
no time in offering such observations thereon as appear to be called for by
the circumstances.
In the course of the trial (as reported in the newspapers of the 25th,
26th, and 27th of June last), the Chief Baron stated his opinion to be,
that no person ought to be confined in a lunatic establishment, unless
" dangerous to himself or othersand further, that the members of this
board were bound to liberate every person not thus dangerous. He also
expressed an opinion that a commission of lunacy ought to have been taken
out in the case, and intimated that, without such commission, the party
confining Miss Nottidge had not " the sanction of the law."
The dicta and opinions here ascribed to the Chief Baron are, we re-
spectfully submit, likely seriously to mislead the medical profession and
the public.
We would first refer your lordship to the act of Parliament under which
this commission is constituted, and by virtue of which persons of unsound
mind are legally placed and detained in licensed houses and other lunatic
establishments, for the treatment and cure of their disease.
It will be observed that the object of this act (8 and 9 Vict., c. 100) is
the " care and treatment of lunatics" generally, and that it is not limited
to any particular class of lunatics, whether dangerous or otherwise.
Indeed, the whcje tepour of this and of the County Asylums Act (8 and
LETTER TO THE LORD CHANCELLOR. 009
9 Vict., c. 126) shows that these acts extend to lunatics of every descrip-
tion, and that dangerous lunatics are only occasionally noticed, where it is
necessary to except and distinguish them from the rest. The act, as set
forth in its title, is, " An Act for the Regulation of the Care and Treat-
ment of Lunatics;" and the word "lunatic" is (s. 114) defined to mean
" every insane person and every person being an idiot or lunatic, or of un-
sound mind and in the statement annexed to the order authorizing the
patient's confinement, one point of inquiry is in these words :?" Whether
suicidal or dangerous to othersthereby denoting that patients who are
not included in that class are equally subjected to the provisions of the
act. The same observation applies to the County Asylums Act (8 and 9
Vict., c. 126), where (ss. 27 and 47, and schedule D) dangerous lunatics
are also referred to as forming part only of the body of insane persons,
whose confinement and treatment in lunatic asylums are thereby au-
thorised.
The object of these acts is not, as your lordship is aware, so much to
confine lunatics, as to restore to a healthy state of mind such of them as
are curable, and to afford comfort and protection to the rest. Amongst the
many persons confined as being lunatics or of unsound mind, those who
are manifestly dangerous, that is to say, those who, by some overt act,
have already proved themselves to be dangerous, are comparatively few
in number; the far more numerous classes consisting ox?1. Those who
are sent into lunatic establishments for the purpose of treatment, with a
view to the alleviation and cure of their malady ; 2. Those who, from disease
of mind, are incapable of self-government, and who therefore require, at
certain periods, (or perhaps generally,) the most careful supervision and
control ; and 3. Those who are incapable of taking care of themselves or
their affairs, and are likely, therefore, to sustain serious injury if left at
large and unprotected.
It may reasonably be asked, what would become of all those large classes
of the insane if set at large, in conformity with the Lord Chief Baron's
opinion ?
It is well known that all commissions of lunacy are founded, not on the
party being dangerous, but on the fact of his being insane, and incapable
of managing his own affairs ; and yet, every one who is found lunatic by
inquisition is placed under the care of a committee of his person, who
thereupon possesses the entire control over the lunatic, and may keep him
in confinement so long as the commission remains in force.
If, in practice, the class of insane persons placed in confinement were
limited to such as had previously exhibited some dangerous tendency, the
main purposes of the legislature, in the statutes now in force, would be
frustrated, and a most fearful hazard be incurred. For, inasmuch as the
tendency to danger first shows itself more frequently in the latter than in
the earlier stages of the disease, when alone such disease is likely to be
cured, a large proportion of patients of this class would be deprived of the
benefit of proper curative treatment until after they had placed either
themselves or other persons in peril, and had not improbably (owing to the
lapse of time) become themselves incurable.
Moreover, the difficulty of ascertaining whether one who is insane be
dangerous or not is exceedingly great, and, in some cases, can only be
determined after minute observation for a considerable time. It is the
general opinion of experienced persons, that whenever an insane delusion
exists, the patient can in no case be considered as otherwise than dan-
gerous, although the tendency may never have been actually exhibited by
overt acts or expressions ; and, in our own experience, \ye have known
NO. vill. S S
GIO LETTER TO THE LORD CHANCELLOR
patients whose disorder has appeared to have abated, and who have been
treated as harmless for a considerable time, but who, nevertheless, upon
some sudden and apparently unprovoked impulse, and without betraying
any preliminary. violence or irritation, have attempted, and in some
instances have effected, the destruction of themselves or others.
In the cases of monomaniacs, and patients suffering under religious and
other delusions, (not apparently tending to any dangerous result,) we
have known repeated instances of their attempting and committing self-
destruction, homicide, and acts of violence, owing to some imaginary sen-
tence of condemnation, or under the influence of some imaginary voice or
spirit.
In the majority of cases which come under the cognizance of the com-
missioners, they have little difficulty in satisfying themselves as to the
state of mind of the patient; but cases of nicety and difficulty occasionally
arise, exhibiting such peculiarities, and differing so decidedly in some
respects from all others, that the commissioners, in dealing with them, have
been unable to lay down any general rule or principle for their guidance.
In no case have they decided that opinions, however wild or extravagant,
which were common to any class or body of persons, either in reference to
religious belief or otherwise, constituted or amounted to insanity. And in
no case have they decided that a patient was insane because his symptoms
resembled, in a greater or less degree, those of other patients whom they
have previously known ; but they have considered each individual case as
depending upon its own special circumstances, and have formed their
judgment accordingly.
We now beg to address a few words to your lordship with respect to the
powers and duties of the members of this commission, a matter which
appears to have been much misunderstood.
Amongst the multifarious duties of the commissioners, one is, to dis-
charge patients when " detained without sufficient cause of the sufficiency
of the cause the commissioners are by law constituted the judges ; and they
endeavour to form the best judgment in their power in each particular
case, when the subject comes before them. Thus, if a patient be placed in
an asylum without just cause, without having been of unsound mind, the
commissioners are bound to discharge him. So, if a patient (originally a
fit subject for confinement) be recovered and restored to a sound state of
mind, the commissioners are obviously bound to discharge him, if the
person under whose care the patient is placed, or the relative who originally
authorized his confinement, (for upon these primaidly the duty devolves,)
has neglected to do so. But a person labouring under an insane delusion
is not detained without sufficient cause.
Under peculiar circumstances, where, after sufficient observation, a
patient, although of weak or unsound mind, appears to be perfectly harm-
less, the commissioners frequently promote his liberation, if he have a
comfortable home, or any friends disposed to receive and protect him and
his property from injury; but, where this is wanting, the commissioners do
not think themselves justified in removing the patient from the shelter of
an asylum, and leaving him at large and unprotected. They consider it
to be quite clear that they are not bound, as a general rule, to speculate
upon the chance that a patient, who, in their opinion, is still insane, will be
perfectly harmless if at large, and therefore to liberate him accordingly.
The person signing the order for a patient's confinement (generally a
relative or friend) not unfrequently, indeed, takes upon himself the re-
sponsibility of liberating a patient whilst still under a delusion, and before
recovery, and the commissioners have no right, and never attempt to inter-
FROM THE COMMISSIONERS IN LUNACY. Oil
fere. The consequence of the premature discharge of a lunatic patient,
however, is frequently a relapse, and should, as much as possible, he avoided.
Even with all the caution now exercised by the medical officers of asylums,
many of whom possess great experience, and have daily opportunities of
watching the process of recovery, it has been found necessary to re-admit,
within a short period, many patients whom they have discharged as re-
covered.
The power of liberation vested in the commissioners is one involving
great responsibility, and, in our judgment, ought to be exercised only after
grave consideration, and with much caution. Every person placed in con-
finement as a lunatic must pvimii facie be presumed to be insane. Before
a private patient can be legally detained in any house, there must exist an
order (signed by some friend or relative), two certificates from different
medical practitioners, who have each separately examined the patient, and
also a third certificate or statement from the medical officer of the establish-
ment, all expressing the condition of the individual as of unsound mind, and
a proper subject for confinement. It would argue great rashness and im-
prudence, to say the least, on our parts, to determine on the immediate, 01*
even the very speedy liberation of a person so certified, unless we had reason
to suppose that the certificates had been fraudulently obtained, or we were
strengthened in our own impressions by the opinion of the medical officers
having the care of the patient, that the confinement had from the first been
improper, or that the nature of the malady was such as is usually of short
duration, and that a perfect cure had been effected. Although, in a few
cases of acute mania, the disorder is sometimes of short duration, yet where
there exist actual delusions, the process of recovery (if ever it takes place)
is slow and gradual, and the question as to the probability of cure can
scarcely be determined satisfactorily until after a considerable period has
elapsed.
The opinion attributed to the Lord Chief Baron, that a commission is
necessary in all cases, in order to give the confinement the sanction of the
law, appears to call for some remark. It is hardly necessary to observe,
that proceedings by commission are, generally speaking, advisable only
where the insanity is likely to be of a permanent character, and the
property of the lunatic is of such a nature as to require them, and of an
amount adequate to meet the expense, always considerable, and, when the
commission is contested, frequently very large.
"Wherever a reasonable hope of recovery exists, and the income of the
lunatic can, in the meantime, be properly administered for his benefit
without a commission, the general practice, amongst the friends and
relatives of the insane is to avoid resorting to proceedings which entail un-
necessary cost?which, by the disclosures they occasion, are most painful
to the feelings of the family?and which, by the excitement they produce,
are sometimes injurious to the patient himself.
It is obvious that the finding of a jury is in no case essential, in order
legally to justify the confinement of a person of unsound mind. In fact,
out of 4028 private patients (many of them possessed of considerable
property), who were confined in asylums on the 1st of January, 1848,
only 245 had been found lunatic by inquisition.
To revert to the opinion stated to have been expressed by the Chief
Baron, that no person should be placed or detained in any lunatic asylum,
unless he be dangerous to himself or others,?upon this point it is ot vital
importance that no mistake or misconception should exist, and that every
medical man, who may be applied to for advice on the subject of lunacy,
and every relative and friend of any lunatic, as well as every magistrate
S S 2
012 LETTER TO THE LORD CHANCELLOR.
and parish officer, (each of whom may be called upon to act in cases of this
sort,) should know and be well assured, that according to law, any person
of unsound mind, whether he be pronounced dangerous or not, may legally
and properly be placed in a county asylum, lunatic hospital, or licensed
house, on the authority of the preliminary order and certificates prescribed
by the Acts 8 & 9 Vict. c. 100, or c. 126 (as the case may be.)
The order and certificates thus obtained show that the person mentioned
therein is either a lunatic, an idiot, or a person of unsound mind, and a
proper person to be confined, and fully justify all parties in the matter;
and they enable the proprietor or superintendent of any hospital or licensed
house to plead them in defence to any action, and are, in the words of the
statute, a justification for "taking, confining, detaining, or retaking" the
patient, (see 8 & 9 Vict. c. 100, s. 99.)
If all lunatics and persons of unsound mind, except such as had pre-
viously manifested a dangerous tendency, were to be excluded from the
care and treatment provided in lunatic establishments, sanctioned by law,
for the benefit of the whole class, the most lamentable consequences must
ensue.
In respect to pauper lunatics, it has already been the subject of almost
universal complaint, that the number of such lunatics has been multiplied,
and the country burdened to a prodigious amount, because the poorer class
of lunatics have been allowed to remain at large, or kept in workhouses,
deprived of that medical treatment which a lunatic establishment, properly
managed, is best calculated to afford, until their malady has become in-
curable.
The misery to lunatics' families, and the great cost to the various parishes
and counties, consequent on this course, it would be difficult to exagge-
rate.
In regard to private patients, if not placed for cure or care in some
lunatic establishment, they must be kept at home under every disadvantage
to themselves, and be the cause of great and unnecessary expense, and of
inexpressible annoyance to their families. The first, and an essential pro-
ceeding, with a view to cure, is, generally, to detach the patient from the
scenes and associations in the midst of which his disorder has arisen. If
he were to remain at home, this could not be effected ; the proper treat-
ment and accommodation could not be obtained, inasmuch as separate
apartments, separate attendants, and daily medical supervision, are neces-
sary?and these, in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, would be beyond
the means of the patient's family to afford. Again, the habits and general
conduct of patients under the influence of mental disease are frequently so
violent, and at times so offensive, that it would be to the last degree cruel
and unjust to expose the other members of the family to them; more
especially where there are children, whose minds might receive a shock,
and perhaps be incurably injured, by continually witnessing the paroxysms
or maniacal extravagances of a lunatic. Equally unjust would it be to
suffer the infirmities of the patient himself to be exposed to the gaze of all
the members of the household, and, in many cases, to the notice and com-
ments of the neighbourhood and of strangers. There are cases of insanity,
as your lordship is aware, in which the most distressing symptoms appear,
?in which the character of the individual for a time becomes altogether
distorted?his habits filthy?his expressions and general conduct disgust-
ing. There are also cases of females suffering under a form of mental dis-
order well known to the medical profession, in which, from disease, not
only the words, but the actions, also, of the patient become absolutely un-
controllable, where the original and real character is, for a time, altogether
PSYCHOLOGICAL FRAGMENTS. 613
subverted, and all modest restraint and decency are abandoned. The want
of moral control, indeed, is one of the most common symptoms and indica-
tions of insanity; and the actions and expressions of a large number of
patients, suffering, at certain periods, under maniacal excitement, are of
such a nature that it becomes an imperative duty to protect and shield
them from observation as much as possible. The privacy indispensable in
cases of this sort can only be properly afforded in houses adapted for the
purpose of receiving lunatics, who there, at least, are secluded from the
observation of all persons except those under whose care they are imme-
diately placed, and are generally exempted from that mechanical restraint
or coercion of the person, which, if they were confined at their own homes,
must frequently be inevitable.
There are cases, also, where the presence and example of the patient, if
at home, would probably lead to the most distressing and dangerous con-
sequences amongst other members of the family?more especially amongst
those of a sensitive and nervous temperament. These remarks respecting
private patients apply (as, indeed, is obvious) not merely to those who are
dangerous to themselves or others, but to all insane persons whatsoever,
of every class and character, including many who, so far as their acts are
concerned, might be denominated harmless.
Persons of unsound mind, therefore, whether dangerous or not, are
placed in lunatic establishments; some remain there after they are appa-
rently much relieved, because their disease is of a recurrent nature.
Others remain there, who, although labouring under insane delusions, are
apparently harmless, and generally well conducted, so long as they are
under proper control and supervision, but who exhibit their former insane
propensities and infirmities the moment that this control and supervision
are withdrawn. There are numerous cases, within our recollection, where
patients thus circumstanced have been taken out of lunatic establishments
upon trial, but who, after a short intercourse with the world, have again
exhibited maniacal excitement, or mental incapacity, and have, for the sake
of their own safety and welfare, been re-admitted.
We have felt it our duty to submit the foregoing observations to your
lordship, for the purpose of putting you in possession of our views and
opinions, as set forth in this letter, and of explaining to your lordship the
course which we have hitherto pursued, and which we feel bound to con-
tinue to pursue, in the exercise of the delicate and responsible functions
entrusted to us by the Legislature.
On behalf of the Commissioners in Lunacy.
Ashley, Chairman.
E. W. S. Lutwidge, Secretary.
