A Brief Notice of the Most Important Works and Memoirs on Psychology
 ===================================================================

Published Abroad During the Years 1846 AND 1847.
{Condensed, for the most part, from Amelung's Reports.)
Our object in the following pages is to give our readers a succinct
report of some of the most practically useful works on psychology that
have appeared on the Continent during the years 1845 and 1846; and
to afford those who have not the time or opportunity of examining the
great mass of French and German psychological literature, some idea
of its general character. We have purposely omitted all reference to
works already noticed in our Journal, and to such as treat of the con-
dition of the insane in this country, since the purpose we have in view,
as we have already implied, is, if possible, rather to guide the English
reader towards new sources of knowledge, than to refer to those with
which he is already familiar. By excluding all notices of the French,
and, more especially, German memoirs that treat of the psychological
literature of Great Britain, our task has been considerably lightened,
for the management of the insane adopted in the best of our public and
private asylums continues to serve as a model for the institutions of
other countries, and constitutes a very considerable portion of the
subjects treated of in the numerous works on psychology with which
the Continental press is continually teeming.
The first work to which we would refer is " A Manual of the
Pathology and Therapeutics of Mental Diseases, by Dr. Schnitzer," * in
which the author gives a general summary of the opinions and observa-
tions of a very large number of ancient and modern writers on psy-
chology, and as such it constitutes a very useful compendium for the
Student or practical physician, who would acquaint himself with the
works that have from time to time appeared in relation to mental
diseases. The author does not, however, furnish us with any new facts
or original views; and the value of his work is simply, as we have
already remarked, that of being a practical compendium of the labours
of others.
The next work on our list,+ by Dr. L. F. Calmeil, physician to the
* Handbuch der Pathologie und Therapie der Geisteskrankheiten. Fur praktische
Aerzte und Studirende bearbeitet von Dr. A. Schnitzer. Leipzig.
+ De la folie, consideree sous le point de vue pathologique, philosophique, his -
torique et judiciaire, depuis la renaissance des sciences en Europe jusqu'au dix-
neuvieme siecle; descriptions des grandes epidemies de delire simple ou complique
qui ont atteint les populations d'autrefois, et regne dans les monasteres. Expose
134
WORKS AND MEMOIRS ON GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY. 135
Charenton, is a most interesting historical and judicial report of the
facts recorded in various public archives, and in authentic private
documents, from the fifteenth to the close of the eighteenth century, in
relation to dsemonomania, lycantliropia, chorea epidemica, monomania
religiosa, Arc. On reading these curious records of the benighted
condition of former ages, we scarcely know whether we should be more
astonished at the superstition and fanaticism which proved such
constant and fruitful sources of a disordered imagination (closely akin
to actual insanity, and based probably on a tendency to convulsive and
epileptic attacks, or on chronic affections of the whole nervous system);
or at the ignorance and bigotry of physicians and judges, who suffered
those afflicted with such diseases to expiate their miseries at the gibbet
or the stake. In looking back with honest pride at the advance we
have made over former times in the treatment of mental diseases, we
must not, however, forget that it behoves us to be moderate in our
rejoicings, as long as the history of psychology continues to record
such instances of fanaticism as those which occurred some years since
in Switzerland, those of the incubus disease in France, the epidemic
dsemonomania which prevailed a short time since in Sweden and Russia
??besides many others witnessed even occasionally in this country, no
less than elsewhere.
M. Pidoux, in a review of M. Brierre de Boismont's work, " On the
Acute Delirium of the Insane,"* expresses the opinion that delirium may
be associated (as a nervous cerebral affection) with chronic insanity, no
less than with other diseases; as, for instance, meningitis, typhus, &c.
M. Pidoux, in the first place, regards delirium as a peculiar affection of
the brain, more especially of the organs by which thought is regulated,
and does not consider it identical with, or dependent upon, inflammation,
loss of blood, or any other known cerebral diseases. He, however, looks
upon delirium more as a symptom than an actual disease.
In the "Annales med. psychol.," torn, vi., Nov. 1845,t we find an
useful report, by Morel, of the psychological journal literature of
Germany, from the older journals of Moritz, Reil, Kaissler, and Hoff-
bauer, to the latest psychological periodicals.
aes condemnations auxquelles la folie meconnue a souvent donne lieu. Par L. F.
Calmeil, Docteur en Medecine de la Faculte de Paris, Medecin de la Maison de
Charenton, &c. T. 2. Paris, 1845.
* De la folie, consideree comme maladie a l'occasion de l'ouvrage suivant: " Du
delire aigu observe dans les etablissements d'alitnes, par M. Brierre de Boismont,
&c. Par Pidoux. Journal de Med., par Trousseau. 1845. Dec.
+ La Pathologie inentale en Belgique, en Hollande, et en Allemagne. Des
Journaux de Psychiatrie en Allemagne. (An. med. psych., t. vi. Nov. 1845.)
]3G WORKS AND MEMOIRS ON GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY.
In a second memoir (Annales med. psychol., torn, vi., Jan. 1846,*)
Morel enters into a full description of tlie principal asylums of Italy; as
for instance, those at Venice, Milan, Genoa, Bologna, Ferrara, Florence,
Rome, Naples, and Palermo. This memoir, which evinces great acute-
ness of observation, and a sound critical spirit, will he read with much
interest. Although we learn from M. Morel's report, that the asylums
for the insane in Italy do not enjoy the same degree of careful super-
intendence manifested in the other charitable institutions of that
country, a general tendency towards improvement is yet everywhere
perceptible. We gather no new facts of practical importance from the
results of M. Morel's observation of the mode of treatment adopted by
the psychologists of Italy. In the insane asylunf for women at
Venice, the author found that, of the 1073 patients admitted between
the years 1837 and 1843, 215 suffered from pellagra. The institu-
tions at Ferrara and Bologna are very defective. That at Florence is
a fine roomy building. Amongst the patients, there were likewise
patients with pellagra from districts in the Apennines, where the people
do not live on maize.
At the fifth meeting of the Congress of Science, in Italy, four subjects
were proposed by the Medical Section:?
1. A classification of mental diseases: to be based on the facts
deduced from clinical observations, and pathological anatomy.
2. Whether, and how far, phrenology is able to further our know-
ledge of mental diseases 1
3. Whether, and how far, pathologico-anatomical changes can be
regarded as the cause or effect of mental diseases 1
4. What symptoms manifest themselves in different mental diseases,
which indicate a prophylactic, therapeutic, moral or physical mode of
treatment, and of what value are such symptoms 1
In a work intended as a reply to these questions,+ Professor Carlo
Speranza, former President of the Medical Section, enters into an
extended disquisition, the purport of which is to prove, that phrenology
has not been of use in furthering the study of mental diseases. The
third question is left as undecided as it was before ; and the fourth is
* La Pathologie mentale en Italie: lettre a Mons. le Docteur Ferrus. Coup-
d'ceil sur les principaux etablissements d'alienes. (Ann. Med. Psycho]., t. vii.
Jan. 1846.)
+ Riporta al Secondo quesito proposto dalla sezione medica del V. Congresso
Scientifico Ital;ano de Cav. Prof. Carlo Speranza, membro corrispondente di
illustri Academie et Societa scientifiche, gia Presidente della suddetta medica
sezione. (Giornale per servire ai Progressi della Pathologia et della Therapeutica,
t, x. lev. 2.)
WORKS AND MEMOIRS ON GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY. 137
treated in accordance with the present condition of psychological
science, but without any new views being advanced.
Leopold Turk's work * demands some notice, from the singular
views of the writer, who regards delirium as a purely nervous phe-
nomenon, occasioned by over-excitement of the cutaneous surface with
electricity. With the view of curing this affection, Turk recommends
the prolonged use of lukewarm baths, continued for days together;
having at the same time recourse to venesection, emetics, purgatives,
&c. By means of the employment of such baths, the author professes
to have cured four-fifths of all his patients.
Dr. C. W. Ideler,+ directing physician to the insane department of
the Charite Hospital at Berlin, attempts, with perhaps too plausible a
form of argument, and with too great scepticism, in reference to the
special investigations of anatomy, chemistry, and microscopy, to prove
that the salvation of psychology, generally and specially, is to be sought
in an anthropology; not such as we are accustomed to regard it,
but in the recognition of the influences exercised by all branches of human
pursuits combined, as theology, jurisprudence, medicine, and philosophy.
This, indeed, is a noble object for the attainment of the psychologist.
Engelken's work J is distinguished for the unprejudiced, rational
views it advances. In opposition to the majority of psychologists, the
author regards the prognosis of mental disease as less unfavourable
than that of many other chronic affections. We also differ from him
in this, and in the favourable character which he attaches to the
prognosis of puerperal insanity, which is often extremely difficult
of cure, and not unfrequently wholly incurable. As the superintendent
of a private institution, the author naturally gives the preference to
such establishments over public institutions. He is averse to all
coercive measures, and thinks that artifice is preferable to force in
inducing the patient to enter an asylum. His remarks on the duties
of the physician who undertakes the charge of the insane, are a mere
recapitulation of the views now so generally recognised on this subject.
We find, however, that his mode of treatment presents several novel
features. Thus, for instance, he adopts a modified form of water-cure ;
enveloping the patient in wet linen sheets, and applying cold moist
cataplasms to the abdomen, in different cases of convulsions; and,
* Memoire sur la Nature de la Folie, et sur le Traitement a lui opposer. Par
Leopold Turk. Paris. 1845.
+ Ueber das Verhaltniss der Seelenheilkunde zu ihren Hiilfswispenschaften, von
Dr. C. W . Ideler, Prof, der Med. und dirigirender Arztder Irrenabtheilung au der
Charite zu Berlin. (Allgemeine Zeitschrift fur Psychiatric, iii. B. 3 H. s. 394.)
J Beitrage zur Seelenheilkunde, von Dr. Fried. EDgelken, Director der Privat.
Heilanstalk zu Oberneuland bei Bremen. Bremen. 1846.
138 WORKS AND MEMOIRS ON GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY.
lastly, employs electricity, from which lie states that he has derived
much aid in cases of imbecility, erethism, nervous derangement,
and hysteria. Dr. Engelken is a great advocate for the use of
opium, not only in melancholia hysterica, but in all instances of ex-
treme irritability of the nervous system where there is erethism, and
even in many forms of mania. According to his views, this remedy
exercises an invigorating and exhilarating action on the brain and
mind. In Dr. Engelken's observations on the psychical treatment of
the insane, although we meet with no striking novelties, Ave are never-
theless forcibly impressed with the proofs of experience and profound
thought manifested by the author.
Dr. Michea's work on Hallucinations and Illusions, to which the
Royal Academy of Medecine at Paris* awarded its prize in 1846, is so
comprehensive, that it may be said to embrace almost all forms of in-
sanity. We do not agree with the author's views of delirium, which
he divides into three kinds, viz. delirium of the senses, of the ideas,
and of the passions ; the difference between delirium and insanity de-
pending mainly, according to his definition, on the longer or shorter
time during which either continues?delirium being converted into
insanity when the mind loses the power of recognising and controlling
its wanderings. In like manner we think that Dr. Michea, like
many other French physicians, gives too wide an extension to the idea
of hallucinations, under which it would appear that he comprehends
almost every form of ideas and conceptions. Thus, French writers
discover this symptom in two-thirds, or in half the whole number of
the insane; and Esquirol, even in as many as eighty in the hundred.
According to M. Michea himself, tJie number is five-eighths. The greater
number of these cases occur in monomania and general mania?fewer
in dementia, and fewer still in imbecility. We cannot take leave of
M. Michea's work without expressing our opinion of its being the
most complete treatise that has as yet appeared on this subject. It
bears ample testimony to the extended reading and the industry of the
author j and the examples advanced in illustration of his views are so
numerous as to be almost wearisome.
Next in order of succession comes Effenberger's memoir,t " On the
Present Condition of Psychology in England," to which, as our object
is here simply to show what has been done abroad during the last two
* Du delire des Sensations. Par C. F. Michea, Dr. en Medecine de la Faculte
de Paris. Ouvrage couronnee par l'Academie Royale de Medecine. Paris.
1846.
+ Der gegenwartige Zustand des Irrenwesens in England. Geschildert nach
Forbes Winslow, von Dr. Joseph Effenberger, K. K. Districts-Physiker zu Eruck
an der Leytba in Niederosterreicb. (Med. Jahrb. des ostr. Staats. Mai.)
WORKS AND MEMOIRS ON GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY. 139
years, we simply refer, for tlie purpose of observing, that Dr. Effen-
berger's work is based on a treatise by the editor of this Journal,
entitled, " An Act for the Regulation of the Cure and Treatment of
Lunatics. With Explanatory Notes and Comments."
The literature of Germany, notwithstanding the political disturbances
by which the country is shaken, affords evidence of the good results
yielded by the free discussion of the state and condition of the insane
at the meetings of the German scientific associations, and the phi-
lanthropic opinions, based on scientific principles, which have been ad-
vanced in Jessen's paper,* read before the Association at Kiel, offer a
pleasing contrast to the views entertained in the generation imme-
diately preceding our own.
In turning from general to sjiecial psychology, we must in the first
place notice the interesting work of Holinbaum,t " On Psychical Health
and Disease, in their various Transitions." The author follows the
almost imperceptible transitions of psychical health, through all the
varieties of eccentricities and peculiarities (so often manifested in the
every-day life of weak-minded persona and geniuses, in tall and in short
men, &c.), to folly or to mania. The author, Avliose own extensive ex-
perience and reading furnish him with numerous illustrations, seeks
the cause of mental derangement in some abnormal relations of the
body, and is further of opinion that such abnormal somatic relations
may be, in the first place, occasioned by a misdirection of the mind, by
evil habits, defective education, or the indulgence of the passions.
Erlenmeyer,| in a recent memoir, enters into the consideration of
the question, whether the blood of the insane presents any peculiar
abnormal properties; and whether certain diseases tend towards in-
sanity, or afford immunity against it. The conclusions arrived at are
only of a negative character. In the next place, the author considers
the different abnormal blood-erases in the insane?viz., the fibrinous, the
venous, the serous, and the scorbutic. From the result of 304 dissec-
tions, made by the author, at the insane asylum at Prague, it would
* Ueber die in Beziehung auf Geistes-und Gemiithskranke herrschenden
Vorurtheile. (Vorgetragen in der allgemeinen Versamnilung der deutschen Natur-
forscher und Acrzte in Kiel am Montage den 21 Sept. 1846. Von Dr. P. Jessen,
(Allgem. Zeitschrift. fur Psycbiatrie, iv. Bd. 1. H.)
+ Psychiscbe Gesundheit und Irrensein in ihren Ubergiingen. Ein Versuch zur
niiheren Ergriindungzweifelhafter Seelenzustande, fur Criminalisten und Gericlits-
iirzte. (Von Dr. C. Hobnbaum. Berlin, 1845.)
+ Ueber das Blut der Irren. Von Dr. Erlenmeyer, erstem Assistenten au der
Irrenheilanstalt zu Siegburg. (Archiv. fur Physiologische Medicin, v. Jahrg.
s. 436, 684.)
140 WORKS AND MEMOIRS ON GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY.
appear that the fibrinous (tuberculous) erasis was the most frequent in
the insane (134 in 304). Different writers, however, advance such
different views regarding this question, that Ave seem scarcely able, in
the present day, to arrive at any very definite conclusion.
Fr. Nasse* attempts to define the local and immediate causes of the
various forms of mental derangement. According to his definitions,
high delirium is a morbidly excited sensibility of the cerebral organs,
which serve to give expression to the psychical emotions?low delirium
is a morbid obtuseness of the susceptibility of the brain?chronic
mania, an abnormal irritability of the brain, generally the result of a
morbid character of the blood?madness (fixed delusion), in a dimi-
nished susceptibility of the brain?folly (using the word in its original
sense of fatuity), is the result of a diminished power of mental activity
and vigour?and imbecility, psychical feebleness in its more highly
developed form. Nasse's work has been answered by a memoir, bear-
ing the same title,t from the pen of D. Focke, who endeavours, and
we think satisfactorily, to refute the views set forth by Nasse.
Bergmann, in a treatise on the derangements of mind arising from
disappointed affection,J makes the observation, that in persons (more
especially women) this species of mental alienation has generally been
preceded by a derangement in the somatic relations of the body, most
frequently by a morbid condition of the tissue of the lungs. He
further observes, that the organs of respiration are the first to suffer
by the psychical disturbance, and that death from pulmonary consump-
tion is a very frequent termination of such affections. The author, who
is distinguished for his profound anatomical researches, is of opinion,
that erotomania proceeds especially from the cerebellum, and physical
love from the organs of sense. The anatomical results appended at the
termination of the work, give evidence of the destructive influence
occasioned in the organism by moral agencies.
Among the works that have appeared on the Continent, within the
period of time included in our considerations, on the physical treat-
ment of the insane, we will in the first place refer to Dr. Weber's
memoir, on the effects of certain medicines on the disposition and
* Die Entscheidung iiber die Unheilbarkeit eines Irreseins. Von Fr. Nasse.
(Allg. Zeitsch. fur Psychiatrie, iii. 4 H. s. 589.)
+ Die Entsclieidung iiber die Unkeilbarkeit eines Irrenseins. Yon D. Focke,
zweitem Arzteder Irrenheilanstalt zu Siegburg. (Allgem. Zeitschr. fiir Psychiatrie,
iv. Bd. 2, H.)
J Bermerkungen iiber die durch getiiuschte Liebe erzeugte Seelenstorung. Von
Dr. G. H. Bergmann, Kgl Medicinaerath und Director der Irrenanstalt.
WORKS AND MEMOIRS ON GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY. 141
011 the sensorium,* in which he treats especially of the good effects
produced by agaricus muscarius, anacardium orientale, assafcetida, and
belladonna.
Osiandert gives several cases of cure of nymphomania by means of
tartar-emetic ointment, and the internal employment of camphor. The
latter remedy, given in clysters, was also found highly serviceable in
puerperal mania.
Gizzi, as we learn from the Gazette Medicale de Paris, has employed
helleborus niger with success in mania and melancholia. The remedy
was gradually increased from small doses, and in all cases, although
slow, the effect terminated in a perfect cure.
Professor Recli,J while he endeavours to establish the efficacy of
cold-water affusions, applied to the head, in cases of insanity, admits,
however, that these means ought to be practised with much caution,
and that they are counter-indicated in acute mania, hallucinations,
and other active affections of the brain. The author is opposed to
Leured's theory, which ascribes a moral influence to these means; and
inclines to the belief that they exercise an undoubted dynamic and
material effect.
We find that Aubanel, physician to the Insane Asylum at Marseilles,
has invented a bed for uncleanly insane patients, which practical expe-
rience has shown to be admirably adapted to the purposes for which it
is designed. It consists of a bedstead with high sides, forming a
species of trough, having a stout oak bottom, supplied with a grating
in the middle, somewhat hollowed out. Below the bottom there is a zinc
vessel, which pulls out like a drawer, and may be removed as often as
necessary, without in any way disturbing the patient. The bedding-
consists of finely chopped straw, covered with a sheet. This bedstead is
also furnished with a concave cover, having a grating and air-holes,
which may be fastened on at will, by means of hinges attached to the
sides of the bed.
The general statistical reports of the insane, in Germany and France,
afford ample evidence of the improvements, both in public and private
asylums, by which the last few years have been characterized in those
countries. Among the numerous works, memoirs, and reports that
Bermerkungen iiber die Wirkungen einiger Arzneimittel auf das Gemlith und
Sensorium. Yon Dr. Weber, in Hannover. (Zeitschrift fur die gesammte Medicin.
herausg. von F. W. Oppenheim.)
+ Glossen und Marginalien. (Zeitsch. fur die gesam. Med.) Von Oppenheim.
+ De la douche et des affusions d'eau froide sur la tete dans le traitement des
alienations mentales. Par le Professeur H. Rech, Medecin en chef de l'asile public
des alienes a Montpellier.
142 WORKS AND MEMOIRS ON GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY.
have been published in such rapid succession on this subject, we may
instance that of M. Cazenave,* which gives a general and compre-
hensive view of the progress made in France, in the treatment of the
insane, since the publication of the well-known edict of the 30th of
June, 1838.
We gather from an epistolary communication of Dr. Flemming,
that the asylum for the insane at Copenliagen+ is still in a very im-
perfect condition, and that the care and proper treatment of the insane
are much neglected throughout the whole of the Danish dominions.
Among the mass of statistical reports before us, referring simply to
some circumscribed locality, we would call attention to the admirable
memoir of Dr. G. H. Bergmann,;}: which besides the customary statis-
tical tables of the condition of the asylum for the insane at Hildesheim,
in the year 1845, enters into the general psychological consideration of
the nature of mental diseases generally, of the pathology of the cerebral
organs, with observations on epilepsy and phrenology, and on the in-
fluence of the weather on the insane.
Dr. Bergmann found that where there had existed a tendency to
suicide, a decidedly abnormal condition of the brain was made manifest
on dissection. In like manner, there were always morbid changes in
incurable cases of imbecility.
The author's definitions of the conjectured seat of the various species
of mental disease, although perhaps occasionally somewhat too fanciful
for our English mode of reasoning, are nevertheless extremely interest-
ing, and well worthy attentive consideration.
From a notice in the Annales Med. Psych.? of the statistics of in-
sanity in Canada, we learn the curious fact, that in Lower Canada the
number of idiots exceeds that of the insane threefold, whilst in Upper
Canada the numbers of the insane are considerably higher than those
of idiots. Can this preponderance of idiotcy, among the Lower
Canadians, arise from their Celt-like practice of subdividing the land,
and the consequent stationary habits of the people, and % their constant
intermarriages amongst their own kindred ?
* Rapport sur l'asile public des alienes de Basse-Pyrenees, par M. le Dr. Caze-
nave, Medecin Directeur. Pau, 1845.
+ Zeitschrift fur Psychiatrie, iii. Bd. 1, H. s. 181.
J Charakteristische Uebersicht der im Jahre, 1845, in die Heil-und Pflegeanstalt
zu Hildesheim aufgenommenen Seelengestorten, nebst soustigen die Psycho-
pathologie betreffrnden Erorterungen. Von Medicinalrath Dr. G. II. Bergmann.
(Hann. Ann. f. d. ges. Heilkunde, -vi. J. vi. H.)
? De la folie en Canada (Annales en Canada, Ann. Med. Psych. Juillet,
184G.)
SELECTIONS.
143
It appears from the report of Lillybridge,* tliat in a population of
20,000 Cherokees, there was not one affected by insanity.
In a statistical report of insanity in Norway, by Dr. Hoist,t we
find that in 1835, the whole number of the insane was 3576, of which
no fewer than 1698 were idiots. In the year 1845, the census showed
that the whole number had increased 1667, or about 64*8 per cent., so
that while, at the first-named census, there was 1 insane person to 550*7
inhabitants, at the present time there is 1 to 334*1; an increase that is
mainly ascribed to the increased consumption of brandy.
* Du peu de frequence de l'alienation mentale chez les Indiens
Africains. (Ann. Med. Psych. Juillet. 1846.) . ?
+ Ueber die Anzahl der Geisteslcranken, Blinden und au s um
*epen, im Jakre, 1835. Von Dr. F. Hoist. (Allg. Zeitch. f. Psychiatrie,
iv. Bd. 3, H.)
