Mental Epidemics
=================

De la Folie

221 Art. II.?, consideree sous le 'point de vue pathologique,
pldlosophique, historique, et judiciaire depuis la Renaissance des
Sciences en Europe jusqu?au Dix-neuvieme Steele; description des
grandes Epidemics de delire simple ou complique, qui ont atteint
les populations dautrefois, et regne dans les monasteres ; expose
des condamnations auxquelles la folie meconnue a souvent donne
lieu. Par L. F. Calmeil, Docteur en Medecine de la Faculty
de Paris, Medecin de la Maison des Alienes de Charenton,
Membre de la Legion d'Honneur. Paris. 2 Tom.

On Insanity, considered in a pathological, philosophical, historical>
and judicial point of view, from the Revival of the Sciences in
Europe to the Nineteenth Century ; a description of the great
epidemics, of simple or complicated insanity, which attached the
people in former times, and prevailed in the monasteries; with
an expose of the judgments ivhich unrecognised insanity has led
to.

By L. F. Calmeil, M.D., Physician to tlie Asylum at Cha-
renton, and Member of the Legion of Honour. Paris. 2 vols.
There are few studies so interesting- as the history of the great
epidemics which have afflicted the human mind. The scourges by
which the body is diseased, and whole regions of the earth laid waste
and desolate : plague, cholera, yellow fever, black death, and sweating
sickness have all their respective points of interest, and deservedly
engage the attention of the philosophical physician. Their causes,
characters, and effects have been as fully investigated as the progress
of science has hitherto permitted. Of the works of this character
which treat generally of epidemics, that of Hecker, on " The Epi-
demics of the Middle Ages," an English version of which has been
published by the Sydenham Society, is perhaps the best and the most
interesting. The disordered and diseased conditions of the human
mind, when occurring widely among the population, and leading to
extraordinary manifestations and aberrations of intellect and conduct,
although generally noticed by medical writers, have not hitherto been
treated of historically and philosophically. M. Calmeil, than whom, no
one was better fitted to be an historian, has assumed the Herculean
task, and performed it with an energy and skill, which must add
greatly to his reputation. Not content with describing the epidemics,
and displaying their prominent features, he has traced out their con-
nexion with disordered conditions of the mind, and has shown that
persons who were burnt, or otherwise executed for magic and other
offences, ought instead, if psychological science bad been sufficiently
advanced, to have been sent to lunatic asylums. We may rejoice tliat
we live at a time when the progress of science has stripped off the veil
that enshrouded and obscured the wanderings of the mind, which led
the great mass of mankind to consider their signs as indications of
dealings with the fiend, instead of, as they really were, the manifesta-
tions of disordered intellect, perverted by the condition of society,
??the overwhelming influence of a bigoted, narrow-minded priest-
hood, and the darkness of general ignorance. The insane in the
present time, no matter whether the hallucination refer to this or to
the invisible world?no matter whether the lunatic conceive himself
to be Caesar or Christ?stands in no danger of execution as a poli-
tical or religious offender. He stands aloof alike from the scaffold
and the stake, and the care of those Avho have him under control is
directed to clear and restore a disordered intellect, and prevent his
becoming an obstacle to the well-being of society, and not to render
him amenable to its laws. A few centuries ago, Irving would have
perished at the stake as a religious impostor. Thom, had he not been
slain by the soldiery, would have died on the scaffold or at the stake,
on the same pretence. Their insanity would not have been recognised.
We manage these things better now.

The first book of the work before us, which consists of one chapter
only, treats of " Insanity, its functional elements, and its principal
modes of manifestation in the simple and complicated states." This
is simply introductory, and need not detain us long. In it are de-
scribed the hallucinations of the different senses to which maniacs are
subjected, and their connexion in a great many cases ?with existing
morbid changes in the organs to which they are referred, explained.
The different causes and characters of insanity, together with their
origin in the perverted passions and feelings of humanity, also occupy
a considerable portion of this chapter. Great stress is laid on the
super-excitement of the organs of generation as a frequent cause of
insanity, evinced in the first instance by the extreme indulgence in
the passions connected with the functions of these organs, such as
inordinate, misplaced, or ill-regulated love, jealousy, &c. Numerous
cases are narrated, illustrative of this point. M. Calmeil thus sums
up the effects of hallucinations &c.:?

" The hallucinations, false sensations, erroneous ideas, false judg-
ments, the alienation of the moral faculties, the disorder of the will,
are among the principal elements of insanity. These functional
lesions sometimes succeed each other in the brain without any ap-
parent order, and as it were by chance; at others, they follow each
other with an incontestable regularity and sequence. We may
sometimes observe an almost logical affiliation between the diseased
sensations, tlie delirious ideas, and the different lesions of the in-
stinctive and moral faculties; in other cases, the connexion between
the different functional disorders does not appear precisely necessary;
but, as in a state of reason, an idea, a recollection, an emotion is
awakened under the influence of such or such a sensation, rather than
under the influence of such or such another, so, in delirium, the ex-
istence of certain morbid phenomena is often connected with that of
such or such a lesion, in preference to that of such or such another.
In the different species of monomania, we are able sometimes to
ascertain whether the derangement of the psychical faculties has
commenced by an absurd idea, by an illusion of the senses, by an
hallucination of the smell, sight, taste, hearing, or touch, by a vicious
super-excitement of the passions, by the alienation of some feeling;
in these diseases, we can equally be certain that not only the primi-
tive alienation leads to a certain number of others, but also that there
often exists a natural analogy between the phenomena which have
been noticed above, at the commencement, and those which have
afterwards aggravated the condition of the patient."
The concluding part of the chapter treats of idiocy, imbecility, the
complications of insanity, mania, monomania, partial delirium, theo-
mania, demonolatria, demonopathia, and zoanthropia?all forms of
insanity which have more or less prevailed in the world, and which,
in the antecedent centuries, raged epidemically, and led to the exer-
cise of the most revolting cruelties on their unhappy victims. M.
Calmeil's object in writing this preliminary sketch of the various
disorders and diseases affecting the human mind, has been to prepare
the reader, and enable him duly to appreciate the evidences of in-
sanity brought forward when narrating the histories of the great epi-
demics of insanity which comprise the greater part of this valuable
work. His account of hallucinations, and of the characters of in-
sanity, is exceedingly well written, and largely illustrated by a series
of instructive cases, evidently bearing on every part of the question.
True, they are isolated instances, but they are not on that account the
less valuable evidences in favour of the opinion that epidemic diseases,
showing similar features, may be traced to the same origin, in the
same way that an attack of intermittent fever occurring in London,
will differ in intensity from the same disease met with epidemically
in marshy districts.
The second book is devoted to the consideration of insanity in
the fifteenth century. It consists of two chapters, the first of which
treats of theories, and the second of the theomania of Jeanne d'Arc,
homicidal monomania, and pretended anthropophagia in the
Vaudois, the demonolatria of Dr Edeline, pretended anthropo-
phagia in Germany, and the demonopathia of the nuns of Cambrai.
It was not to be expected that, after the long reign of ignorance
and barbarism, the minds of men should be in a fit state to grapple
with the difficulties attendant on the solution of the question re-
specting diseases of the intellect. " It is evident that the explana-
tion of diseases of the understanding, of all the functional aberra-
tions connected with the nervous apparatus, is based on the ensemble
of anatomico - physiological, philosophical, and pathological data,
which can be rendered available only by the effects of a slow and suc-
cessive observation; and besides, mental pathology could not be at
once freed from the chains with which it had been loaded in the high
regions of metaphysics." Everything tended in these days to direct
the attention of all classes of society to the existence in the world,
and the direct communication of supernatural beings with the visible
inhabitants of this earth. The idea that active and intelligent beings
placed between God and man, between heaven and earth, were indis-
pensable as occasional causes, then occupied the first place in the
convictions of Christian doctors and metaphysicians. The conse-
quence was that monomaniacs were generally classed as heretics, the
disciples of Satan, and apostates. The Holy Scriptures, and the
oral and written traditions of the church, led men to conclude in the
still existing communications of angels and demons with men, and
events which would now be explained as the results of natural
causes, or as effects of disease, were then universally regarded as
evidences of demonolatria, and punished rigorously and fearfully, as
proofs of a falling oft' from the faith.

Insanity is apt to be tinctured by the religious belief, the philo-
sophical or superstitious ideas, and social prejudices which are prevalent
at the time among the people or nations; this varies even in the
same country, according to the character of political events, civil
commotions, the nature of literary productions, theoretical repre-
sentations, and also according to the bearing of industry, the arts
and sciences. The progress of science has caused many persons in
their hallucinations, to refer their feelings to the influence of elec-
tricity, balloons, burning glasses, the telegraph, air guns, and to the
effects of optical instruments. Many, since the opinions of Mesmer
were first broached, considered themselves persecuted by magnetizers
and somnambulists. Thus, in the fifteenth century, insanity bore
the impression of the superstitious ideas and theological doctrines
then in vogue, nor could it be otherwise, for these doctrines had
been brought forward and developed in the schools, taught in the
religious houses, explained to all the world from the pulpit, and
amply commented on to the faithful when in confession. The hal-
lucinations and false ideas of the insane had reference principally to
demons, angels, and supernatural beings, precisely because they were
familiar with these subjects, and because they had made a deep im-
pression on their imagination. They were thus led to consider
themselves as contemners of the true God, and apostles of the
liend. The atrocities of the inquisition greatly increased this ten-
dency, many being forced by torture to make such confessions, who
became afterwards victims at the stake. Thus ignorance and fanati-
cism, as they ever do, conduced greatly to the spread of insanity.
The insanity of Jeanne d'Arc is regarded by our author as an
instance of theomania, which acted by influencing her warlike
ardour, by communicating to her an extraordinary air of command,
and a great excitement (illumination) of the understanding, rather
than by falsifying the combination of the mind, and the rectitude of
her judgment. Jeanne was early noticed by her desire for con-
templation and melancholy. She rarely mingled in the sports of
her companions, and when she cullcd flowers, it was to adorn the
image of the Virgin, or of some other saint. The management of
horses and hard labour afforded her pleasure. The recital of
battles, and the woes of her country, which constantly formed the
topic of conversation among the villagers, moved her greatly; fre-
quent visions and secret ecstasies, favoured, doubtless, by the absence
of menstruation, seemed to fix her destiny. Frequent hallucinations
of sight and hearing commenced from her 13th year; when older,
she believed that St. Michael, Gabriel, St. Catherine, and St. Mar-
garet, visited her, and urged her on to the course she afterwards
adopted. In these statements she ever afterwards persisted. It is,
of course, certain that these personages never presented themselves
in reality to Jeanne ; like all other hallucinates, she was the dupe of
the state of fascination of her senses and her brain. It happened,
however, that in considering the errors of her imagination and judg-
ment as heavenly visions, she saved France, and gained immortal
reputation. The success that attended her, however, is no proof
that she was right in attaching faith to her visions. M. Calmeil in
no respect attempts to justify the cruelty that condemned her to
the stake; but he admits that, had she lived in private life, a similar
iate, in those days, would have awaited her, and the judges would
have condemned her to the stake, after hearing her avowals, and
having heard the wonders she had executed after having predicted
them. Her fate, therefore, was an evidence of the ignorance and
credulity of the times.

The theomania under which Jeanne laboured, threatened, after
lier death, to bccome contagious among her sex. Two young girls
living near Paris, declared themselves her successors in her mission.
One, who persisted in her declarations after having been examined by
an ecclesiastical commission, was burnt; the other,having been assured
she was under the influence of the fiend, showed signs of repent-
ance and escaped. A third Amazon, of a bad reputation, appeared
at Metz, and supported the views of the competitors for the bishopric
of Treves. The inquisitor Henry summoned her before his tribunal;
but she made her escape, and afterwards married a French officer.
Her appearance at Metz gave rise to a report that Jeanne was not
burnt in reality, but allowed to escape by the generosity of the English.
A few years after the execution of Jeanne d'Arc, a rumour spread
through the Pays de Vaud, that the environs of Berne and Lau-
sanne were filled with sorcerers and cannibals. It was reported that
thirteen victims had disappeared, who had been devoured. The
authorities made inquiries into the matter; several persons were sub-
mitted to the torture, and a great many were burnt. The confes-
sions of the unhappy wretches in question would apparently justify
the inquisitors in their proceedings, were it not evident that these
statements were the ravings of insanity, and not the description of
actual occurrences. One of the women accused, and who was put
to death at Berne, acknowledged that she belonged to the sect of
devil-worshippers, and that unbaptized children, and even those who
had been baptized, but over whom the sign of the cross had not
been made, became the victims of their sorceries. Newly-born
children were caused by their invocations to perish in their cradles, and
the bodies, after interment, were dug up and boiled by the witches,
until the flesh became liquid and potable. The remaining solid
parts were formed into an ointment, which, when a sorcerer was
anointed with it, conveyed him through the air, wherever lie desired
to go; the liquid that resulted from the process was given to the
novices to drink; a few drops would initiate them into the secrets of
the art, and render them as learned as the masters. These strange
avowals were confirmed by others, and maintained even at the stake.
Stadeleiu, who was regarded as a magician of the first class, and
boasted that by pronouncing certain words, and observing certain
processes, lie could compel the fiend to send his subordinates on
earth, and could cause thunder and hail to fall on the farms of
others, added further, that he had caused seven infants to perish in
the bosom of one mother, and had also contrived that for many
years all the females in the house of the same woman should abort;
this he had effected by a spell made of a lizard's body.

It is certain that, plunged in ignorance and superstition, as all
nations were in the fifteenth century, influenced by a firm belief in
the existence of magic, and a mundane intercourse of demons, with
confessions so full and ample, and so strongly confirmatory of all
they had conceived or heard respecting the alleged science, the judi-
cial and ecclesiastical authorities could not do otherwise than con-
demn the unhappy maniacs to the flames as apostates, murderers,
and devil-worshippers. The progress of science, and the increase of
education, have given a different impulse to the perverted ideas and
hallucinations of the insane; but if they were to recur now in the
same form and character as among the Yaudois in the fifteenth
century, the judicial treatment would be very different. With our
author we should recognise that the infanticides, murders, cannibal
feasts, and all the atrocities with which the unfortunate wretches,
who were called sorcerers, Avere charged, had no other origin than
their imagination, and that in all probability no one had seriously
thought of establishing devil-worship anywhere. A monomaniac
alone, when her life was in danger, would persist in affirming that
her comrades and herself caused infants to perish by uttering certain
words; that human fat gave those, who were anointed with it, the
power of flying through the air; and that the juice of infants, when
drank in small quantities, changed neophytes into illuminati. A
madman alone could persuade himself that he caused cows and sheep
to abort, that he could cause the death of infants even in the mother's
bosom, and that he could compel the evil spirits to let loose the
elements, and to destroy the harvests. Even now patients labouring
under melancholia in our asylums accuse themselves of most atrocious
crimes. They have defaced, robbed, and pillaged their benefactors;
have had recourse to fire and poison, and have caused inundations,
earthquakes, and epidemic diseases. It follows not, therefore, be-
cause the crimes which the Yaudois monomaniacs acknowledged
were of a most awful and atrocious character, that they really obeyed
the most frightful impulses, destroyed infants, and proceeded by the
decomposition of their corpses to obtain their disgusting draughts.
Cases are 011 record certainly in which monomaniacs have actually
murdered children, and one, a female in Milan, who was broken on
the wheel, followed up the murder by an act of cannibalism. But
in these cases the bodies of the victims and the blood proved the
commission of the offence; but such evidence was not obtained in
Berne in any case, nor was any one of the accused caught in flagrante
delicto, which led the theologians to infer that the demons aided
them in the commission of these crimes.

The origin of the general belief of mankind in the murderous and
cannibal propensities of sorcerers, is referred by M. Calmeil, to a
Jewish tradition respecting a sorceress named Lilith, said to be
Adam's first wife, whose principal occupation seems to have been the
destruction of the Jewish infants. A sect of Lilithites is reported to
have sprung up afterwards among the Jews. Among the Greeks,
Lamia, a daughter of Neptune, founded a similar sect or sects, the
duties consisting in destroying infants, travellers, and young men.
Among the Romans, aged sorcerers were represented, disguised as
striges, or owls, and, thus changed, entering the houses and sucking
the life-blood of children, in the hope, it is alleged, of regaining their
youth. These fables were fully credited by the inquisitors, who, in
their writings, designated their victims as Lamias, malefactors, striges,
and lestrigones. Is it to be wondered at, then, that the unhappy
wretches who had repeatedly listened to the reproaches levelled else-
where against the adorers of Satan, and the denunciations of their
crimes, should, when they believed they had themselves become
sorcerers, acknowledge the most horrible offences, and the judges
condemn them to the flames in perfect security of conscience? The
habit of cannibalism, therefore, among the nations of Europe, must
be regarded as a fiction. Similar, and even worse, crimes, were, in
the early ages of Christianity, alleged against its professors by the
Pagans.
Edelin, or Edeline, a doctor of the Sorbonne, first drew attention
to himself by preaching openly against the belief in the worship of
the devil, which lie denounced as imaginary; and he preached also
the cruelty of putting persons to death who were merely visited by
illusions of the senses. His eloquence silenced his opponents,
and for a while arrested the effusion of blood. He himself, how-
ever, fell under the charges of the theologians, and was arrested.

The replies which he made to the interrogations addressed
to him show that he had become insane. He acknowledged, it
would appear, that he had long been a devil-worshipper; had been
transported by the fiend to the assemblies of the sorcerers, and had
only obeyed his master in preaching that fiend-worship was imaginary.
His sentence was perpetual imprisonment.

In 1459, charges of sorcery were brought very largely against the
inhabitants of the Artois, many of whom confessed the crime, and
implicated others as equally engaged in the commission of the
offence. These latter, by the contrivance of the judges, were gene-
rally selected from the better classes of inhabitants, who, after suffer-
ing repeated tortures, were compelled to confess, and then allowed
to purchase tlieir lives by sacrificing their wealth. The lower orders,
after confession, were burnt. In some instances the constancy and
courage of some of the inhabitants were such that they resisted the
tortures, and did not confess; and others again bribed the judges
and witnesses to obtain an acquittal. The demonolatria attributed
to the inhabitants of Artois may be regarded as the type of a moral
contagion, which soon after presented the most extraordinary forms.
The author attributes the wild and extravagant ideas of these insane
persons to conceptions formed during sleep, which led them to be-
lieve and confess that they had left their homes, had been present at
fiendish assemblies, had eaten and drank there, and perceived in the
crowds innocent persons whose lives they endangered by their
charges. It is evident that all those who, in accusing themselves or
others, believed they were speaking the truth, had become insane,
since they were unable to distinguish the false from the true. They
were, nevertheless, regarded by the theologians as heretics and
apostates.

Towards the close of the century, similar proceedings took place at
Cologne, Mayence, Treves, Saltzburgh, and Breme; and Innocent VIII.
issued a bull denouncing the demon - worshippers. The crimes
alleged against them were of a similar character to those already
described, and the punishments were proportionate. Forty-eight
women were burnt to death in one place on the charge of infanticide,
and connexion with incubi; the latter offence in itself a hallucina-
tion, and leading materially to the belief that the crime of child-
murder was also ail error of the imagination. Forty-eight more
were burned at Constance and Ravensburg, who had made similar
confessions. Humanity revolts against such fearful destruction of
the insane. M. Calmeil refers these confessions to disordered visceral
sensations and erroneous sensations of touch. Midwives, who were
also sorcerers, were especially regarded as guilty of infanticide; and
it is said that the devil neglected nothing to get them into his ser-
vice, 011 account of the opportunities they had of destroying newly-
born children. One of them confessed to having killed more than
iorty children. Notwithstanding monomania may be homicidal,
M. Calmeil is unwilling to believe that these women could have
been guilty of the crimes they confessed, as that would involve the
persistence of the homicidal monomania for years, without the exist-
ence ot such a state being discovered by any one up to the moment
of their arrest, and also that they must have destroyed hundreds of
infants without the cognizance of their parents, a thing he naturally
regards as impossible.

Other sorcerers were put to death for raising tempests, and some
of them, at the stake, confessed their crimes, and rejoiced that they
were about to be delivered from the control of their demon lovers.
The inquisitors, who judged these cases, aver that demon-worship
had become, as it were, hereditary in certain families, and in certain
localities; that it was principally noticed in women, and more espe-
cially in young women with a great deal of black hair, who are
readily seduced by incubi; thus indicating that demonolatria was more
frequent in women than in men; that the hereditary character and ex-
ample have always exerted an injurious influence on the transmission
of insanity, and that young women, such as those described by the
inquisitors, are very liable to uterine sensations, which recall to their
recollection during sleep that which passes during sexual intercourse.
In some instances, it is probable that weak timid persons, in dread
of torture, or overcome by pain, confessed that which they knew to
be false. All who were executed as demon-worshippers were not, in
all probability, monomaniacs.

The nuns of Cambrai, in 1491, were seized Avitli demonopathy,
which continued for four years. They used to run like dogs across
the country, spring into the air like birds, climb trees like cats, hang
on the branches, imitate the cries of animals, divine hidden things,
and prophesy the future. At last the demon confessed that he was
the author of these extraordinary events, aided by a nun named
Jeanne Potliiere, with whom he had illicit commerce. Jeanne was
condemned to perpetual imprisonment. The recovery of the other
nuns took place very slowly. The authors who mention the con-
fession made by the devil, do not state whether it was by the mouth
of Jeanne herself, or by one or more of the possessed. In the former
case, Jeanne must have been the victim of a perversion in her sen-
sations and intellectual faculties; in the latter, she was the victim
of charges invented by persons partially deprived of reason and
judgment.

The disease with which the nuns were afflicted, appears to us
to be in some way connected with hysterical chorea, tinctured,
more or less, with the prevalent superstitions of the time. This
is the disease which we fancy M. Calmeil would call hystero-
demonopathy.

The sixteenth century is remarkable for the commencement of the
struggle of science against superstition, as far, at all events, as
regards the diseases ot the mind. On the one hand, Bartlielemi de
Lepine, de Fernel, Ambrose Pare, de Bodin, de Leloyer, and de Boguet
ranged themselves on the side of the theologians, and attributed
certain of these diseases, sucli as demonomania, hystero-demonopathy,
zoantliropy, and possession, to commerce with supernatural heings,
while, on the other hand, Ponzinibius, D'Alciat, Wier, de Pigray,
Jean Baptiste Porta, and Montaigne, with a degree of intelligence
and courage which does them immortal honour, removed the veil that
obscured the singular phenomena attendant on these forms of mental
disease, demonstrated that they were the result of a pathological
condition of the mind, and that society was acting with great cruelty
in coolly permitting the punishment of numerous maniacs, many of
whom were capable of being restored to reason.

De Lepine, who was a professor of theology and a Dominican, was
a stout advocate on the side of the theologians. He contended for
the truth in every particular of the confessions made by the accused,
and averred his belief that they had the power, with the aid of the
demon, of changing themselves into cats, a form they generally
assumed when about to destroy infants at the breast. The pomade of
sorcerers, stated recently by Mr. Huttmann, to be a preparation of red
ants, and in some degree allied to chloroform in its action, he asserts
had even power over the faithful, while it stupified sorcerers and threw
them into a trance. He further contended, that although certain of
the sorcerers, after using the ointment, instead of really repairing to
the Sabbat, remained torpid, and, as it were, dead in their beds,
or in a corner of their house, they ought not, therefore, to be looked
upon as innocent, inasmuch as they experienced the same sensations
as if they had been present, which tlicy Avould not have done had
they not been engaged in bonds of connexion with Satan, and he
further gave it as his opinion that even those who merely experienced
illusory sensations and ideas should be put to death, for those who
abhor the devil and his works are not subject to such aberrations of
the senses and judgment.

Unfortunately these monstrous opinions were rather generally
adopted by the demonograpliers of all countries, and blood flowed
plentifully in consequence.

Francois Pic de Mirandola has no doubt of the cohabitation of
fallen spirits with men and women, and he seriously narrates the
cases of two priests, who for years maintained such an intercourse.
Savonarola, according to him, was frequently visited by spirits, and
on one occasion by the Holy Ghost, in the form of a bird with
most beautiful plumage. Among those who wrote in favour of the
visitation of supernatural beings to this world, and who believed that
they saw and conversed with them, are Melanctlion, Luther, and
Jerome Cardan. Lange narrates a case, as illustrative of supcrna-
tural diseases, of a maniac, who slew himself in loo9. When the
body was examined after death, there were found in the stomach, a
large piece of wood, four knives, two plates of iron, and a mass of
hair?all of which, in Lange's opinion, were placed there by diabolical
agency. In this opinion, Ambrose Pare agreed.

Fern el, who possessed some notions, drawn from the writings of
the ancient physicians, on frenzy, epilepsy, mania, hypochondriasis,
and melancholy, of which he admitted several species, believed in
the influence of evil spirits on the human body. The state of pos-
session resembled that of ordinary insanity, except that the possessed
could read in the past events, and divine the most secret things. They
also trembled when they heard the praises of the Creator. Ambrose
Pare, the father of French surgery, and Bodin, the juris-consuit,
fully coincided in all the doctrines of the theologians. The latter,
later in life, was himself accused of sacrificing to Beelzebub.
Bodin published a work on demonomania, which, like that of
Lepine, tended greatly to prevent the progress of science, and con-
firm the public belief in the doctrines of the theologians. He appa-
rently gave full credence to all the monstrous talcs recorded in the
justiciary records of the inquisitors, and states that many females
were violated by the fiend the first time they attended the Sabbat.
The intercourse of men with incubi, he adds, really occurred, but
less frequently. Iusanity and somnambulism were occasionally, but
not necessarily, induced by supernatural influence. Demoniacs threw
up by the mouth pieces of wood, pins, &c., and were subject to
strange contortions; in one case, the chin was turned towards the
nape of the neck, and the tongue thrust out of the mouth. The
devil can speak, by the mouths of the possessed, in languages which
they did not understand, and of matters with which they were un-
acquainted. The demons were drawn into the organism by the
sorcerers; they were expelled by exorcisms from the bodies of men
and animals, and houses were also purified by the same process, which
was not always without danger, as the demon might transfer his
residence to the body of the exorcist. St. Gregory and Nider both
mention instances of this. The soul, according to Bodin, could be
separated from the body for an instant?a phenomenon which really
occurs, in his opinion, during ecstasy, and is due to the influence of
supernatural beings. The ecstasy of demoniacs was regarded as
evidence of their being under Satan's yoke; during its continuance,
the soul could make long journeys; and seven persons, who were con-
demned and burnt at Nantes in 1549, who were in a state of ecstatic
immobility for several hours, reported afterwards that they knew all
that had passed in the interior and environs of the city during then*
trance.

Lycanthropia was regarded by many medical men, among whom was
Paulus iEgineta, as a species of insanity, in which the maniacs thought
they had become wolves, and ran about the woods; Theoplirastus,
however, Pomponaceus, and even Fernel, were of opinion that ly-
canthropia was a true and indisputable disease.

Four years after Bodin's work on Demonomcinia was published,
there appeared a monograph on Spectres, by Leloyer, in which he
seeks to show that the voices and other sounds heard by the hallu-
cinates, the objects they fancy they see, etc., are the production of
angels and demons. The latter frequently assumed the character
and appearance of the dead, and presented themselves as such to
the friends of the departed. He designated different kinds of demons,
and assigned to each its respective duties and influences. The
union of incubi and succubi with human beings might be effected,
but it was never fruitful, nor was the metamorphosis of man into
animals ever real, although Satan had the art to make the change
appear such to the demoniac. The occurrence of insanity depended
on the pre-existence of disease in the organs; the demon caused the
entire derangement of the operations of the intellect by taking pos-
session of the affected parts. The soul never left the body before
the moment of death. During the ecstasy of the sorcerers, it was
so pre-occupied by the continuance of the impressions with which it
was assailed, by the vivacity of the images, the representation of
which was offered it by the devil, that the patient appeared as if
deprived of life. Should he present to the soul the pictures of real
life, the sorcerer, when he awoke, might faithfully detail events
which had passed at a distance from liim. The effect is the same
as if the soul had really left the body.

Leloyer, in another part of his work, brought forward the
opinions of Hippocrates, Galen, Areteus, Nemesius, and Paulus
yEgineta, on hallucinations, melancholy, ecstasy, lycanthropia, mania,
and other disorders of the understanding, and acknowledged that all
cases of these diseases were not caused by the intervention of evil
spirits, and thereby tacitly admitted that it was possible they might all
arise from pure derangement of the nervous system. He further
stated, that those who fell into ecstasy rubbed themselves first of all
with a narcotic ointment; and therefore that the effects attributed to
a supernatural cause might result from the toxic agent which had
been used.

We come next to writers whose productions must give greater
satisfaction. Tliey are those who sought to prove that the alleged
cases of sorcery, &c., were in reality instances of disordered intellect.
Ponzinibius, the first on the noble list, wrote that demonolatria
was a disease, and all the sensations which caused the Lamias to
believe they were demon-worshippers should be attributed to the
depraved state of the senses; that it was false, that certain persons
could assemble at night, unknown to their families, in places fre-
quented by spirits; the crimes of which they were accused could not
be proved legally, and further, that it was atrocious to burn maniacs.
The council of Ancyra declared that the abominations attributed to
the sorcerers could not be committed in reality. The inverisimili-
tude of the events described by the alleged demoniacs ought to have
opened the eyes of all reasonable people; nor could he comprehend
how they could admit as facts things which were in opposition to
the laws of nature.

Alciat followed, and feared not to attack an inquisitor, who had
put a number of hallucinates to death in Piedmont. He supported
his views by the declaration of the council of Angouri, by whom the
absurdity of the sorcerer's sabbat was declared. He brought for-
ward the evidence of the husbands of the alleged sorceresses, who
asserted that their wives had not left their beds, nor been out of
their presence, and attributed the assertions of the demoniacs to
melancholia, and believed they could be cured, if their state of penury
permitted the requisite attention. Nor did he allow that the occur-
rence of ecstasy was a reason for depriving its victims of life, as it
at once proved that the alleged crimes could not really have been
committed.

Lemnius Levinius explained the strange sounds sometimes uttered
by the possessed, by the intensity of the cerebral excitement, and not
as in any way induced by demons. It was occasionally cured with
great rapidity by therapeutic measures. Epilepsy, which had also
been attributed to supernatural influence, had not any such origin,
which should be sought in the enceplialon and the humours.
Wier appears to have been well acquainted with the spirits; he
calculated their numbers as several millions, and admitted that they
possessed real influence in the productions of the conditions which
have been hitherto under consideration. He, however, did good
service by tracing the causes which lead to insanity. He has shown
that the maniacs of the sixteenth century often attempted suicide;
that they frequently swalloAved pieces of bone, feathers, and iron;
that convulsions, complicated with delirium, frequently occurred
among them, and in boys' schools, and sometimes were epidemic;
that the delirium of demonolatria assumed the most diverse forms;
that persons were discovered who simulated demonopathy, and that
many toxic agents were known which, when taken into the stomach,
could cause a momentary delirium. He meditated deeply on the
symptoms of demonomania, lycantliropia, and religious melancholy;
he examined many maniacs, reflected on the processes against sor-
cery already instituted, and was convinced that lycanthropes (wehr-
wolves) and stryges, whom the theologians were so anxious to burn,
were no other than maniacs. He appeared to have believed, how-
ever, that Satan led them to make the false statements which they
promulgated, but without any culpability on their part. The chil-
dren they pretended to have devoured were still living; the dead
they asserted they had torn from the tomb, were still in their graves.
The sorcerers could be bound down with chains in their beds; they
nevertheless declared that they had danced at the Sabbat, and had
connexion with incubi. Those who, they stated, had been present at
the Sabbat, were seen elsewhere at the very time by witnesses of
credibility. If they did commit crimes, it was because they were
no longer able to appreciate the bearing of their nature, nor to con-
trol their own impulses. He was, further, of opinion that the homi-
cidal monomania of the Yaudois could be credited only by imbecile
or ignorant persons; and that the stryges, whose blood Avas so freely
shed on the banks of the Leman and Rhine, in Savoy, and else-
where, had neither murders nor other crimes to reproach themselves
with. He added, further, that the confessions Avere obtained by
throwing old persons, Avliose intellects Avere already disordered, into
dark, cold, and damp dungeons, Avliere grief, despair, and fright,
combined Avith the torture and the effects of the soporifics given
them by brutal judges, completed the Avork, and ruined the intel-
lectual and moral powers.

Numerous cases Avere reported to have occurred in this century of
fearful suicides and homicides, in the majority of which the Avriters
who have published the details appear to recognise indications of in-
sanity; nor AAras it long afterwards before the fact was recognised
that insanity frequently becomes homicidal. Thus Avas a step made
in the right path. About the middle of the same century, a villager
near Pavia, says Fincel, thought himself changed to a Avolf, and
killed several persons. When taken, he still asserted that he Avas a
Avolf, and differed from them only in this, that in ordinary Avolves
the hairy coat Avas outside, Avhile in his it Avas between the skin and
flesh. Some persons, desirous of ascertaining this, made incisions in
his arms and legs, and then recognising the innocence of the maniac,
called in surgical aid. He died, however, a few days afterwards.
Fincel added that he classed certain lycanthropes among the insane.
Towards the close of the century, writers began more generally to
attribute these and such like diseases to aberration of the mind.
Instances will be found in the works of Valeriola, Zuynger, Brassa-
vola, Dodoens, 13011 at, Altomare, Schenck, and Houlier, which at an
earlier period would have been regarded as genuine cases of sorcery.
In 1/580, Nicholas Lepois published a treatise on pathology, no
less remarkable for the solidity of its doctrines than for its freedom
from the ruling prejudices. Catalepsy, frenzy, coma, amnesia, palsy,
apoplexy, incubus, convulsions, mania, melancholy, epilepsy, are all
referred by him to so many lesions or derangements of the encepha-
I011, and described with much talent. He was not content with
localizing, as much as possible, the point de depart of the morbid
phenomena, and comparing them together in the different nervous
affections, in order to ascertain the differential diagnosis, he also
sought to appreciate their nature and severity, and to make known
the means requisite in each case to restore the functional equili-
brium. He however did not feel himself justified in denying the
existence of demoniac insanity.

The writings of wise and learned men, such as those already cited,
together with the essays of Montaigne, in which, with great talent,
he combated the opinions and practice then in vogue with respect
to sorcerers, had little or no effect on the clergy, who held the scales
of ecclesiastical justice, and on the lower orders of society, who,
throughout Europe, lay under the yoke of the most deplorable
ignorance. The belief in all the horrible tales which we have
noticed was prevalent through the Christian states; it became, as
it were, impossible to diagnose behveen murderers and hallucinates
or lypemaniacs. Monks assumed the office of physicians, and en-
deavoured to cure the insane by exorcisms. Denionomaniacs were
led to the scaffold in bands of dozens, and even of hundreds. One
hundred thousand were put to death in the name of justice during
the reign of Francis the First.

Demonomania appears to have been the principal crime for which
these unhappy victims suffered in 1507; thirty women were burnt
by the inquisition at Caluhorra for sorcery. From 1.504 to 1523 we
are told that sorcery prevailed epidemically throughout Lombardy,
and several popes launched their bulls against the offenders. The
Dominicans, according to Lepine, burnt a thousand wretches, prin-
cipally women, annually at Come. The details of the supposed
crime resemble in their general aspect those already narrated.
demon-worship, homicide, infanticide, and zoanthropia constitute
the principal features. In 1521 two men were burnt at Poligny
for demonomania, lycanthropia, and homicide. They confessed five
murders, committed while disguised as wolves, and acknowledged to
have had connexion with she-wolves. Their victims, according to their
account, were chiefly of the female sex, and were generally devoured
by them after they had been murdered. These statements M. Cal-
meil justly regards as hallucinations, and he cites a case, narrated by
Guillaume D'Auvergne, of another lycanthrope, who boasted of his
deeds as a wehr-wolf, but who, when followed, was found to retire to
a solitary cave, and pass his time in ecstasy, after which he again
recounted his feats of lycanthropy, and boasted of the terror he had
caused in the neighbouring villages.

One hundred and fifty women were sentenced in Navarre to im-
prisonment and flogging on their confession of demonolatria, and a
number more were burnt at the stake in Saragossa by order of the
inquisition.

In 1574 Gilles Gamier, known as the hermit of St. Bonnot, was
burnt for lycanthropy and numerous homicides. There can be but little
doubt of his having murdered and eaten several children, and even
attacked horsemen on the public highway, as lie was, on more than
one occasion, disturbed and put to flight at the moment of destroying
his victims. His insanity is equally evident. In the same year eighty
demonomaniacs were burnt alive in Savoy, and three years after-
wards nearly four hundred in Languedoc. In 1578, Jeanne Ilervil-
liers, whose mother was burnt for sorcery, was also condemned to
the stake for similar offences. Homicide and carnal intercourse with
the demon she freely confessed. Here, as in other cases, the hallu-
cinations of the maniac led her as a criminal to the stake. Pigray,
surgeon to Henry the Fourth, was with others appointed in 1589 to
examine fourteen demonomaniacs, who had been condemned to
death, and after having ascertained the phases of their malady,
reported that " a dose of hellebore would be more serviceable than
punishment." The court dismissed the accused accordingly. Seven
years prior to this decision, a number of demoniacs were burnt to
death by the inquisition at Avignon on a charge of demonolatria,
which was generally confessed by the unfortunate victims, in whom
hallucinations had apparently been produced by extreme famine,
so severe, indeed, that they had been obliged to live on the egesta of
horses and asses, and on wild plants which they were enabled to
gather?a cause capable in all ages to produce insanity. In Lorraine,
NO. vi. B

nine hundred victims were burnt in fifteen years, and many others
were driven to commit suicide.

Voltaire states that, between 1598 and 1G00, more than six
hundred lycanthropes 01* demoniacs were put to death in the district
of the Jura by Boguet. This he avers on the dictum of the judge
himself. The statements made by the accused were of a most ex-
traordinary character in every respect, and such as no person in pos-
session of common sense could consider as other than the ravings
of insanity. While these events were passing on the Jura, a man
was arrested at Angers on a charge of lycantliropy and homicide, he
having been found near the mangled body of a boy, Avith the inside
of his hands bloody. Two wolves made their escape just as the
rescuers arrived. In his confession, he acknowledged that he had
killed the boy, and eaten part of him, and the two wolves who got
away were his brother and cousin. The judgment, of course, was a
sentence of death; but an appeal was made to the parliament of
Paris, which wisely decided that the case evinced more insanity
than sorcery, and ordered his confinement in a lunatic asylum. In
the same year, 1598, the priest of Payas was burnt in the Limousin
on a charge of demon-worship, which he strenuously denied, until
obliged to confess by the application of torture.
During the sixteenth century, hystero-demonopathy became en-
demic in several places, more especially in convents and schools. It
broke out about 1550, and lasted till 1565. The disease is described
in old books as the "possession des nonnains," and the account
given of it shows that almost all the encephalic functions were more
or less simultaneously affected in the persons who were supposed to
be possessed. It first showed itself in the convent of Uvertet, in
Hoorn, immediately after Lent, consequently just after the nuns
had endured considerable privations for more than forty days. It
lasted among the nuns above three years, and then began to diminish
in intensity. Unfortunately, during this time, several persons were
arrested charged with causing the disease, and one poor woman was
tortured to death. The disease then broke out among the nuns of St.
Brigitte, the first person attacked being a young woman who had
taken the vows from a disappointment in love; from her it spread
by contagion, or, rather, by imitation, among the others. It con-
tinued about ten years. The nuns in the convent of Neomage Avere
affected Avith hallucinations of the organs of hearing, and fancied
tliey heard musical instruments at night-time in the dormitories.
These imaginary sounds Avere attributed to the demon endeavouring
to seduce the sisters. The nuns of Kintorp, near Strasburgh, Avere
affected in 1552. At first, a few only were attacked; the disease
afterwards invaded others by contagion. The attack was violently
convulsive, the muscles of the pharynx participating. As soon as
it was known that one of the nuns was thus affected, all those who
slept in the same dormitory were also seized. The return of the fits
was always preceded by foetid breath. They all complained of a
burning sensation on the soles of the feet, as if boiling water had
been poured on them. The unfortunate cook of the establishment,
although subject to the same disease as the nuns, was denounced as
being in communication with the fiend, and as the cause of all the
mischief; her attacks were said to be simulated. Herself and another
were burnt to death, but this tragical event did not arrest the pro-
gress of the demonopathy, which spread among the neighbouring
villages, many other persons being put to death as sorcerers on that
account. In 1554, the same disease showed itself among the con-
verted Jewesses, at Rome. Those attacked were above eighty in
number, and had just been baptized. The Jews were accused of having
bewitched them, and would, in all probability, have fearfully ex-
piated the charge, but that a Jesuit boldly and honestly defended
them before the pope, and showed that men do not possess the power
of sending demons into the bodies of their fellow-creatures. It
Avould have been well if other theologians had possessed the good
sense of this Jesuit. Ten years afterwards the nuns of Nazareth,
at Cologne, were similarly affected, and in addition, laboured under
nymphomania, ? in this instance, at least, clearly showing the
origin of the disease in a disordered condition of the uterine organs.
A convulsive disease broke out in the orphan establishment at
Amsterdam, in 1566, thirty children, according to Wier, seventy,
according to Neal, being affected. The greater number of these were
boys.

The case of Dr Torralba, and that of the old abbess of Cordova,
which occurred in this century, are of decided interest; but Ave fear the
extent of this article will prevent our giving them the extended notice
which they deserve. Dr Torralba was a very learned physician, who
had travelled over great part of Europe to increase his store of know-
ledge. After a time his character changed j he became sullen, and
although hitherto firm in his religious and philosophical belief, lie be-
came tormented with painful doubts, and gave himself up to chiro-
mancy. The insanity with which Torralba was afflicted gradually
increased, and he began to fancy that he was attended by agencies,
who carried him about from place to place with great rapidity, and
enabled him to prophecy. His genius was exceedingly learned,
it 2210 ON THE USE AND ABUSE OF RESTRAINT IN
and could converse with him in all languages. He was, however,
unable to exhibit him to others, who earnestly desired to see him.
In 1528, Torralba was arrested by the inquisition, and tortured, with
the view of discovering whether his familiar were a good or an evil
spirit. The latter lie denied; and asserted that lie had not made any
compact with him. After three years' uncertainty, and physical and
moral sufferings, Torralba was condemned to abjure his errors as a
heretic, to renounce the demon, to wear the san benito publicly, and
to be imprisoned for a certain time. His life Avas only spared at the
instance of the court, and of some friendly grandees. The abbess of
Cordova had enjoyed all her lifetime, till old age, the reputation of
holiness, and of working miracles. Labouring, then, under a disease
which it was considered would prove fatal, and in terror for her
future welfare, she confessed her intercourse with demons, which at
first represented themselves to her as angels, and even as the Christ,
and by their aid she said she had effected all her miracles. She was con-
demned to do penance publicly, and to be shut up in a convent for the
remainder of her existence. Both cases were instances of monomania.
