Case Of Double Consciousness Connected with Hysteria
======================================================

456
BY T. OGIER WARD, M.D. OX ON.
As but few cases are on record of that curious form of mental
disorder, termed " double consciousness," I am induced to submit to
you, for insertion in tlie Psychological Journal, tlie following one,
which, though it does not present the disease in its most intense
form, and is therefore less interesting as a simple psychological
phenomenon, is perhaps rendered more useful in a practical point of
view, by its evident connexion with the approach and establishment
of the menses, and its having been in some degree influenced by
treatment,
Mary Parker, aged 13, April, 1836. Had measles at the age of
seven, and has ever since been subject to cough, and pain in the side.
About a year ago, while in the country for the benefit of her health,
she was seized one evening with rigors, followed by an epileptic
attack, in which she struggled violently, and attempted to scratch
and bite the bystanders. She was not insensible, but delirious, and
frequently came to herself for a few minutes. She was bled, but this
only seemed to increase her struggles. She was brought home in a
state of almost syncope on the fourth day; and the attacks came on
at intervals for a fortnight afterwards. At the end of this time, they
became much worse, sometimes assuming a cataleptic character, when
the arms were extended and perfectly rigid, and the jaws clenched.
At other times, she struggled greatly, and then the abdomen became
much swelled. In neither kind of fit was she entirely unconscious,
nor did she change colour in the face, though her appearance was
wild. Her disposition was altered, for she grew excessively mis-
chievous between the attacks, climbing over walls, &c., and beating
the other children. When a paroxysm came on, she generally called
her, mother, and then began to struggle, and became half insensible.
This state of things lasted about three months, when she partially
recovered, having fits only at intervals. She then went into the
country for six months, during which time she had only four or five
fits, but they returned in the wagon in which her mother brought
her home.
April 1st, 1836.?Saw her for the first time at the dispensary,
when she presented the following symptoms: complained of headache,
and pain in the stomach and left side, increased on pressure; pulse
natural; tongue clean and moist, though rather white; appetite bad;
bowels, which had been rather relaxed, were now confined; the
glands down the neck were enlarged; hacking cough without ex-
pectoration ; tenderness of spine on pressure; burning pain at the
back of the head previous to the fits. I ordered eight leeches to the
side, and a blister to the spine. Ferri carb. c. rheo., ter die. The
leeches seemed to produce a little delirium, which continued at
CASE OF DOUBLE CONSCIOUSNESS. 457
intervals till April 3rd, during wliicli time she said persons were
coming to take her away. On that day, she complained of intense
headache till the afternoon, when she burst out crying, and seemed
much alarmed at every one who approached her. From this state
she passed into the opposite one of laughing and attempting to strike
them. I now saw her at home, when I found her lying in bed,
laughing, and half-naked. She replied very saucily to all my ques-
tions, and did not recognise me, though I had attended her brothers at
home a short time previously. Complained of no pain, and denied she
had ever had any; ate voraciously, which was always the case during
the delirium; the bowels were confined, and her cheeks flushed; but,
upon the Avhole, her appearance was healthy. She exhibited no signs
of approaching puberty. I ordered a cold shower-bath daily. Mist,
ferri c. decoct, aloes co., and tinct. assse.
April 14th.?She has continued, since my last report, to alternate
between delirium and sound state of mind. When in the former
condition, she has lately become more tractable, and, as she then
appears to be endued with almost preternatural strength, I have
directed her mother to employ her in domestic labours, and in
bringing water from a canal close by, which seems to have but little
effect in inducing fatigue. But every day she has a half-fainting fit,
during which she complains of her head, side, and stomach, and is
very low. She then either gradually recovers her senses, or else
bursts out laughing, and relapses suddenly into the previous state of
delirium. Just before this change, she puts her hand to her head as
if in pain.
Double consciousness is now established, for while delirious, she
has little or no recollection of persons she has seen, or events which
have occurred during the state of sanity, nor does she complain of
any bodily pain or suffering. In the opposite state, on the contrary,
she is extremely depressed, incompetent to any exertion, complains
of pain in her head, side, and stomach, and is equally forgetful of all
that has passed during the delirium.
April 19 th.?Two days ago she became sensible, and has continued
so with the exception of some fits of the epileptic kind, during which
she does not change colour, nor entirely lose consciousness, but
groans and struggles hard. Yesterday she nearly fainted while under
the shower-bath, and to-day she is very low, and complains of pain in
the head and stomach, but not in the side. Pulse 100. She feels her
head much worse while lying down, but notwithstanding this symp-
tom of congestion, I have ordered stimulants and antispasmodics.
May 2nd.?She gradually improved under the above treatment
(the maniacal attacks being less durable, and the intermissions
longer, and attended with fewer complaints of pain and feebleness)
till April 24th, when the mania returned with all its violence, and
without intermission. The pulse was strong and frequent, and a new
symptom now arose. Frequently in the course of the day her legs
became suddenly stiff, and she rolled about the floor in an hysterical
458 CASE OF DOUBLE CONSCIOUSNESS
attack, from which she as suddenly recovered, but not to perfect con-
sciousness.
Four days ago I found her quite unmanageable, biting and scratch-
ing all who came near her, impatient of control, and, if not pre-
vented, butting her head against the wall, or the head of the bed. I
ordered her a strong solution of tart, antim., to be repeated till full
vomiting was induced. This calmed her much. Yesterday she had
an attack of semi-syncope, and to-day she is quiet, though still in
the maniacal state. I ordered a tonic pill, composed of quin. sulph.,
ferri sulph., and pulv. capsici, aa gr. i., and cold applications to the
head, which was to be shaved.
May 12th.?She has been rather better lately, and Avas sensible
the whole of last night, though much depressed, and complaining of
pain in her head. The period of her dispensary note having expired,
I have directed her to discontinue medicine for some time.
She perfectly recovered some months afterwards, when the menses
became established.
Observations.?The cases of double consciousness, hitherto pub-
lished, have mostly occurred in young females in whom the uterine
functions were disturbed, or, if in the male sex, where the nervous
system had been weakened by excesses, terror, or other cerebral
excitement; and they have been classed by systematic writers with
epilepsy, catalepsy, somnambulism, ecstasis, or other anomalous
affections.
The case related in "Mayo's Physiology," p. 195, resembles that
under consideration in the patient feeling quite well, and ceasing to
suffer from headache on the access of the paroxysm. Another case
in which the patient's symptoms still more closely resembled the
present one, is mentioned under the head of Somnambulism, in the
" Cyclopaedia of Medicine." In other instances, on the contrary, the
patient only complained during the access, as in that mentioned by
Dr. Abercrombie. The third alone of the three cases, in the first
vol. of " Silliman's Journal," seems analogous to the present, inas-
much as the paroxysms were numerous; the two others being in-
stances of long-continued delirium, from which the patients, on their
recovery, resumed the train of thought that had occupied their
minds just before the access, all that had passed during the interval
having passed from their memory, a phenomenon of no veiy unusual
occurrence in acute mania, and almost universally the case in the
delirium of fever, and of mania a potu. The state of double con-
sciousness was not as complete in this case as in some of the above,
where there was a perfect oblivion of all antecedent circumstances;
but it was sufficiently well marked to satisfy every witness how
decided was the distinction between the two states of mind, which
seemed to have no ideas in common beyond the existence of objects
with which the patient was in constant relation. Thus, neither the
house nor her friends seemed strange to her when under the influ-
ence of the disease; but other persons, less usually seen, failed to be
recognised. I have not given any detailed account of the psychical
CONNECTED WITH HYSTERIA. 459
phenomena presented during the maniacal attacks, because they were
not of a remarkable character. Except while suffering from the
epileptic or hysteric paroxysms, she took notice of what was passing
around her; had no perversions of the senses, nor any hallucinations;
and but from the change in her manner, which was pert and forward,
and in her disposition, which became passionate, mischievous, and
vindictive, and from a peculiar expression of her features, her con-
dition would hardly have attracted any attention. Indeed, I some-
times had to inquire her state from her friends to be certain whether
she were in the maniacal state or not. The fits themselves, whether
epileptic or hysterical, did not differ from the ordinary forms of
those diseases, except that while suffering from them, she never
entirely lost her consciousness, notwithstanding that on the cessation
of these fits, and her return to a sane state of mind, she retained no
recollection of them, or of anything that had taken place during
their continuance.
With regard to the nature of this malady, Dr. Prichard states that,
though most of the cases hitherto observed in females were connected
with epilepsy, yet they had an hysteric origin; and from a review of
the phenomena of the present case, its spontaneous cure upon the
establishment of the catemenia seems to be the most certain guide
we can take in investigating its pathology; though the length of
time the complaint existed (eighteen months), and the apparently
complete absence of any marks of puberty during the whole period,
would rather induce us to refer the origin of the disease to some
previous irritation, particularly as she had never been in good health
since she had the measles at seven years of age.
The first attack began with rigors, followed by an epileptic fit, to
judge from the struggles of the patient; but as she did not entirely
lose her consciousness, but was alternately delirious and sensible, the
attack seems to have partaken more of an hysteric than of an
epileptic form. The effect of the bleeding in increasing the struggles,
and producing a tendency to syncope, would also bear out this view;
for though bleeding is rarely used in the systematic treatment of
epilepsy, yet it is generally serviceable in controlling the violence of
the paroxysms, as has often been remarked, when by accident the
patients have wounded themselves so as to lose a quantity of blood
during a fit. In hysteria, however, the treatment is ordinarily
quite opposed to bloodletting, (which has a tendency to exasperate
the disease by increasing the debility, and with it the nervous sus-
ceptibility of the patient,) except in certain cases where there is
evidence of some local congestion. Judged, then, by the effect of
treatment, this case seems to have been hysterical ab initio, and if
hysterical, dependent, therefore, upon the state of the generative
system, though there existed no signs of approaching puberty. But
as it is well known that menstruation may precede the other appear-
ances of puberty, there is nothing very unreasonable in supposing
that in a delicate susceptible young person, the earliest change in
the condition of the generative organs might be attended with the
460 CASE OF DOUBLE CONSCIOUSNESS
same phenomena of convulsive action as are often observed in other
cases of hysteria, where, though the external signs of puberty are
present, the conclusive proof of its establishment is still wanting by
the absence of menstruation. In regard to this subject, I regret
that I did not make particular inquiry into the moral habits of my
patient; but whatever they may have been, (and from her modest
demeanour, when well, I am disposed to think favourably of them,)
no information that I could have gained would have invalidated the
argument for an hysteric origin of her complaint, but would have
tended to confirm it.
The occurrence of tympanitis and catalepsy during the course of
the disease favours this view of its nature; and the pain at the back
of the head, and the tenderness of the spine, are well-known symp-
toms of hysterical affections, independently of the support they
derive from the phrenological theory that assigns to the cerebellum
the office of presiding over the generative functions, and presumes
that organ to participate, by reflected sensibility, in the derangement
of the sexual organs. Indeed, the first accessions of the state of
double consciousness in this case were considered to be merely
phases of hysteria; and it was not till after their repetition, and a
close observation of their phenomena, that this state was ascertained
to exist.
A certain connected train of ideas, but totally foreign to the ordi-
nary thoughts and feelings of the patient, however, is often observed
in other disorders as well as in hysteria; in delirium, for instance,
particularly in delirium-tremens, and that attending typhus fever, of
which ideas not a trace remains in the memory after recovery; yet
such cases are not thought to be extraordinary, but merely transient
disturbances of the mind?the consequences of obvious irritation of
the nervous centres, which cease with the removal of their causes,
like the passing off of the stupefaction of drunkenness. It is only
when these phenomena are frequently repeated, or become of a per-
manent character, that we are struck with surprise that the mind
can be almost at the same time in a sound or unsound state; and
that ideas that arise in it, or impressions received by it, in either
condition are only retained by it during the continuance, and on the
recurrence, of that same condition, though this recurrence may not
take place till after an interval of some years, when the delirium
returns with all its delusions, or the reason resumes its sway, as
though there had never been any interruption of its influence.
To those Avho have witnessed them, the phenomena of mesmerism
Avill doubtless here suggest themselves as being analogous, if not
almost identical, with this condition; but as I do not wish to say
more upon a subject in regard to which there is so much diversity
of opinion in the profession, I will proceed to point out the
relation of double consciousness to other states of the mind, re-
specting which there can be no dispute. Viewed physiologically,
double consciousness is connected most closely with dreaming and
CONNECTED WITH HYSTERIA. ' 461
somnambulism, though the latter is in many instances a pathological
condition; but as neither of these phases of the mind has had much
light thrown upon it, even by all the improvements and disco-
veries of modern times, I think it better to point out the relations
of the subject before us to certain disordered states of the sensorium,
of which, though their proximate cause be equally unknown as that
of the former, yet the exciting causes are sufficiently evident in
many, and even in most cases, to admit of their treatment, being
undertaken with well-founded expectations of success.
We have already noticed hysteria, and the delirium of fever and
mania a, potu, as often exhibiting double consciousness in the oblivion
of facts connected with the paroxysms; but these diseases, before
they obtain this height, frequently pass through a state that is, in
fact, a form of double consciousness, in which the patients still retain
enough reason and reflection to know that their minds are dis-
ordered, but not enough to control the new set of feelings and ideas
that are continually arising in them. The commonest form of this
condition is exhibited in drunkenness, in which at one moment ex-
travagant acts are committed, and all kinds of nonsense are uttered,
and in the next the patient will deplore his folly, and put a sufficient
restraint upon himself to pass for a sober person, if negd be. So,
also, the first abnormal ideas and feelings of hysteria may be con-
trolled with success, but if yielded to, they will carry the patient
on to the wildest extravagances and bursts of passion. A like con-
dition often occurs in monomania and moral insanity, particularly
in that form which leads to the perpetration of horrid crimes, from
which the natural disposition of the patient revolts. Such cases
have been adduced by Dr. Wigan, in his work on the " Duality of
the Mind," in proof that the brain is not only anatomically, but
psychologically a double organ, of which one hemisphere is liable
to have its functions disordered, so as sometimes to predominate
over, and sometimes to be subordinate to, the other healthy portion.
The increase in the strength of Mary Parker during the maniacal
state is not an uncommon thing in hysterical patients, whose vigour
at other times seems to be quite exhausted, and also in the last
delirious struggles of mania and typhus, and is explicable by the
increased irritability of the muscular system, induced by the excited
state of the brain. Her insensibility to her ordinary pains and
sufferings is not at all an unusual symptom in the insane, and
depended upon the same condition of the sensorium, whatever it
was, that produced the maniacal state. Analogous effects are now
well known to be produced, without abolition of the other faculties,
by anaesthetic agents, and even by drunkenness occasionally.
The change in her disposition, from bashful timidity to audacity
and impertinence, must be regarded as identical with the violence
and mischievous tricks of maniacs, who thereby clearly exhibit (in
an exaggerated degree, however) what are the impulses of our nature
when uncontrolled by reason and religion.
NO. VII. H H
