The Fourth Report of the Committee of Visitors of the County Lunatic Asylum, at Hanwell
========================================================================================

418
Akt.V
January Quarter Sessions, 1849.
London: Norris. 1849.

The Hanwell Lunatic Asylum was opened for tlie reception of patients
on the 16th May, 1831, and enjoys the pre-eminence of having carried
the " non-restraint system," as it is termed, to the greatest possible
extent; in fact, neither strait-waistcoat, muff, body-staps, leg-locks,
coercion-chair, or any kind of instruments of restraint are now ad-
mitted within its walls.

On the 21st September, 1839, every form of instrumental restraint
was discontinued; and from that period to the present, every annual
report has recorded in terms of the highest commendation the
success which has attended the new plan. From the opening of the
Asylum in 1831, to December, 1848, there have been admitted 3142
patients, of whom 768 appear to have been cured, 160 relieved, and
1251 have died. On the 31st of December, 1848, there were in the
Asylum, 967 patients, and 94 officers and attendants, making a total
of 1061 inmates. The entire establishment is under the immediate
control and supervision of a committee of twenty magistrates and
country gentlemen, who, to their honour be it spoken, attend the
Asylum daily, to discharge the onerous and responsible duties of their
office.

Looking at the high position which the Hanwell Lunatic Asylum
aspires to, amidst other contemporary asylums, we are tempted to
make some observations upon its constitution and government, and
the mode in which it is conducted. We are in the first place sur-
prised to observe, that the committee of management assumes to
itself a jurisdiction which should be purely professional. From the
Report before us, we find that the committee not only controls the
financial and domestic arrangements of the establishment, but ad-
judicates upon the admission and the discharge of patients, and thus
constitutes itself, de facto, a medical board. We have no doubt but
that the members of the committee exercise their judgment in the
most conscientious manner, and that they allow themselves to be
influenced by the opinion of the medical officers; but the principle
of non-professional interposition in the management of any public
hospital or asylum is in itself objectionable. We cannot understand
country gentlemen examining, quarterly, every patient in the esta-
blishment, and determining which cases shall be admitted, and which
discharged. It appears to us an anomaly. These are strictly pro-
fessional duties, wliicli should be delegated exclusively to the medical
officers of the institution. The Keport before us states that?
" A quarterly examination of every patient in the Asylum by the
Committee, with records of their proceedings and remarks, is no
ordinary obligation, but has been cheerfully and regularly fulfilled.
And their own spontaneous regulations, tliat every 'patient admitted
shall be introduced to the Committee, and that none shall be dis-
charged without similar intercourse, all multiply the attentions de-
manded, whilst obviously those regulations for the protection of the
patients must be applauded by the judicious and humane.

"Well to regulate such an establishment also, peculiar experience
and discernment are to be desired. Numerous as are the patients,
and classified as they may be, on their arrival and during tlieir stay,
under the usual heads adopted by medical men, there exists generally
a peculiarity in every individual case?and special attentions, where
the peculiarity is ascertained, will allay greatly the wretchedness of
the insane, and assuredly soothe and tranquillize the patient, and often
accelerate the cure. By frequent and gentle intercourse on the part
of the members of the Committee, confidence and respect are produced,
and they are perpetually gratified by a recognition of themselves on
the part of the patients, as their benefactors and their friends."
We concur with the humanity and spirit of these remarks, but we
believe the " peculiarity which exists in every individual case" can
be only fairly appreciated by a professional eye, and we doubt whether
" the frequent and gentle intercourse " of unprofessional visitors can
be of any advantage to the insane. We cheerfully admit that a
frequent and systematic general supervision is not only desirable, but
necessary, in so large an establishment as Hanwell; but here the
labours of the committee should legitimately end.

In the constitution of the Hanwell Asylum, we are also struck
with the paucity of medical officers attached to it. There appear in
round numbers to be about 500 patients on the male, and 500 on
the female, side; yet there is only one resident medical officer
attached to each department, and one visiting physician for the whole
establishment. The inefficiency of so small a medical staff is obvious.
If Ave look across the Channel, we find in Paris, that the Salpetriere,
with its thousand patients, has four times the number of visiting
physicians, and ten times the number of resident medical officers*
Hie disproportion between the sane and the insane is here so great,
that it is impossible under such a system to bring any moral
influence to bear upon the afflicted multitude. Then, again, this
Asylum costs the county 26,500?. per annum, (as appears by the
present report,) and yet does nothing of any importance for the
benefit of this department of science. We remember with pleasure
the lectures of Dr. Conolly, and we hail with peculiar satisfaction
his appointment, by the President of the College of Physicians, to
deliver the Croonean Lectures.

Such an asylum as Hanwell ought to do something more for the
benefit of science. There ought to be a more numerous medical
staff, and a permanent clinique attached to such an institution. We
have statistical tables before us, giving the number of patients ad-
mitted, and discharged?cured, relieved, and dead ; but where are its
pathological reports? Since the opening of the Asylum, 1251 patients
have died, yet the post-mortem examinations, when such have taken
place, have been made privately, and neither student nor professor
been benefited by witnessing the result. The County Asylum of
Hanwell, supported largely as it is by county rates and parish assess-
ments, is as much a hospital as St George's, or St. Bartholomew's,
and ought to have a medical staff as numerous and efficient as these,
or any other metropolitan hospitals. While charity might thus be
administered upon the highest principles of Christian benevolence,
something ought to be done to advance our knowledge of science,
and thereby enable us to relieve the afflictions of suffering humanity.
The Keport before us, as usual, expresses the highest satisfaction at
the enlightened, humane, and effective system of non-restraint which
has, the committee states, rendered the Hanwell establishment a
model to be imitated by all other public asylums. We must not,
however, deceive ourselves. In all such institutions, there will occa-
sionally be found dangerous, ferocious, and rampant lunatics, whom
it is necessary, while the furor lasts, to restrain. The paroxysm may
not last long, but while it is at its height, the unfortunate patient,
for his own sake, as well as for the safety of other persons, must in
some way be secured. This is done at Hanwell, not by the use of
the hand-strap and body-belt, or the strait-waistcoat, or any other
mechanical means; but instead of these, human restraint is substi-
tuted, and solitary confinement in the padded room. The Keport of
the Commissioners in Lunacy is perfectly clear upon this point.
Those Avho profess the entire disuse of restraint, employ manual force
and seclusion as parts of their methods of management; but, observe
the Commissioners?"In those cases where the patient is over-
powered by a number of keepers holding his arms and hands during
a paroxysm of violence, restraint is manifest. Even in those cases
where the patient is forced into a cell by manual strength, and pre-
vented from leaving it until his fit of excitement shall have passed,
it is difficult to understand how this can be reconciled with the pro-
fession of abstaining from all restraint whatever, so as to be correctly
termed ' non-restraint.' "?Metropolitan Report, 1848. Upon these
grounds, Foville and other eminent authorities, liave designated the
" non-restraint system" at Hanwell " a fiction," because, after all, it
amounts only to the substitution of one mode of restraint for another
mode of restraint. This may be true, but the most humane system
should be adopted, and from the time when Pinel emancipated the
unhappy lunatic from the chains, bolts, and bars which thrust " the
iron into his soul," every attempt has been made to abolish restraint
altogether, and certainly in no establishment has this effort been
carried out more successfully than at Hanwell. If it be " a fiction,"
it is better that such a fiction should exist, than the cruel reality of
modes of restraint which inflicted torture under the old system, and
which precluded, in most cases, any chance of recovery. When the
Commissioners visited the asylum on the 12tli July, 1848, there
were 967 patients in the establishment, of whom three were in
seclusion, and fifty-nine under medical treatment.

In Hanwell Asylum, it should be added, there is less necessity for
restraint or seclusion than in many other institutions of the kind,
because the majority of cases there are chronic and incurable, and
such patients, speaking generally, are not very liable to paroxysms
of excitement.

From the Report before us, Ave find that during the year 1848,
there were 165 patients admitted, of whom 29 were discharged
cured, 7 relieved, and 77 died. This appears to be a large propor-
tion of deaths; but it is to be remembered that many of the cases
were incurable upon admission. Hence, also, the proportion of
cures is much smaller than might be expected under the present im-
proved system of treatment. The per centage of cures from the
opening of the asylum in 1831 to the end of the year 1848 is esti-
mated at only 6-3G, and the per centage of deaths at 10-02. The
committee again calls upon the local authorities to send recent, and
not old and chronic cases to the asylum.

" Edified by the confirmed experiences of another year, your com-
mittee would renew to the parochial authorities of the county the
entreaties that have formerly been made, that recent and not chronic
patients should be sent to the asylum. The concurrent testimony
of all medical men experienced in the treatment of the insane pro-
nounces that, generally, early cases are curable; and the facts of the
past year demonstrate that rarely has a case occurred in which an
early cure has not followed an early treatment; while prudence and
kindness should unite to prevent the selecting too frequently, old,
hopeless, and diseased subjects, to occupy the wards of the asylum,
and to absorb an attention from the attendants and the officers, which
might be so much better and availingly applied."

We have frequently reflected with wouder at the fact, that not-
withstanding the numerous munificent institutions which exist in
this country, where the hand of Christian charity dispenses her
favours so liberally, there is not any hospital in the metropolis for
the reception of incurables. We have often been called upon to
attend poor miserable beings, who, on account of their disease being-
incurable, have been refused admission into any hospital, and sent
home to die in a wretched attic, where the want of the most ordinary
necessities has aggravated and embittered their dying sufferings. It
would be well to consider whether it might not be advisable, when
the two county asylums are open, to make Colney Hatch an asylum
for curative treatment, and Hanwell an asylum for incurables, or
vice versd.

The most interesting portion of the present Report is the account
which the committee gives of the educational improvement of the
patients in Hanwell Asylum:?
" The last Annual Report referred to the great number of human
beings who were demented, imbecile, and idiotic; also to the efforts
made for some education of the insane by Mr. Gaskell, the active
and intelligent medical officer of the Lancaster County Asylum, now
most worthily promoted to the honourable situation of a Commissioner
of Lunacy; and also in the Surrey County Asylum, and to the sur-
prising benefits that had crowned the attempts ingeniously and
generously made in France, Prussia, Switzerland, and America,
under most illustrious auspices, and the direction of M. Seguin,
Dr. Voisin, and M. Valee, of Dr. Guggenbuhl, and others, justly dis-
tinguished for a charity and skill beyond all praise. It also an-
nounced a design to make an experiment, as to which 110 sanguine
expectations could be reasonably cherished, but which it appeared to
be a duty to attempt. For the plan and their resolutions, the com-
mittee refer to their last Annual Report. There it was announced
that no patient would be compelled to attendance?that attendance
should not interfere with the recreations or customary useful labour
of those patients who were productively or healthfully employed?
and that the schools would not be designed merely to teach patients
to read, write, and similar matters, but for the awakening and im-
proving the intellectual state of the imbecile and idiotic, and for the
alleviation and gratification, by instruction in natural history, geo-
graphy, and general knowledge, of those patients who were already
partially educated and instructed, and so as to excite, relieve, and
recreate, as well as to inform their minds. To the superintendence
of that attempt, your committee have devoted themselves during the
year, and consider that their limited hopes have not been disap-
pointed, and that they have good reason to be content. With
pleasure they acknowledge the cordial co-operation of the medical
authorities, the chaplain, the matron, and the other officers, all of
whom have shown much generous interest.

" Fortunate, too, have the committee been in the appointment of
Mr. Frederick Waite, late of Exeter, as the master of the male
school; and of his daughter, Miss Charlotte Waite, as the competent
and eligible mistress of the female school. Ordinary expressions,
as applied to the governors and governesses of schools, Avould con-
vey no adequate ideas of the capability of both of them for the
situations which they occupy, and of the intelligence, zeal, good
temper, and perseverance which both have manifested, and which
have won for tlieni just and universal confidence and esteem. The
schools were opened with the commencement of the year. The
patients have been selected by the medical officers of each depart-
ment. Daily in the forenoon and afternoon the pupils are assembled.
To the much approved methods adopted in France and Switzerland,
recourse has been had. Besides the usual occupation in the forenoon
and afternoon, an evening male writing-class is periodically as-
sembled, and thither the attendants who wish for improvement also
repair. Weekly, from 60 to 70 male and female patients congregate
in the chapel, and, Avith suitable tuition, form a musical class, which
is very worthily popular, and by which the religious services have
been rendered far more harmonious and pleasant, and would not
discredit the congregations assembled in many a parochial edifice or
cathedral choir. Not limited to those performances, Mr. Waite has
excited much interest, and gives much satisfaction by evening
lectures delivered oil physical geography, entomology, and the cul-
tivation and properties of plants, well illustrated, and which some-
times 150 patients and persons have been gratified to hear; and they
form subjects for hope, for remembrance, and for conversation, and
present a pleasing and propitious novelty in the management of the
insane. Your committee hope, that on this interesting subject, the
mention of some statements made at the desire of their chairman,
by Mr. Waite and his daughter, will prove acceptable to the court;
and especially as the annual reports obtain an extended circulation
and reference, and as detailed information on such topics must prove
exemplary and useful. Such statement of Mr. Waite contains the
following information :?

" ' I forward you a condensed report of the patients attending the
male school during the past year. Since Ave commenced in January,
1848, 64 patients have attended the school; Avith respect to their
ages?
"' 5 are above 10 and under 20
19 ? 20 ? 30
15 ? 30 ? 40
8 ? 40 ? 50
7 ? 50 ? 60
2 60 ? 70

" ? Of these patients, 31 are epileptic, attended Avith mania. 9 of
the number under various stages of imbecility. 20 are insane, sub-
ject to periods of excitement. 3 are congenital idiots; and there
424 ON THE MANAGEMENT OF
were 2 recent cases of mania, who liave been cured and left the
asylum.

" ' 1G of the patients can read and write fairly.
18 ? can read and write imperfectly.
9 ? can read a little, and not write.
6 ? never speak, but anxiously watch the les-
sons, particularly those given to others
on the slate; they can also write words
on a slate.
4 ? are of a still lower grade, and amuse them-
selves with pictures, and slate and pencil.
3 ? hitherto taught only a few gymnastic
exercises.
" The few following prominent cases may crave your considera-
tion :?

" ' C. C., 27 years of age, Epileptic, attended with frequent Mania.
This patient has attended the school from its commencement; he
is usually attentive and obedient, and very desirous of obtaining in-
struction and information. During his worst periods of excitement,
I have rarely failed to tranquillize him during school time.
" 1 J. C., 31, Mania attended with Imbecility. He is always mild
and gentle ; has attended the school eight months; he is very fond
of reading and writing, in both of which he has greatly improved;
he has again resumed his attendance, after a long and severe illness.
" ' W. B., 50, Occasional Violent Mania. He has attended the
school with tolerable regularity the last six months; reads and writes,
and is very fond of arithmetic; even under considerable excitement,
he becomes tranquil on giving him a sum to work.

" 1 E. D., 33. (Frenchman.) He has attended the school from
its commencement. Epileptic, with recurrent periods of excite-
ment, and paralyzed; the improvement of this man is very consider-
able; his reading was very imperfect, and his writing worse; in both
he has wonderfully improved, spells exceedingly well, and has ac-
quired much information.

" ' D. D., 28, Insane. Attended the school for three months
with considerable effect; he was afterwards employed out of doors,
till he was discharged cured. During the latter period, he attended
the evening classes.
" 1 P. H. Q., 24. A very remarkable case of Melancholia. This
patient never speaks, but will copy for me letters of a commercial
nature, bills of lading, &c.
" ' J. H., 34, Epileptic, attended with Imbecility. This patient
has been in the school for some months without speaking. I saw
him on one occasion apparently reading a piece of newspaper with
much attention; and I inquired of him, if he would read a little
HAN WELL LUNATIC ASYLUM. 425
book to me if I gave him one 1 He replied, Yes. Since that
period, he constantly reads and writes during school hours.
" ' C. W., 19, Epileptic, with Imbecility. He has attended the school
from its commencement, and has very greatly improved in reading
and writing,^ <fcc. ; indeed, I may add, what he does know, he has
Avholly acquired in the school.
" ' H. M., 30, Imbecile. He has attended the school from its
commencement, and notwithstanding his imbecility, has been taught
to write and read; owing to his having a very imperfect knowledge
of sounds, he has not acquired the latter with the same facility as
writing; he is exceedingly fond of pictures, and by their aid in
teaching him to read, the labour has been greatly lessened.
" ' J. O. D., 25, Epileptic, with occasional Mania. An exceedingly
attentive, well-behaved young man; reads extremely well, writes
tolerably; numbers perplex him; the latter I find to be almost in-
variably the case, with the epileptic patients especially.
" 1 J. L., 28, Idiot. He is now learning to write, and with great
hope of success; he has hitherto been regarded as incapable of being

taught.
" ' B. F., 30, Imbecility in a low degree. I have succeeded in
getting this patient to pronounce a few words, and he is making
satisfactory progress in learning to write; from his being a tranquil
patient, I hope, ultimately, I shall teach him to read.'
" Of the classes, the following are the arrangements :?
" f Reading the Testament twice a week.
" ' Miscellaneous reading, ditto.
" ' Writing, &c., three ov four times a week.
" ' Spelling, with slate lessons, ditto.
" 1 Oral insv Action daily.
" ' Singing with music in the chapel every Friday evening, the
average number of male and female patients in attendance exceed-
ing sixty.

" ' Attendants' class for general improvement twice a week.
" ' And lectures have been given on the following subjects to both
male and female patients during the year :?On History and Geo-
graphy?On the Geography of Plants?On the Pleasures arising
from the Cultivation of Flowers?On the Shrubs and other Plants
cultivated about the Grounds of the Asylum, with Descriptions of
their properties and uses?On the Transformation and changes of
Insects, illustrated by some beautiful diagrams, drawn and coloured
by one of the patients. And on some occasions, above 150 were
present at the lectures; and the attention with which they have
listened to me was a sure indication liow much they felt interested
and amused, and I cannot but hope that in some instances they,
indeed, were instructed.'

"The ingenuous and unpretending statement of Miss Waite will
also indicate the difficulties of the undertaking, as well as its nature,
and the very appropriate motives, and feeling sentiments, which
amidst her very peculiar functions have been entertained.
" ' Since the commencement of the school on the 1st of January,
1848, 73 female patients in the whole have attended.
"' Of these patients, Dr. Hitchman states that 33 are suffering
from chronic mania, and liable to recurrent fits of violence; 32 are
in various stages of imbecility; four are congenital idiots; and four
belonged to the class of recent cases, and have left the asylum cured.
Several in each of the first two classes are epileptic. Of these 73
patients? >

10 are above 20 and under 25 years of age.
6 under 30
11 under 35
10 under 40
19 under 45
5 under 50
7 under 55
4 under 60
1 under 65
" ' The patients are daily instructed in reading, writing, a variety
of lessons on the black board, on natural history, spelling, &c.
" ' The patients have continued to evince a desire to attend during
the school hours, and according to their various capacities have
benefited to a great extent. Many, whose time might have been
passed in idleness, have been roused into watching, with something
like interest, the patients who are disposed to exert themselves to a
greater degree. Amongst the most interesting cases is one of a
woman, aged 43, suffering from chronic mania, liable to periods of
violence and epileptic. She first joined the school-classes in March,
at that time scarcely able to read, and having ?1!> knowledge of
writing: she now writes a good legible hand, and reads perfectly
well; she has also improved in various ways. When in the school,
she is tractable, obliging, and amiable, and so grateful for the new
powers she has acquired, that it has been one of the happiest occu-
pations to teach her.

" 1 M. B., 45, Chronic Mania. This patient always appears in a
state of perfect unconsciousness, unless she is actually occupied; she
has improved in reading, and has begun to learn writing.
" ' A. D., 40, Chronic Mania, Has attended the school during the
last six months, shows a great desire to improve, and has learned to
read and write.
"1 M. M., 42. A very violent patient, who, when she first at-
tended the school, was rude and quarrelsome, but has become gentle
and grateful: she has received a fair education, and is now most
anxious to improve herself to the greatest extent.
" e M. B., 61, Chronic Mania. Has wished to attend the school
the last two months; during that time, has been very punctual and
remarkably persevering: she is improving greatly in reading and
writing.

"' C. D., 40, Melancholia. A very singular patient, not often
present in the school-room, and then almost constantly weeping:
she has never spoken, but latterly has appeared willing to write. I
trust she may be won to still greater exertions, which, it is hoped,
will have the effect of causing her to forget for a time some real or
imaginary sorrow.

" 1 Several patients, who had a very imperfect knowledge of read-
ing, have sufficiently improved to read with ease. Many of the
patients, not being able to read, have, since their attendance at the
school, learned the alphabet, and are able to spell a few words.
Other patients, of extremely feeble intellect, but not absolutely
idiotic, have, with great difficulty, acquired a limited knowledge of
the alphabet.

" 1 P. L., 43, Congenital Idiot. This is the most interesting case
of that class. The patient, possessing a certain kind of energy and
great love of approbation, has, encouraged apparently only by the
latter feeling, acquired, with great labour, the knowledge of a few
letters and a few simple words: she perfectly remembers, and is
fond of repeating, many little facts connected with natural history,
but has no idea of colour, form, or number. With the remaining
three idiots, two of whom cannot articulate, all attempts at teaching
lip to this time have failed; but they have become obedient and
cheerful, and anxious to attend the school.

"' There is an evening writing-class for those patients Avho are
variously occupied during the day; 30 have been admitted, and on
an average, 25 attend with great willingness, notwithstanding they
have been actively engaged during many hours of the day.

" 1 Of the four patients who have been discharged cured, two, one
aged 21, the other 27, made great progress, and expressed them-
selves very grateful for the opportunity given them of improvement.
" ' The period since the school commenced has been too recent to
enable me to offer to your notice many remarkable cases of improve-
ment ; but I have seen these heavily-afflicted women assemble in the
school-room with cheerfulness and ready obedience, proceed to
arrange themselves in their accustomed places, and apply themselves,
with wonderful perseverance and diligence, to their several employ-
ments ; and during the whole time they are present, the utmost
order and decorum prevail, whilst the silence, unless they are called
on to speak, is profound. And during the twelve months the school
has been established, I can only remember one instance where it was
necessary to request the attendant to remove a patient for violent
conduct.

" ' On the whole, my teaching has been received by the patients
with such apparent pleasure and gratitude, that it has truly lessened
whatever labour may attend it, and given me, with your sanction,
every encouragement to go on rejoicing.' "

Nothing can be more gratifying than these details, particularly as
the mental improvement would indicate, in some degree, the restora-
tion of the intellectual faculties. We must now take farewell of the
present Report. Whatever improvements the progress of science
may suggest in the management of Hanwell Asylum, the committee
of visitors is entitled to the thanks of the community for the zeal,
assiduity, and humanity with which they have discharged their
duties. And we cordially join them in their benevolent wish, that
"long as the poor and helpless, suffering the worst of Heaven's
visitation, need such asylums, may Hanwell remain for their recep-
tion and recovery. And may it, under the care of their successors,
long continue to flourish and improve."
