Impulsive Insanity? The French Vampire
========================================

A most striking and appalling instance of insanity has just occupied
the attention of the French psychologists. It has called forth the
talents of Brierre de Boismont, of Micliea, and of several other cele-
brated mental pathologists. It is one of those cases which, whilst
it shocks the feelings of all those who have the ordinary suscepti-
bilities of human nature, is accompanied with such disgusting traits
of unnatural sensation, that many of the points must still be left in
mystery, as they are scarcely fit even for medical discussion. It is
true that our neighbours are less delicate on such subjects than we
are, and that the scientific journals that have narrated the occur-
rences have entered with a minuteness upon them that would scarcely
be palatable to our own more sensitive tastes; and they have ran-
sacked both ancient and modern records to furnish forth similar
proofs of moral depravity.

Towards the close of the year 1848, a rumour was prevalent in
Paris that awoke the most fearful alarm. It was whispered about
that the cemeteries of the dead had been broken into; that bodies
lately interred had been dragged from their gloomy receptacles and
savagely mutilated. To a people so singularly devoted to respect the
remains of their friends, who take frequent opportunities of visiting
their graves, and who, more particularly amongst the humbler
classes, are accustomed on certain days to hang upon the tombs
* Communicated by G. Sigmond, M.D., F.S.R.S., formerly Professor of Materia
Medica to the Royal Medico-Botanical Society, and Lecturer on Medical Juris-
prudence, Grosvenor School, St. George's Hospital.
memorials of tlieir affections, and to strew around, as was formerly
customary in England, flowers and lierbs, this information was
most harassing. Every care was paid to the due watching of the
cemeteries, and, if possible, to ascertain what motives could lead to
the perpetration of such acts. It was evident that it was not that
love of science which formerly led medical men in search of anato-
mical knowledge, for the bodies that had been exhumed had been
treated with violence. Limbs had been torn oft', the internal parts
had been disemboAvelled, yet with one or two exceptions there had
been no portion missing.

On the 16th of November in that year, Dr. Pujol was sum-
moned by the commissioner of police, of the quarter of the Luxem-
bourg, to attend at the cemetery of Mount Parnassus, and to draw
up a medical report upon a case which demanded medico-legal in-
vestigation. He found there the body of a female, aged about fifty;
the corpse was lying upon its back at a little distance from the
tomb, surrounded by large cypresses; it was partly covered by its
winding-sheet, so that the head and the lower extremities only were
visible; the right angle of the mouth had been cut asunder by a
sharp instrument almost to the ear; a deep incision had been made
in the throat. On taking off the covering, two very large mutila-
tions came into view; the whole of the interior part of the body was
laid open by an immense incision, which embraced the whole length
of the thoracic and abdominal cavities. The limbs exhibited still
greater mutilations; the right arm had been dragged from its socket
and placed between the thighs, which had also undergone disarticu-
lation; the various tissues had been hacked by some instrument ;
nothing was to be seen which could in any way account for what had
occurred. There had been no attempt to take away the clothing?
the examination had not been scientific?there had evidently been
much labour employed in reaching the body?there was no one
who, from motives of revenge, could have been led to the violation
of the sanctity of the dead; in short, the whole was involved in a
mystery which no one could unravel.

The subject had scarcely ceased to form the daily conversation
of the neighbouring coffee-houses, Avlien a similar occurrence gave
rise to the greatest agitation. On the 12tli of December, the same
physician was sent for to the same cemetery for a precisely similar
object to that which had so lately demanded his attention. Upon
this occasion, it was the corpse of a female, still young, that he was
called upon to inspect, and to draw up a report. The body, which
had been taken from its coffin, had been dragged about fifty paces
from the grave. One incision was to be noticed, which it was
evident had been performed for scientific purposes, and upon inquiry
at a later period, the hospital in which she had died attested the
fact; but besides this, there were none of those savage mutilations
which before were visible. Here, for the first time, was publicly
noticed that the gratification of some horrid propensity must have
urged tlie perpetrator of these deeds upon liis frightful expedition.
The publicity given by the journals to these shocking events brought
to light several cases which had been whispered about, but which had
not become the object of inquiry. It was made known by the Mayor
of Ivry, that at that village, which is close to Paris, there had been
occurrences of a similar nature, which had baffled every inquiry, and
which had thrown the surrounding neighbourhood into the utmost
consternation.

A young girl, of the name of Gillet, had been buried amidst the
lamentations of her friends, who had been shocked a few days after-
wards by the discovery that her corpse had been dragged from its
resting-place; the stomach and the bowels had been opened. A
female, a married woman, Charpitelle, who died in childbirth, had
also been similarly treated thirteen days after her interment. The
body had been opened, tlie heart had been taken away, but all the
other organs were left in their normal state. In these instances
there was an erotic manifestation. The putrifying remains exhibited
that there had been an attempt to perpetrate crime, and to gratify
an unnatural appetite. Disgust and horror followed upon these
crimes. In the public mind there existed a general feeling of dismay
at the idea of being compelled to bury a relation in places where
such atrocious deeds were committed. The mystery which en-
veloped the whole matter added to the alarm. The guardians of the
cemeteries were doubled and trebled; watcli-dogs and blood-hounds
were employed; spring-guns, infernal-machines, steel-traps, were set,
and the utmost publicity given to the steps that were taken for
securing the catacombs and cemeteries of the dead. All seemed in
vain. The guns were heard apparently discharging of their o wn
accord; the infernal machines were found to have gone off; but
although there were even observed traces of blood, and marks that
deep injuries had been inflicted upon the intruder, there was no solu-
tion to the mystery?there was no one discovered. The cemetery of
Mount Parnassus had evidently been scaled on the 15th of March,
1849. The machine, which had been charged with all sorts of
missiles, had gone off; the invader had evidently not escaped unhurt;
his blood remained as evidence that he had been wounded; but the
watchmen who rushed to the spot had found no one, and they were
in a state of despair, when one of those accidental circumstances
which occasionally seem to be destined to reveal obscure crimes,
took place, and enabled the hand of justice to seize the perpetrator
of these unseemly and disgusting acts.

Two soldiers of the seventy-fourth of the line were stationed as
sentries at the cemetery of Mount Parnassus, on the occasion of the
execution of the men who killed General Brea, during the insurrec-
tion in June. They entered into conversation with the guardians of
the place, and in talking of the severity of wounds, they mentioned
those of one of their comrades, Serjeant Bertrand, who had gone into
the military hospital on the night of the 15th of March, having been,
according to his statement, attacked by some of the insurgents whilst
returning to his barracks. They dwelt upon the number of the
wounds, and the singular way in which they had been inflicted, as
well as the nature of the missiles that had been employed. The
narrative awoke the curiosity of the listeners, who, comparing the
time when the attack was said to have been made, and the pecu-
liarities attendant upon the injuries that had been inflicted, arrived
at the conclusion that they had gained a clue to the long wished-for
discovery. They communicated their suspicions to the medical at-
tendant of the wounded man, M. Marchal, of Calvi, who, acting with
great prudence and discretion, waited until Serjeant Bertrand was
out of danger, and then gradually unfolding to him the nature of the
accusations that were brought against him, and for which he was to
be tried before a court-martial, obtained from him a complete revela-
tion of his disgusting deeds, and a confession of all the circumstances
connected with them, establishing in the mind of his humane and
scientific physician a conviction that a monomania of a frightful
character had possession of him, and that he was urged on to the
commission of horrors and of crimes by an impulsive insanity, which
left him entirely without control over his passions and his actions.
By the 10th of July, Serjeant Bertrand was sufficiently recovered
to be able to appear before the council of war of the department of
the Seine for the purpose of undergoing his trial for the misdemeanor
of which he was accused. It was a matter of much regret that he
was to be placed before a military tribunal, not only as far as the
satisfaction of the public mind was concerned, but also in reference
to the information which was expected to accrue from the investiga-
tion to medical and psychological science. But as Paris was at the
period under military law, the whole of the department of the Seine
being in a state of siege, the ordinary courts of law coidd have no
cognizance of delinquencies committed by soldiers. The investiga-
tion, however, was well conducted, and the presiding officer was most
anxious that the truth should be elicited. If, however, medical
opinions were not there sufficiently examined, the publications of
Brierre de Boismont and others have left nothing to desire; and
there has been as much attention devoted to the subject as is neces-
sary for the complete investigation of the state of mind of the
individual. When Serjeant Bertrand made his appearance in the
court, every eye was naturally directed towards him, and the precon-
ceived opinion from what had been brought forward in the charge,
led the spectator to expect to see an unprepossessing person, with
a countenance of ferocious and unpleasant expression. The surprise
was therefore the greater, on seeing a young and interesting
man, leaning on crutches, and evidently suffering under the pain of
recently-inflicted wounds, advance with an air of respectful deference
and gentle manner. He appeared to be about twenty-five years of
age; his figure of the middle height, thin, and well-proportioned; a
marked and well-defined profile of Grecian character; a fine forehead;
his eyes full of life and expression, with something of a melancholy
cast; his hair chesnut colour. The phrenologist could discover
nothing in the form of the head that could indicate sensuality or
brutality; on the contrary, without studying minutely the organiza-
tion, he would pronounce him to be intellectual, whilst the physiogno-
mist would find sufficient of energy, yet of mildness and benevolence,
in the expression of his countenance, to say that he could do nothing-
contrary to the laws of society or to the Divine revelation?at least,
that he would not be guilty of those ferocious acts which lead to the
idea of innate wickedness, and which exclude their perpetrator from
society. On being questioned by the president, he unhesitatingly
acknowledged the commission of the deeds of which he was accused,
and for which he was arraigned before the tribunal. He had drawn
up a statement, he said, of what had occurred, and which he requested
his physician to read before the court. He did not seem in the
slightest degree affected by the situation in which he stood; listened
with apparently a deep interest to the document; now and then
looking round the court, as if he expected to find sympathy from his
audience, and as if he considered himself rather as a martyr or a
sufferer than a person accused of crimes which are visited by public
execration.

His confession began by stating, that, as early as seven years old,
there had been a species of madness observed in him, but that it had
never led him into any excess. He had satisfied himself by walking
in the most gloomy recesses of a forest, where he had remained
for several days plunged in the deepest gloom; but it was not until
the 23rd of February, 1847, that a kind of fury seized him, and led
him on to the execution of those acts for which he was then in a
state of confinement. He then described his first paroxysm. He Avas
walking in the country with one of his comrades,?for he was then
in the army, having studied originally for the church, but suddenly
enlisted, and rapidly promoted to the rank of serjeant,?they passed a
cemetery, which curiosity induced them to enter. A person had been
buried the previous evening; the grave-digger, surprised by a storm,
had not filled up the grave, but had left his tools upon the ground.
At this sight, fearful ideas crossed his mind, a violent headache and
a beating of the heart came on; he seemed to lose possession of his
faculties; he made a pretext to return into the town. As soon as
he had got rid of his companion, he returned to the cemetery, laid
hold of the shovel, and dug up the grave. Scarcely had he taken
the body out of the earth, than he began to beat it with the shovel
in a rage, such as he has never been able to account for; but when
he saw a peasant approaching the gate of the cemetery, he laid
himself down by the side of the corpse, and remained there some
moments : the peasant, who had also seen him, ran to acquaint
the authorities of it; he got out of the grave, restored the body,
covered it with earth, and escaped over the wall. He was then
trembling all over, a cold sweat covered his body; he hid himself in
a small copse in the neighbourhood; and notwithstanding a heavy
rain which continued to fall, lie laid down and remained from
twelve to three in a complete state of insensibility: on his recovery
from this condition, his head was in a feeble state, and his powers
of body diminished. The same thing occurred after each act of
madness. Two days afterwards, he returned to the cemetery at mid-
night during a heavy storm of rain. Finding none of the imple-
ments, he tore up the same grave with his hands; tlicy were soon
covered with blood, but he was insensible to pain. He dragged out
the body, he tore it piecemeal, and threw back the portions into the
grave, which he filled up with his hands. Four months then elapsed;
he fancied that he had become calm, he thought that his madness
was terminated; when upon going to Paris, some of his friends invited
him to accompany them to the cemetery of Pere la Chaise. The
sombre walks delighted him; he determined to go there during the
night, and at nine in the evening he scaled the walls, walked there,
agitated by sombre visions, for half an hour. He then began to dis-
inter a body without any implements. He delighted in the joy of
tearing a body in pieces. He then returned home. This was in the
month of June. For fourteen or fifteen days he followed the same
course, when he was surprised by two of the watchmen of the ceme-
tery, who were preparing to fire upon him; but as he had always
carefully filled up the graves after the mutilation, they had observed
nothing, and he got out of the scrape by saying that having been
intoxicated, he had entered the cemetery; that he had laid down
under a tree, and fallen asleep until that moment. They obliged him
to leave the place, but nothing else occurred, though the risk that he
had run made such an impression upon his mind that for seven or
eight days afterwards, he. avoided returning to the cemetery. The
events of February occurring, his regiment quitted Paris, and did
not return until the affair of June, when the disease developed itself
with redoubled violence. He was stationed at the camp at Ivry;
and during the night, although the sentinels were numerous and
vigilant, and the discipline severe, he contrived to pass out; nothing
could stop him. Every night he managed to reach the cemetery of
Mount Parnassus, where he acknowledged that he delivered himself up
to every species of excess. The first victim of liis paroxysm was a
young female, whose limbs he mutilated and threw about. This
profanation took place about the 25th of July; since that he returned
only twice to the cemetery. The first time it was a lovely moon-
light night; he saw a watchman armed with a pistol patrolling. He
was hid in a tree near the outward wall, which he had scaled for the
purpose of entering the cemetery; the man passed close to him, but
lie escaped unobserved, and he then got away without making any
attempt to enter. The second time, he disinterred an old woman
and a child; lie treated these corpses precisely as he had done others.
He then went to the cemetery where suicides, and those who die in
the hospitals, are buried, continuing the same treatment of dead
bodies. The first person lie there exhumed was a man who had
been drowned, and whose body he opened; this was towards the end
of the month of July. One of the most remarkable facts, to which, of
course, much interest is attached, aud which he himself observes that
he never was able in any way to account for, Avas, that he never
attempted to commit any sort of mutilation upon the corpses of the
men whom he disinterred; but, on the contrary, that he cut the
bodies of females in pieces with sensations of exquisite pleasure. On
one occasion, the 6th of November, 1848, he disinterred two male and
two female bodies, mutilating the females only. On this occasion,
as he was scaling the Avails of the cemetery, a pistol Avas fired at him,
but he escaped uninjured. This did not discourage him; he laid
himself down, notAvitlistanding the inclemency of the Aveather at the
time, and slept at least tAVO hours. He then penetrated into the
burying-ground, disinterred the corpse of a young girl that had been
found drowned, and mutilated it. From this period up to the 15th
of March, he only tAvice revisited the scene of action; once on the
15th of December; the other occasion, the beginning of January.
On both these intrusions, he found the guardians on the alert,
for each time he Avas fired upon. The ball on the first occasion
nearly touched him, having traversed his great coat behind; the
second did not come near him. He examined the position of the
machine from Avhicli missiles Avere throAvn, and remarked the manner
in Avliich it Avas discharged, and took precautions to escape its effects.
From this period up to the 15th of June there Avas no return of the
paroxysm; on the contrary, he felt an estrangement from that
peculiar sensation, Avliich lie describes as liaATing for some time
formed his enjoyment. At the time that he made the attack Avliich
led to his discovery, he AATas free from his excitement; but the feeling
of curiosity induced him, as he Avas passing the cemetery of Mount
Parnassus, to scale the wall, and just at the moment that he reached
the parapet, and Avas about to jump doAvn, he received the in-
juries, for the cure of Avliich he AAras admitted within the Avails of
the hospital. He declared, that had he on that occasion not been
so severely Avounded, he should never again have attempted to
enter a burial-ground, for that his boldness had completely left liim.
During the first period of his excesses, he never committed them
unless at times when he had taken someAvhat freely of Avine; but
latterly he required no such stimulus to call his morbid appetite into
play; any disagreeable circumstance occurring to him urged him on
to the committal of these acts. He added that it might be ima-
gined, after all that had been stated, that he might also have a desire
to injure the living; on the contrary, he Avas exceedingly gentle
toAvards all mankind, and he could not do mischief to a child. He
felt persuaded that he had not a single enemy, and that all the non-
commissioned officers Avere attached to him for his frankness and for
his gaiety.

Thus ended the confessions made by this singular being, upon
wliom every eye was fixed with earnest scrutiny, which he stood
with modest demeanour and unabashed look. He appeared to have
little or no compunctious visitings, and to he perfectly at bis ease
during the whole time that the long document was read by his
medical attendant. A pause of some moments followed, and then
there was almost a breathless silence, when M. Marchal, of Calvi,
stated that he had revelations of a most important character to detail;
that he made them with the perfect consent of the Serjeant. It had
been previously believed that the insanity of the unfortunate young
man was connected with cannibalism; that he was urged on to his
atrocities by a love of devouring human flesh; and that he had fed
upon the hearts and upon the bowels of some of the corpses. As
this species of unnatural propensity has been known to exist, there
was an idea that allusion was to be made to such a form of mental
aberration; but the horror of the audience, of the judge, and of the
court was fearfully awakened as the physician unfolded tlie sequel.
He began by observing that those who had heard what had been
read would no doubt have been struck by the singular allusion that
had been made to the preference shown by the accused to female
bodies; the profanations had been accompanied by still further
atrocities. The exhumation of tlie bodies had been for an end; the
mutilations had been only accessories?cohabitation with the dead
had been the object. When the corpse of a man was disinterred by
him, be felt a loathing and a disgust; but when a female presented
itself, be rushed upon it with avidity and ardour. He satisfied a
deplorable passion, and then fell into a state of convulsive stupor.
He laid down upon the ground in the open air, amongst the shrubs,
let the weather be of the most severe kind. He remained in a
lethargy unconscious of all that passed around him, and for several
hours seemed lost to every earthly feeling. It would be useless to
enter into minute details, or to follow the learned physician further.
There was sufficient evidence of the facts that were advanced; the
foul depravity of the man's taste was acknowledged by himself, and
the annals of the medical profession furnish similar histories; fortu-
nately they are of exceeding rarity. The sexual desire seems to
have been instinctively produced by the sight of the corpse; whether
it was the irresistible impulse produced by this depraved passion that
led to the exhumation, in the first instance, seems somewhat doubt-
ful, though this opinion is generally held by the psychologists, who
consider that the increased energy of the frame that rendered him
capable of surmounting every difficulty, and braving every danger,
was the result of the inordinate development of the erotic passion,
which accidentally was perverted to a depraved taste. The repulsive
story seemed borne out by all the facts that were produced, and the
man's declaration was looked upon as conclusive evidence, there-
fore the court did not pursue the investigation any further; it felt
incompetent to decide upon the nature of the mental delusion. It
contented itself, therefore, with declaring the man guilty of a mis-
demeanor; for which the highest punishment inflicted by the Code
Napoleon is twelve months' imprisonment. However unsatisfactory
this amount of punishment may appear, either for the chastisement
of such hideous deeds, or for the protection of society against their
repetition, no other course could have been followed; but upon the
expiration of this term, the police will exercise for some time a
surveillance over liim, and should any circumstance lead to the belief
that the monomania still exists, he will be consigned to confinement
for life in the Bicetre, or some lunatic establishment, as the evidence
of his physician will now be a sufficient ground for taking ulterior
measures.

The discussion excited by the opinions of the medical men are
interesting in the highest degree; but that which is entertained by
Michea is the one generally prevalent, that the maniac was urged on
by a depraved amatory feeling; that which M. Marclial, of Calvi, has
promulgated, that the organ of destructiveness was developed beyond
its normal state, whilst the erotic passion was only an accessory, has
not gained much ground. Those who have argued upon the proba-
bility of the correctness of the first proposition, have adduced nume-
rous extraordinary instances of the perversion of the moral faculties,
in consequence of a depraved generative instinct. They refer to the
evidences that exist of this degradation of human nature in the annals
of antiquity, and point to the secret museum in the palace at Naples,
and to the discovery that was made at Pompeii, of a room devoted to
scenes which surpass in their iniquity anything that modern invention
has dared to execute; and Brierre de Boismont has even gone further
in his illustrations; he has brought forward instances, one occurring
in his own practice, in which the sexual passion, which is certainly
in some instances one of the most imperious governors of the Avhole
organization, has been directed towards the commission of immoral,
cruel, and indecent acts. In the middle ages, the chroniclers have
given to us narratives which exhibit the wild ravings of madmen,
upon whom satyriasis, erotomania, and nymphomania had exerted
their baleful power, and led them to the commission of atrocious
folly, which the legal tribunals of the day associated with sorcery and
witchcraft, and condemned the miserable wretches to the torture and
to flames. The descriptions of Delancre, of what occurred by those
who believed themselves possessed by the agents of Satan, and driven
by him to the consummation of every frightful act of depravity, have
been the theme of much examination by those whose duty it is to study
every form of insanity, and who are compelled, with a view of assist-
ing in the due administration of the laws of their country, to examine
subjects which neither correspond with their taste nor with their
morals; and show that the perversion of the sexual instinct exists,
and as frequently leads to impulsive insanity, as do suicidal, homicidal,
or incendiary monomania. Doctor Castelnau has, in " La Gazette
des Hopitaux," shown that the annals of medical literature furnish us
with instances which prove that the disease of Serjeant Bertrand has
been developed 111 other individuals; and although there is no case
where there was a long continued series of crimes committed, there
can be no doubt that there are well authenticated facts which sub-
stantiate the matter. It will be remembered that Georget, in his
" Examen Medical des Proces Criminels," gives us the case of Leger,
an old soldier, who was tried in the year 1824, by the Court of Assizes
at Versailles, who one day seized a little girl at the entrance of the
forest, murdered hex*, sucked her blood, violated her, tore out her
heart, and mutilated her bosom and her sexual organs, besides eating
some portion of her flesh. Upon his trial, he wore an air of gaiety
and satisfaction, until lie heard the melancholy evidence of the poor
girl's mother, when he burst into tears, and with much apparent
sympathy, exclaimed, " I am, indeed, sorry to have deprived you of
your daughter. I implore your pardon." Georget, who examined
the case minutely after the man had been condemned to death, (which
sentence he heard with the most perfect indifference,) says of him, " He
was not, as has generally been said, a great criminal, a monster, a can-
nibal, a man eater, who wished to renew the feast of Atreus; this
individual was, in my opinion, an unfortunate imbecile, a madman,
who ought to have been confined in the Bicetre as a lunatic." That
Bertram! was a cannibal certainly is not proved; but that a depravity
of taste, requiring for its satisfaction human flesh collected from the
foulest sources, sometimes occurs, there can be no doubt whatever;
and Dr. Bartholett has given us an instance of a man of thirty, who
sought from the most disgusting and filthy carcases his nourish-
ment, disinterring corpses that had been long buried, and feasting
upon them.

Amongst those who have written upon the case, there are several
who have confounded depravity of manners with depraved instincts,
and have cited cases which show that in all ages there have been in-
dividuals who have forgotten that their passions were given them to
fulfil the noblest duties of existence, and who have indulged in sen-
suality until they have vitiated their tastes, and disunited the grati-
fication of the mind from the body, which totally annihilates all the
higher feelings of our nature, and places us on a level with the brute
creation. One of the writers in the " Gazette Medicale de Paris"
has most injudiciously attempted to connect the hideous propensity
of Serjeant Bertrand with the state of the military life, and has
taken the pains to bring together numerous instances of the immoral
conduct of several soldiers, whose cases have from time to time drawn
attention. That celibacy, the frequent separation from the other sex,
may be the cause of inexcusable delinquencies, it is not necessary to
deny; but it would be most absurd to attribute them to aberrations
of intellect, and the ingenious arguments of the clever author who
has. undertaken the loathsome task of recording vice and folly, will
not rank him amongst psychologists and mental pathologists, who
are anxious to ascertain what may be considered punishable offences,
and what may be safely pronounced instances of insanity.
*
Physicians have a task of the utmost difficulty to fulfil, they are
to discover whether there are not special and decided symptoms, not
perceptible to ordinary observers, which form the true indication of
insanity; they have been accused by high authority of introducing
a new word into criminal jurisprudence, that of monomania; as
Regnault declared, for some years " at every assize court an excuse
has been set up for crime," the advocate employs it in every despe-
rate cause, the physician regards it as a new path by which he can
obtain reputation, and juries only hear it as another source of incer-
titude, and another reason for embarrassment in their sacred func-
tions. It is, therefore, incumbent on all those who can throw light
upon the subject, to render the doctrines of the day more complete,
more certain; to assist in that classification upon which the whole
basis of the study of mental disease rests. Besides which, there is
an important point to be ascertained?Can any mental force?we will
call it education?be so directed to bear upon the intellectual organiza-
tion, that it shall be enabled to withstand those irresistible impulses
which lead to the commission of unexpected and unusual acts ? Can
we see the incubation of such disease? or shall we not by study be
hereafter enabled to do so 1 Shall we not, by watching the progress
and development of the human mind, be capable of imparting to it
such force and healthy vigour as will make it withstand the pre-
dominance of any one ruling passion, and by giving the power of
self-control, whether by religious or moral instruction, teach energy
to the slumbering reason, and so invigorate it as to rescue it from
impending disease ? It is singular that in this case, as well as others
of a somewhat similar character, the instinctive desire to commit an
act contrary to the laws of God, of nature, and of men, should not
be associated with any conception of its enormity?not the slightest
appearance of self-accusation or of repentance for what had been
perpetrated, seemed to cross the mind of the guilty person ? he had
scarcely any feeling of shame; he was surprised at the reproachcs
others heaped upon him; and when an attempt is made to awaken
some other sentiment within him, it produces no effect; all consider-
ations are swallowed up by the momentary whirlwind of the passion;
he is carried to his object; neither the tempest of rain, the bitter
cold, the painful exertion, nor the fear of being killed, influence him;
he is insensible to everything during the paroxysmand even during
the intermission he has no proportionate horror at his propensity.
All these facts demand earnest investigation. Are they in themselves
arguments irresistible? Is insanity the only explanation of them?
There seems to be no premeditation, no concealment, except Avhen
instantaneous punishment is apprehended,?no fears for personal
safety, no dread of punishment,?all yield to the engrossing impulse
which is daringly executed, and frequently repeated. Would not
education or watching over him when he gloomily walked in the
woods have prevented the exhibition of his mental aberration?
Have not the greater part of the histories of monomania shown some
moment when the careful psychological observer would mark the
coming on of disease? These are points which must yet be deeply
and carefully studied by the mental psychologist, for as yet Ave have
110 clue to their explanation. I must here introduce a case, which
made in France, some years since, an indelible impression upon mental
pathologists; it is but little known in England, but ought to be re-
corded in our literature. The circumstances were narrated at the
time only in the " Gazette des Tribunaux." On the 2nd of July,
in 1828, about ten in the evening, three young girls in a village in
France were sitting by the side of the river, bathing their feet, when
Nicholas Rousselot, a man living in the village, came up to them
and tried to lay hold of them. The two most active escaped ; the
third, Genevieve Barroyer, had not time to do so. Forced to walk
into the stream, she called out to the man, " Do not be foolish; we are
in the water." He, without answering, took her and threw her down.
The river was not very deep. The companions of the young girl
ran, frightened, into the village, and spread the alarm; a great
number of persons ran quickly to the spot, but it was too late, the
body of the girl was found by the side of the water spread out, all
her garments were thrown over her head, and twisted in such a way
as to have prevented her respiration and the use of her arms; a large
contusion was visible upon her chest, evidently produced by the
pressure of the knee. Rousselot had disappeared as soon as the
persons came rushing down the river, and remained conccaled two
days and two nights in a neighbouring wood, and on the third day
he delivered himself up from hunger. He was tried at the assizes for
the murder; the greater number of the witnesses testified that he was
a man of whom all the females in the neighbourhood were in constant
dread; he seemed always tormented by sexual desire; not only had
he made several attempts upon the young women of the village, but
all sorts of strange stories were afloat about his conduct to the
women throughout the whole department; he was supposed to be
somewhat deranged since he had been ill the previous year. The
man appeared about thirty years of age, small in size, a thin visage,
with deep sunk eyes and pallid look. During the trial, he kept his
eyes constantly fixed on the ground, without evincing any emotion.
Those who knew him from his infancy, described him as of a sombre,
savage character, always avoiding society, and of obstinate taciturnity.
The medical men who had charge of him declared that he never
evinced any mark of insanity. Besides the murder of this girl, he
was accused of an attempt on a married woman shortly before. The
accusation was, that he had murdered the girl, and then attempted to
violate her; the defe'nee Avas, insanity; upon both points he Avas
found guilty, but by one of those decisions which lead the public to
believe that the jury is more insane than the man they are trying,
they considered that he had committed the murder in a state of in-
sanity, but that he Avas in his senses Avlien he committed the act of
violation. This inexplicable enigma of judicial logic still remains aa
a psychological problem. The accused was condemned to be shut
up for ten years for the minor offence, and afterwards to be com-
mitted to a lunatic asylum. Verdicts of this kind show the necessity
for more minute knowledge, and for more accurate judgment, in the
judicial investigation of psychological crimes.
,
