In Impairment Of Mind
======================

Monograph Ii. On Softening Of The Brain Arising From &Nxtetb & ?N&Ue Jttental Isxerctse and Resulting .
:Author:  FORBES WINSLOW, M.D.
LONDON:
JOHN CHURCHILL, PRINCES STREET, SOHO.
1849.
i SI 11W US: | ? " ? WKM

ADVERTISEMENT.
In deference to the kind judgment of the members of
the Medico-Chirurgical Society of Brighton, I have been
induced to print this essay. It is necessary, however,
to premise that it was not written for publication.
Having been requested to read a paper at the Society, I
thought the subject of Ramollissement of the Brain,
more particularly associated with Impairment of Mind,
would be novel, and give rise to an interesting and a
practical discussion. The essay has been sent to press
as it was read;.'- I feel it necessary to make this statement, as an excuse for. its desultory character, as well
as .for the superficial mariner in which an important
subject has been treated. I append, as my excuse for
printing the essay, the following resolution of the
Society, before whom it was read:?

" At a meeting of the Brighton Medical Society, held
? '-i V
at the Town HaH-, Brighton, on Thursday, January 4th,
%
1849, Benjamin Yallance, Esq., President, in the Chair,
A 2
IV
it was moved by Dr Mackness, of Hastings, seconded
by Benjamin Yallance, Esq., President of the Society,?
" That Dr Forbes Winslow be requested to print his
excellent paper, with such additions as may tend
to further illustrate the subject, in the Psycho-
logical Journal, edited by Dr Forbes Winslow."
Sussex House, Hammersmith,
July, 1849.

Nineteen years ago, I submitted to the profession,
through the pages of " The Lancet," some observations
on Ramollissement of the Brain. Since that period, my
attention has been frequently devoted to the considera-
tion of this important, obscure, but interesting subject.
Latterly, my investigations have been principally con-
fined, in relation to this portion of the pathology of the
nervous system, to those softenings of the brain occur-
ring in the middle stage of life, often associated with
great Impairment of Mind, and resulting, generally,
from what I term an undue taxation of the Brain and
Nervous System. I feel the more anxious to bring this
subject under the notice of the profession, from having,
in the course of my experience, witnessed many incur-
able cases of mental disorder, occurring among medical
practitioners, and clearly traceable to this cause. I
think we are, individually, too little disposed to re-
cognise the necessity of a close adherence to those
physiological laws which, on reflection, we must feel
cannot with impunity be violated. The day of serious
reckoning may be deferred; the latent mischief may
not have cast the faintest shadow on our path of life;
all may appear calm and secure, and yet the enemy may
be creeping stealthily on in his sure but fatal progress.
We know, as experienced and practical men, how in-
sidious (are the disorders of the brain and nervous
system: great irremediable changes may be taking place
in the delicate structure of the nervous matter, without
presenting any very obvious and appreciable indications
of their existence. But, alas, how often are these mani-
festations of health but ignes fatui, luring us on with
false hopes of security, even at a time when the seeds of
terrible disease of the brain may be in the process of
germination? I have had painful opportunities of seeing
some sad cases among members of our own profession,
illustrating?vividly illustrating?the previous observa-
tions. I have witnessed men apparently in the vigour
of health, in the full tide of professional prosperity, sud-
denly sink from the possession of all their mental facul-
ties into hopeless fatuity, the consequence of an over-
exercise of the cerebral functions. I have watched these
cases with great and unusual interest. This impair-
ment of the intelligence, this sudden extinction of the
powers of the understanding, this change from vigorous
mental capacity, to almost hopeless imbecility and
drivelling idiocy, have given little or no warnings of their
approach. The loss of capacity has apparently been
sudden; yet upon instituting a close and searching exa-
mination into the history of the cases, I have generally
been enabled to detect faint gleams of the disease, at a
distance very far remote from the positive development
of symptoms usually considered indicative of organic
cerebral disease. This morbid change in the structure of
the brain, associated with loss of mind, is not confined
to those engaged in the active exercise of professional
life, neither is the affection peculiar to medical men. I
have seen it among persons connected with commerce,
and, in fact, among all classes whose avocations neces-
sarily expose them to protracted anxiety and distress of
mind. I think this form of ramollissement presents
peculiar characteristics. It differs in some of its features
from the softening of the brain of which we read in
books, and which we have been accustomed to see exhi-
bited in our hospitals. I also think it possible to detect,
at an early period, its precursory manifestations, and
that, happily too, at a time when the resources of our
art may be made available in arresting its onward march.
In these particulars, I think it differs from ramollisse-
ment of the brain unconnected with any well-marked
lesions of the intelligence, and often combined with par-
ticular and general paralysis.

Before, however, directing the attention of the Society
to the species of ramollissement more particularly con-
nected with impairment of mind, I think it necessary to
consider the subject more generally.

The pathological change known as ramollissement, or
softening of organic tissues, is not confined to nervous
matter. The blood-vessels, both arteries and veins, are
subject to the disease. Ramollissement is often per-
ceptible in their coats. The internal tunic in each is
most commonly the seat of the alteration. It is some-
times followed by ulceration. The cartilages may be-
come so soft as to resemble paste. The osseous structure
is liable to these pathological changes, producing rickets
or mollities ossium. The centre of circulation does
not escape, and we occasionally find the heart, particu-
larly its muscular structure, after death, in a state of
extreme ramollissement. Under these circumstances, the
finger passes easily through its walls. The brain, then,
is not the only organic structure liable to ramollissement.
In considering this subject, the following points will be
discussed seriatim. I think it, however, necessary to
premise, that it is not my purpose to state in detail all
the points of dispute among pathologists in reference to
this disease. I shall confine myself principally to the
most important facts, leaving the minutiae for subsequent
discussion.

I purpose" considering,
1. The pathological character of Ramollissement of
the Brain;
2. Its seat;
3. Its causes;
4. The period of life at which it occurs;
5. Its physical and mental symptoms;
6. Its treatment.
I then purpose directing the attention of the Society
to that form of ramollissement most generally allied to
impairment of mind?the frequent result of over
anxiety and excessive mental application.
Ramollissement of the brain is understood to be,
according to Lallemande's definition, " a liquefaction of a
part of the substance of the brain, the remainder pre-
serving its natural consistence.'' He lays a stress on
the word " part," because, as he observes, if the whole
of the brain were soft, we should have some difficulty in
deciding whether the change was pathological in its
character. Softening may, as Dr Watson observes,
vary in degree, from the consistence which naturally
belongs to the cerebral substance to that of thin cream.
In its minor degree, it may be easily overlooked, and is
more perceptible to . the touch than to the eye; the
cerebral matter is less coherent, but is not yet discon-
tinuous or broken down. It may be washed away,
however, by letting a slender stream of water fall upon
it, and then the softened parts are easily distinguishable
from those which retain their natural consistence. The
vexata qucestio among pathologists has been, whether
ramollissement of the brain be a disease sui generis, or
the result of inflammation. This point has been the
subject of much discussion, the combatants being Eostan,
Lallemande, Andral, Fardel, Calmeil, Abercrombie, Ben-
nett, &c., and other distinguished pathologists of Ger-
many, France, and England. Without going over
ground which has been so frequently traversed, or
even recapitulating facts which must be familiar to all
the members of this Society, it will be only necessary for
me to state the results to which, after a careful exami-
nation of the question, modern pathologists have arrived.
The views of Abercrombie are, I believe, those generally
received by the profession. This distinguished writer
generalizes the whole subject by observing, that ramollisse-
ment of the brain may occur under two modifications
essentially different from each other. The cases referred
to by Eostan, who considers this affection as sui generis,
although admitting that it is sometimes the result of
inflammation, occurred almost exclusively in persons ad-
vanced ill life. It was generally associated with attacks
of paralysis and apoplexy, and often found combined
with extravasation of blood. In many of the cases, the
softening surrounded old apoplectic cysts. The inflam-
matory ramollissement of which Abercrombie speaks,
was seated in the more central parts of the brain, the
Fornix, Septum Lucidum, or Corpus Callosum, being
10
generally implicated in the organic lesion. The ramol-
lissement was generally preceded by well-marked attacks
of inflammation, and occurred in persons at an early
period of life. The post-mortem appearances were
generally deep redness surrounding the ramollissement,
suppuration, and deposition of false membranes. Dr Aber-
crombie, in his attempt to reconcile the views of Kostan
with his own, observes that the peculiar softening of the
cerebral matter is analogous to the gangrene which
occurs in other parts of the body; it may be the effect
either of inflammation, or be the result of a starvation of
the brain, caused by a diminished supply of arterial blood
being transmitted to that organ, in consequence of the
calibre of the cerebral vessels being altered by dis-
ease. The ramollissement described by Abercrombie
is said to have been caused by the former, and that re-
ferred to by Rostan, by the latter condition. We know
how often ossific deposits take place in the arteries in
advanced life, and therefore we need not feel surprised
at ramollissement being the frequent consequence of the
failure of the circulation caused by the mechanical ob-
struction to the free passage of the blood through the
brain. Dr Hughes Bennett (who has entered scien-
tifically into a consideration of the subject) maintains,
that by the aid of the microscope, he is able easily to
recognise the inflammatory and non-inflammatory soften-
ing of the brain. The former is said to be characterized
by the presence of exudation corpuscles, and granules.
In the non-inflammatory ramollissement these bodies are
never found. He also has discovered, as the result of
his microscopical observations, that in inflammatory
softening there exist the formation and development
of nucleated cells in exuded blood pliasmas. The non-
inflammatory ramollissement consists, according to the
same authority, " in the mechanical destruction or ma-
ceration of the nervous tissue in serum, or is the result
of putrefaction." The yellow and -white softening is
said to be the effect of inflammatory action. The fawn-
coloured ramollissement is generally consequent upon an
opposite condition. The other conclusions of this able
physiologist I give in his own words:?"That red
softenings usually depend upon congestion or the direct
extravasation of blood; yellow softenings, on the imbi-
bition of the colouring-matter of the blood; fawn and
grey-coloured softenings, on the presence of grey exuda-
tion corpuscles; and white softenings, in the great ma-
jority of cases, are post-mortem, and the result of mace-
ration in serum.

" In no single instance has softening of the nervous
centres been traced to the presence or infiltration of pus.
" That inflammation of the central parts of the brain
generally produce well-marked lesions of sensation and
motion; whilst in inflammation of the peripheral por-
tions, lesions of intelligence are commonly well pro-
nounced.

" That in idiopathic inflammatory softening of the
brain, contraction in one or more limbs is a common
symptom.

" That the fawn-coloured spots described by Dr Sims,
are no evidence of the cure of inflammatory softening.
" That inflammation accompanying haemorrhage is
usually consecutive.

" The softening surrounding apoplectic clots, or san-
guineous infiltration, is no proof of inflammatory action.''
Hamollissement of the brain is not confined to one
portion of the cerebral mass. The parts most frequently
found in a softened state are the grey matter of the
convolutions, the Thalami and Corpora Striata. The
12
Corpus Callosum, Septum LucicLum, and Fornix, are also
often the seat of this pathological change. Andral has
published an analysis of 117 cases. The following is
the result:

Softness of the entire Hemisphere 4
of only one Hemisphere in its entire extent 13
? of the convolutions alone, and others more
deeply seated
Anterior Lobes .
Posterior ?
Corpora Striata; .
Optic ?Thalami
Parietes of the Ventricles
Cerebral Peduncles .
Dispersed through various parts
14
27
37
28
15
2
1
5
This pathologist does not think, as some suppose,
that the grey substance of the brain is more frequently
softened than the white. I have compared this table with
others published by Calmeil, Fardel, and Abercrombie, and
have found but little difference in the results at which they
have arrived. It will, therefore, be unnecessary for me to
go further into this subject. I shall merely observe, as
a fact of some pathological importance, that it is esta-
blished, that those portions of the brain most liable to
softening are generally the seat of cerebral haemorrhage.
I come now to the consideration of the causes of
ramollissement of the brain. These are various. In
inflammatory ramollissement occurring in young persons
of a plethoric constitution, the disease is generally
the result of those causes which develope inflammatory
action, and is often seen as the effect of physical injury
to the head, and an extension of disease from the
internal ear to the brain. In these cases, we witness
all the symptoms which precede inflammation of the
brain or its membranes. The more frequent causes, as
far as they can be ascertained, of this morbid change,
are, (I am now speaking without reference to age,)
physical injury to the head at an early period of life,
exposure to intense cold or heat, defective nourishment,
syphilis, abuse of mercury, excessive venery, retrocession
of acute cutaneous eruptions, debility of constitution,
habits of intoxication, self-abuse, opium-eating, continued
irritation of the stomach and bowels, and mechanical
obstruction to the free circulation of blood through the
brain, from tumours, or from osseous or fibrous matter
deposited in the arteries of the brain, particularly at
the base of this organ. The moral or mental causes are,
anxiety of mind, and an overstraining of the functions
of the brain. The diseases with which ramollissement
of the brain is frequently associated, are, valvular affec-
tion of the heart, aneurismal tumours on the large
vessels, rheumatism, gout, &c. Considerable softening
of the brain is sometimes noticed very early in life. It
may be detected during all the periods of childhood, the
result of active cerebral disease. Of 153 cases of
ramollissement referred to by Andral, 39 were forty
years of age, 54 between forty and sixty-five, 60 between
sixty-five and eighty-seven. It is mentioned as a singular
fact, that the period of life when the number of the
population is lowest, is, nevertheless, that which gives
the highest absolute number of cases of ramollissement.
In considering the symptoms of ramollissement, I
shall first speak of those which are precursory. In doing
so, I purpose confining my observations to cases occur-
ring in the middle or advanced period of life. Ramol-
lissement taking place at an early age, is generally
associated with acute cerebral affections, and the indica-
tions are those of active disease going on in the head.
It is a question among practical men, whether there are
any well-marked characteristic symptoms which may be
considered precursory of ramollissement of the brain?
It is most important to detect these, if they exist; for
at this stage of the malady, it may be possible, by a
well-directed application of the agents placed at our
disposal, to impede the progress of the disease, and often
to cure it entirely. I think it is our duty to trace,
if possible, the first warnings or approach of this
affection. I am always anxious, when consulted in
these cases, to ascertain, if possible, the symptoms which
have been premonitory of the cerebral disease; for in the
early stages, when the disturbance is independent of any
extensive organic alteration, and merely the effect of an
altered action of the functions of the part, the disease
admits, cceteris paribus, in the majority of instances,
of an easy cure. If the symptoms be mistaken or over-
looked, and the affection be neglected in its earlier or
incipient stages, little or nothing can be done when the
disease in all its formidable characteristics manifests
itself. But even in cases where the disease appears to
be fully developed, it is possible to effect a cure; if not,
it is often in our power to mitigate considerably or
alleviate its distressing symptoms.

Attacks of acute ramollissement of the brain are
generally preceded by all the symptoms indicative
of the consecutive progress of inflammatory affec-
tions of this organ. If ramollissement of the brain
be the result of the congestion of that organ, it is most
important to keep in recollection the symptoms cha-
racterizing this state of the vascular system. 1 believe,
in many cases, the softened state of the nervous pulp is
the effect of congestion, and congestion only. It is,
therefore, of much consequence to detect in its earliest
stage this premonitory sign. Before, however, speaking
of congestion, we must revert to those symptoms which
are precursory of this condition of the blood-vessels.
We have first what is termed " cerebral determina-
tion this is well understood. Following this, there is
an active cerebral congestion, consequent upon the blood
not being carried off by the veins as rapidly as it is
introduced by the arteries. There is, therefore, an
accumulation of blood in the arterial system; but
should there be a deficiency in the contractile power
of the cerebral capillary vessels, interfering with the
circulation, a condition denominated "passive conges-
tion" takes place. This may also result from any
mechanical impediment to the return of the venous
blood from the brain. In active cerebral determina-
tion, the functions of the brain are excited, or exalted,
resulting, it is supposed, from the increased arterial
action without congestion. The cerebral powers
are depressed in active, or arterial congestion, conse-
quent upon an interruption to the free circulation of
blood in the brain. In passive, or venous congestion,
the cerebral functions are also in a state of depression.
As the conditions here spoken of are, in ninety-nine
cases out of a hundred, the precursory symptoms of
inflammation of the brain, how important does it become
that we should be on our guard whenever any of these
signs are present. The symptoms of congestion of the
brain are so well known, that it is unnecessary for me
to recapitulate them.

I now approach the consideration of the precursory
symptoms. In the majority of cases I have usually
found the early signs to be headache, the pain being
often circumscribed. This headache I have known to
be of years' duration. Conjoined with it we have
vertigo, imperfect vision, a sensation of weight in the
head, increased temperature of the scalp, irregular action
of the superior palpebras muscles, double vision, optical
illusions, a want of sensation in the scalp. After careful
inquiry, I have generally found the symptoms just
enumerated to be those which, in reference to the head,
are frequently the precursors of this organic change. In
some cases, no headache has been complained of. Fol-
lowing these symptoms, we generally have a sense
of numbness accompanied with an irregular action of
the organs of voluntary motion. I have noticed a dis-
eased sensation, irregular muscular action and mere
loss of power in the muscular system to precede for
some period the development of the well-marked and
characteristic signs of softening. Whenever head-symp-
toms present themselves, we should watch, from day to
day, the condition of the muscular power. In some cases,
we are able to discover the first symptom of diminished
motor power long anterior to the development of abso-
lute paralysis. Muscular debility is generally precursory
of irregular muscular action or deficiency of motor power.
The patient suffering from head-symptoms will complain
of want of tone in the muscles; he will find himself
incapable of taking his usual extent of exercise; will
often feel under the necessity of sitting down whilst
out walking. Conjoined wi^h this debility there is
a numbness of some portion of the body, which is
generally attributed to an imperfect circulation of the
blood in the part. Following this want of muscular
tone, the patient complains of occasional weakness
of the leg or ankle coming on suddenly whilst taking
exercise. He will when walking lose, perhaps only for
a moment, complete control over the muscles of the leg,
or his ankle-joint will give way, leaving the person to
suppose that there exists a weakened or diseased state of
the ligaments of that joint. I have particularly noticed
these symptoms in four well-marked cases of ramollisse-
ment. For some period before the medical attendant
had any suspicion of the existence of serious cerebral
disease, this tendency on the part of the ankle-joint to
yield was specially noticed. This symptom often mani-
fests itself for years, and may be quite independent of
disease of the brain. It is only when it occurs in
combination with other symptoms that it becomes of
importance as a diagnostic sign. As the disease ad-
vances, other indications of a less equivocal character
present themselves. The speech becomes affected. In
reference to this symptom, it is interesting as well as
important to regard the first warnings or scintillations
of an altered action in the vocal function. Before the
thick, husky tone of the voice, or the tremulous state of
the muscular fibres of the tongue excite alarm in our
minds, we may detect a loss of voluntary power over the
ideas and an inability to pronounce certain letters in the
alphabet, particularly the letter R. I believe this
phenomenon always precedes the physical signs of which
I have been speaking. As this may properly be con-
sidered as a mental symptom, I shall reserve what I
have to say upon the point until I come to the con-
sideration of that part of my subject.

According to the experience of men who have had
ample opportunities of studying the early or incipient
symptoms of ramollissement of the brain, the following
are considered to be the usual symptoms of its approach,
or actual existence. A sense of debility over the whole
body, of heaviness, numbness, and loss of power in the
extremities, usually of one side; a muddy, pallid com-
plexion. The morbid sensations in the extremities are
often of some duration, the patient having a constant
sensation as if the limbs were asleep. They drag in
walking, and the patient is unable to use the arm and
hand with as much freedom and strength as usual.
But more frequently these symptoms are only occasional,
coming on in paroxysms, in which the extremities of one
side suddenly fail, and the patient must either sit down
or fall, but in a few seconds or minutes is again able to
rise and pursue his way. In addition to these symptoms,
the patient frequently suffers from headache, giddiness,
stammering, dimness of sight, visual spectra, noise in
the ears. The circulation and vegetative functions are
undisturbed during this stage.

It has been maintained that in the early period of
ramollissement there exists a permanently contracted
state of the flexor muscles of one or more of the limbs.
In some cases, the contraction amounts only to a slight
stiffness; in others, it reaches such an extent, that if the
arm be the part affected, the hand is clenched and
remains pressed against the shoulder; or if the leg, the
heel is carried up to the hip. I attach no importance to
this as a diagnostic sign. It is often present in affec-
tions of the membranes of the brain, in encysted abscess
of the brain, and it is frequently associated with typhus
fever when the cerebral disturbance is great. Of the
more advanced symptoms it is unnecessary for me to
speak. In conjunction with the physical signs pre-
viously enumerated, we have certain mental indications
the effect of these pathological changes. I am now
speaking of the ordinary attacks of ramollissement. In
these instances, the mind is generally more or less affected,
the symptoms being, a loss of memory, of the power of
attention, and change of temper. It is difficult to account
for the fact of the memory being the first faculty of the
mind to give way in this cerebral affection. But it is
a remarkable circumstance that in ramollissement of the
brain, one of the earliest mental signs is a weakened power
of recalling to the mind recent impressions. Whenever
? the mind has been overworked, and I find the memory
failing, my serious apprehensions are excited, and without
creating unnecessary alarm, I invariably enjoin an im-
mediate cessation from all mental exertion. The symptom,
however, more particularly deserving of notice, is the
loss of voluntary power over the ideas, and the disposition
to substitute one word for another. I have so often seen
this symptom precede those which are generally regarded
as the pathognomonic signs of ramollissement, that I
consider it my duty to make it the subject of special
remark. The substitution of one word for another is a
remarkable premonitory symptom. This symptom is
often precursory of paralysis; the paralysis of ideas
appearing to precede that of the tongue. A patient
threatened with an attack of the disease has been known,
during conversation, to misplace his words; for instance,
if he wished to ask for bread, he has asked for butter,
and vice versa; and so with reference to other things,
being angry with himself for his apparent absence of
mind. A gentleman who appeared apparently in excellent
health, manifested this symptom for several days, much
to the annoyance of himself and those about him. It
excited no uneasiness in the mind of those who were
witnesses to the irregularity of thought. About a week
afterwards, whilst sitting at the breakfast-table, he was
suddenly seized with paralysis, of which he ultimately
died. Extensive ramollissement in the central portion
of the brain was detected after death. It must likewise
never be forgotten that this symptom is often precursory
of an attack of apoplexy.

What can I say on the subject of treatment? Except
in the early stage of this formidable disease, how vain
are all our efforts to impede its march ? It has been
affirmed that ramollissement of the brain admits of cure
even after changes in the structure of that organ have
taken place. Pathologists have maintained that by the
aid of the microscope they have succeeded in discovering
evidences of softening of the brain which must have
existed some years previously to death, and which had
been cured. Without questioning the authority of these
writers, I must confess that I cannot from personal
observation bear testimony to the accuracy of the state-
ment. I have seen cases presenting all the features of
ramollissement of the brain recover, but I have never
been able to detect in post-mortem examinations the
evidences of which pathologists have spoken. If, how-
ever, this view be correct, it encourages us to proceed
in our treatment, even where the symptoms of ramol-
lissement are obvious and well-marked. In the inci-
pient stage of softening, it may be possible, by well-
devised means, to arrest the disease. The treatment
must be adapted to the peculiarity of each case. In
persons of plethoric habit, with decided indications of
active disease in the head, cautious depletion will be
necessary. The treatment must be conducted on ge-
neral principles. Unfortunately, we possess no specifics
for this affection. The great question in reference to
this part of the subject is, whether this morbid lesion
does not often commence in the peripheral extremities of
the nerves spreading towards the centre of the nervous
system, producing idtimately the organic change to
which I allude ? Dr Graves, of Dublin, takes this
view of the subject, arguing that it is possible for
this to occur. Certainly many of the cases so minutely de-
tailed by Rostan are examples of what is termed Creeping
Palsy, being illustrations of disease spreading from the
extremities of the nervous system towards the centre.
Under such circumstances, it may be practicable to cure
the disease before the nervous centres are implicated in
the destructive process. This is a point worthy of our
profound consideration. The points of physiological,
pathological, and practical interest in relation to these
attacks of local paralysis, at a distance from the great
nervous centre, and independent of disease in that
quarter, are, upon what state of the nerves does the loss
of power depend ??is it often a muscular affection inter-
fering with the normal action of nervous power, or an
alteration in the tissue of the nerve itself, and what
treatment is likely to be successful under these circum-
stances? I reserve, for the concluding portion of my
observations, the remarks which I purpose making in
reference to the mental treatment of this cerebral disease.
Having spoken of ramollissement of the brain generally,
I now come to the consideration of softening specially
associated with mental impairment. Of the precise
pathological character of this species of morbid altera-
tion, it is extremely difficult to speak. I do not consider
it to be, in many cases, the result of inflammation; as a
rule, it is connected with an ansemiated condition of the
system. It manifests indications which lead me to the
conclusion, that we may with propriety consider it a
disease sui generis, a something apart from those forms
of ramollissement associated with profound coma, or with
lesions, of the motor power. It is not confined to
persons in advanced life, and often exists for years
independently of paralysis of the extremities. It fre-
quently developes itself at a period anterior to the time
when we are justified in supposing the circulation of the
brain to be impeded by osseous deposits in the blood-
vessels. In fifteen cases which have come under my own
care, in which I had every reason to believe that this
condition of the brain existed, I found that the majority
occurred before the age of forty, and in every instance the
mental powers had been most severely taxed. In this
form of ramollissement, the pathological change will
generally be found situated in the cortical part of the
brain. The other portions of the cerebral mass may be
implicated, and often are seriously so, in the destructive
disorganization, but I have never seen softening of the
brain associated with well-marked lesions of intelligence
unaccompanied by organic changes in that region of the
brain generally admitted by physiologists to be the seat
of the intellectual principle. Few physiologists are
disposed to deny that the mental powers are closely
connected with the cortical or cineritious substance of
the brain, or, as Mr. Solly terms it, the " hemispherical
ganglia." The medullary portion of the brain is merely
the passive servant of the cineritious part, either as the
conductor of its commands to the muscles, or of various
impressions made upon the extremities of the nerves of
sense, which it, the cineritious, perceives, and with which
it works.

It is extremely difficult to generalize satisfactorily the
peculiar symptoms of this description of morbid alteration.
Each case generally presents its own individual charac-
teristics. I may, however, observe, that the attacks
were not often?until the disease became much more
advanced?connected with a morbid condition of the
motor power. In all the cases of softening occurring at
an early period of life, I have almost invariably found
the morbid condition of brain consequent upon excessive
mental labour or anxiety of mind. In four cases, the
parties affected had been guilty of onanism to a great
extent; in three cases, the system had been frequently
salivated with mercury; and in two they had been
exposed for a protracted period to the intense heat
of the sun without absolutely having a coup de soleil.
Superadded to these causes, predisposing the persons to
morbid cerebral action, there was an undue exercise of
the functions of the brain, occasioned by either excessive
application to business or study, or over-anxiety of mind,
consequent upon pecuniary or other losses. In most of
these cases, the physical symptoms, although they had
been overlooked, were nevertheless well-marked, and had
existed in several of the cases for some years before evidence
of any mental affection presented itself. When the powers
of the mind, or, speaking physiologically, the functions of
the brain, are exposed to severe and continued exercise,
we cannot be too careful in watching the head symp-
toms. Of the common physical signs of the approaching
mischief I have previously spoken.

In three cases which came under my notice, the only
symptom of any importance, which existed for four years
before the disease became more fully developed, was an
intermittent pain, severe in its character, in the posterior
part of the head. For the removal of this pain various
remedies were tried, but nothing appeared to do good.
I could not ascertain that there existed any other indi-
cation until well-marked signs of organic disease of the
brain were exhibited. In the majority of the instances of
ramollissement associated with lesions of intelligence,
the physical symptoms have been so trifling and insig-
nificant as almost to escape observation. Occasionally
they were not noticed until the mind had given way.
In cases where the functions of the brain have been
severely taxed, headache, feelings of uneasiness in the
brain, sensations of weight in the posterior part of the
head, accompanied with a disturbance of the digestive
functions, a tendency to spasm, and a loss of muscular
power, ought never to escape our serious consideration.
These physical signs are generally the sure precursory
manifestations of ramollissement of the brain. I am
now speaking in general terms. As a rule, each case
presents a physiognomy peculiarly its own, it being
extremely difficult to fix upon any one or two
symptoms characteristic of this organic lesion. In one
case of severe ramollissement, the patient had never
suffered at all from cephalalgia. We all know what
serious mischief may be going on in the brain without
giving rise to pain, or even to uneasiness in that
quarter. I feel I may be somewhat premature in
observing that the ramollissement of the brain allied
to extensive lesions of the intelligence, or mental
impairment, is an affection sui generis in its character.
I am of opinion that the pathological change commences
earlier than most writers are inclined to admit. Are
there any reasons why it should not? I believe it is im-
possible to detect, in many cases, the presence of ramol-
lissement of the brain without a minute microscopical ex-
amination. In most cases of cerebral organic disease, the
mind cannot be otherwise than affected. I know that
pathologists, who are disposed to question the close relation-
ship which exists between the operations of the mind and
a sound condition of the cerebral organs, are in the habit
of citing cases in which the brain has been found exten-
sively disorganized after death, the mind being intact
during the existence of these morbid changes. It is
true the intellectual and perceptive powers may not
exhibit any aberration or derangement, but it is a
psychological and a pathological absurdity to suppose, that
any organic lesion can take place in the encephalon, in-
volving the cortical structure, without affecting the
'powers of the mind.

What are the incipient mental symptoms of this form
of softening? I can best reply to this interrogatory by
referring to the history of several cases which have come
under my notice. Without troubling the Society with
a minute history of each, I may observe that the fol-
lowing have been the premonitory mental symptoms
usually manifested under such circumstances. The
patient has complained of a weakness of mind, depres-
sion of spirits, disposition to cry, a feeling of mental
languor, of an inability to exercise continuity of thought,
of a deficiency of concentrative power, and a weakened
condition of the faculties of volition and attention, con-
fusion of ideas, and defective memory. Experienced
men lay great stress on this latter symptom, as being,
ceteris paribus, the sure forerunner of this condition of
brain. I was consulted, not many days back, by a
person who had filled for many years the situation of
commercial traveller, and had been exposed to great
anxiety of mind. The principal mental symptom under
which he laboured was a total loss of memory for recent
occurrences. I have no doubt, from the history of the
case, that ramollissement of the brain had commenced its
ravages.

A physician who had been engaged, for a period of
twenty years, in active practice had been subject for a
few years prior to his attack to an unusual degree of
mental excitement and hard work. His wife urged him
repeatedly to retire from the active duties of his pro-
fession, but he declared his intention of dying in har-
ness. The first symptom which he manifested was his
mistaking the names of two sisters whom he attended,
an unusual thing for him, as he was generally so very
particular and precise in all his transactions with them.
I was consulted in this case, when, alas! I could hold
out no hope of recovery. His wife informed me that
before the mental confusion became so apparent as to
attract the patient's own observation, she had noticed
an alteration in his manner, which made her fearful
that he was overstraining the powers of his mind. He
was observed to be more than ordinarily restless and
fidgetty, forgetting his appointments, anxious about
trifles, and apprehensive of being left in adverse circum-
stances. This alteration in his mental powers was per-
ceptible eight months before the family would believe
that anything serious was portending.

A gentleman engaged on the Stock Exchange had for
some months been exposed to great perturbation of mind.
His brother, who was associated with him in business,
perceived an alteration in the mind of his relative, and
asked my opinion of the case. The symptoms were an
undue anxiety about trifles, an inability to attend, as
usual, to the minutiae of business, and defective memory.
It was evident that the brain had been overworked. I
recommended immediate rest. I found that conjoined
with the impairment of the intellect there was consider-
able derangement of the general health, particularly of the
hepatic functions. I urged the necessity of his retiring
altogether from the anxieties of speculation for six months.
This advice was followed; his general health was re-
stored by the ordinary means. He took gentle exercise
on horse-back daily, and at the expiration of seven
months his mind had completely recovered its vigour.
The patient complained of a sensation of fulness in the
head; and as the pulse was of a character to denote
activity of circulation, I had a few leeches applied to the
neighbourhood of the occiput with much advantage.
A lady who had the management of a large school
was placed under my care, presenting, as I thought, un-
equivocal symptoms of the commencement of softening of
the brain. In addition to a positive impairment of the
mind, rendered remarkable by an almost total loss of
memory for recent occurrences, she had an amaurotic
affection, accompanied with a slight affection of the
motor power. I treated the case on general principles,
applied counter-irritants to the head, regulated all the
secretions, brought the system slightly under the in-
fluence of mercury, and gave small doses of the tinc-
ture of lyttse. This mode of treatment, conjoined with
regular exercise in the open air, mineral tonics, and
the employment of moral means, effected a permanent
cure.

A medical gentleman, a general practitioner, was placed
under my care by Dr Conolly. He had for some years
been occupied in conducting an extensive country prac-
tice. Not satisfied with the amount of anxiety necessarily-
resulting from his professional labours, he was in the
habit of sitting up until two or three o'clock in the
morning engaged in study. His mind soon became im-
paired, and committing some acts of extravagance, whilst
out visiting his patients, he was detained by a magistrate,
and, with the consent of his family, was sent to a county
asylum. In the course of a few weeks he was transferred
to me. The case gave unequivocal indications of great
mental debility, with obvious incipient paralysis. There
could be no doubt of the nature of the case. All who
saw the gentleman pronounced him to have softening of
the brain. In eight months he left me perfectly restored.
Six months after, he came to London for the purpose of
consulting me relative to a practice, the purchase for
which he was negotiating. He continued well. In this
case, in addition to the affection of the mind and the loss
of power over the voluntary muscles, there was paralysis
of the sphincter ani. Notwithstanding all these
most alarming symptoms, this gentleman was restored,
re-entered his profession, and is now engaged in the
exercise of its responsible duties. Alas! these cures
are not of common occurrence.

A gentleman, whose property was made the subject of
vexatious and protracted litigation, presented evidences
of great impairment of mind. The first symptom
noticed was the habit of extreme abstraction, which was
most unusual in him. He would sit for twenty minutes
at a time with a fixed look, staring at vacancy. His
bodily health appeared unaffected. He was physically
vigorous, indulged in great exercise, and was able to take
an active part in athletic games. His mental peculiarity
was the only symptom which alarmed his family. I saw
the case with other practitioners, and he was immediately
subjected to treatment; but notwithstanding the prompt
and, it was hoped, efficient measures pursued, the
disease gradually advanced until it was developed in all
its intense and incurable malignity, and the poor man, in
the prime of life, sank into loathsome and hopeless imbe-
cility. In this case, the mind was not the subject of
aberration or delusion. It was broken down by great
anxiety. It is the absence of everything like derange-
ment of the intellect which gives a peculiarity to the
cases of which I am speaking. Occasionally the patient
mistakes the wanderings of his imagination for realities;
but such instances form the exception and not the rule.
I am anxious to confine my observations to those cases
in which the general powers of the intellect appear
reduced in vigour and power, and in which insanity (in
the ordinary acceptation of the term) does not exist.
A distinguished member of our own body had been
engaged for many years in the anxious and responsible
duties of an active professional life. His mind gave
way. The first alarming indication was, the unusual
degree of solicitude he manifested in reference to the
accuracy of his prescriptions, frequently writing and re-
writing them, repeating questions to his patients, and
forgetting the names of his most intimate friends. Con-
joined with these symptoms there was great irritability of
temper. Before friends, however, noticed the phenomena
I have referred to, there existed evidence of an over-
worked mind, clearly indicating the necessity of great
caution in the exercise of its powers.

A gentleman, aged twenty-five, who had exposed him-
self to intense mental application for a period of twelve
months, with the view of taking honours at one of our
universities, was noticed one day to manifest an extra-
ordinary degree of risibility. He burst into a fit of
laughter in the presence of a number of college friends,
nothing having been said to excite anything like
pleasantry or merriment. The fact was noticed by one
of his most intimate associates, and caused some anxiety.
He subsequently became depressed and sullen, taking
little notice of anything. He was placed under treat-
ment, and was finally consigned to an asylum. The
symptoms of depression, conjoined with extreme feeble-
ness of intellect, continued for some years, before any
symptom resembling paralysis presented itself. The
disease then exhibited itself in full maturity, and he
became as helpless as a child. In this case we perceive
the commencement of the disease at the early age of
twenty-five, the result of undue taxation of the powers
of the mind. It may be a question whether the
softening, which subsequently manifested unequivocal
signs of its presence, existed at that period of life. I
am inclined to believe that such was the fact.
Having spoken of the symptoms of this form of mental
disease, the Society will naturally expect that I should
enter into some details in regard to its treatment. I
think, if the impairment be discerned in its early period,
and prompt and energetic measures are adopted, the
disease may, in the majority of cases, be cured. The
great, the primary remedy, is rest for the brain, and
as a sequence, rest for the mind. Unless this condition
be imperatively complied with, nothing?literally nothing
?can be done. The medical treatment consists in a
judicious adoption of those means which are calculated
to restore a fibrinous or plastic state of the blood, and
to promote its healthy circulation in the brain. The
patient should live generously, and the digestive functions
should be improved by the exhibition of gentle alteratives,
tonics, and stimulants. After ramollissement has taken
place, these remedies act by determining the blood to the
portion of the brain where a defective supply exists, and,
as it has been suggested, may act beneficially by causing
the production of fibrine and cell-germs from the albumen
of the blood. In non-inilammatory softenings, rubefa-
cients must be applied, and the shower-bath used. The
tonics found most beneficial have been Zinc, Iron,
Quinine, and the vegetable acids. The patient will
derive an advantage from the use of chalybeate aperient
mineral waters. Small doses of phosphorus, persever-
ingly exhibited, have been found advantageous. I
have, in some cases, given the nitrate of silver with
benefit. A careful avoidance of mental excitement,
and removing the individual from the scene of business,
should be strictly enjoined, the patient carefully ab-
staining from all excesses, paying particular atten-
tion to dietetic rules, refraining from the use of wine,
spirits, coffee, and spices. My principal object in bring-
ing this subject before the profession, is not for the
purpose of developing any novel views in reference to its
pathology or treatment, but to point out the necessity
of a careful and judicious exercise of those faculties with
which God has endowed us. Length of life and sanity
of mind are incompatible with an excessive and con-
tinuous exercise and taxation of the functions of the
brain. There is, perhaps, no class of men more
reckless of this physiological fact than the profession
I have the honour to address. It is, indeed, lament-
able to witness the devastations which have followed
a non-recognition of this important law among some
of the brightest ornaments of our profession. Let us
be wise in time. As we rest the stomach when it
presents evidence of its powers having been unduly
strained, so let us allow the brain to repose when we feel
conscious that its peculiar functions have been severely
exercised, and the mind presents deviations from a
normal state.

Savill & Edwards, Printers, Cliandos Street, Covent Garden.
