Progressive General Palsy
==========================

PSYCHOLOGICAL FRAGMENTS
.?In the AiXnales Medico-Psijchologiques^

M. Lunier has published a paper on progressive general palsy, which hfl
seeks to show may affect the sound in mind, as well as the insane. He says
its nature was misunderstood until towards the close of the last century;
it was described by Haslam, Esquirol, and Georget, as a complication or
rather a termination of insanity. Progressive general palsy was for a long
while, and is even now, regarded by many pi-actitioners as a. disease proper
to the insane. Nevertheless, one of the earliest works published on this
subject,?the thesis of M. Delaye, which appeared in 1824, contains a case
of progressive general palsy, which occurred in an individual whose intel-
lect was perfectly sound. The author of this excellent dissertation, how-
ever, considers the case in question to be exceptional, and the greater
number of practitioners who have since written on the subject, speak of
it as the only case that has come to their knowledge. The name of general
palsy of the insane, which is used to designate the disease, serves to propa-
gate and maintain the error. A few more cases, he observes, have since been
published, illustrative of the view he takes, and. he adds that, if we read
attentively the facts brought forward by J. Bayle, Delaye, Calmeil, Foville,
Deveau, Lelut, Parchappe, Wachter, Hequin,"&c., and the excellent de-
scription many of these authors have given of general palsy, it will be easy
to recognise tliat this morbid state, which they have described as a symp-
tom or termination of insanity, existed in many of their cases before there
was any lesion of the intellectual faculties, and that the lesion occurred
most frequently consecutively only, and as a complication of the paralysis.
M. Lunier seeks to establish that progressive general palsy may be met
with in the general hospitals, although not so frequently as in lunatic
asyla; that the palsy, in the one case, in no respect differs from that in the
other; that the lesions of the intellectual faculties met with in such cases
do not deserve generally the name of insanity, but consist simply in a
diminution, or an abolition, or a more or less complete palsy of these
faculties, comparable to the palsy of motion and sensation, and finally that
progressive general palsy constitutes a special and clearly defined disease,
which ought to be completely separated from insanity, just as are epilepsy
and hysteria.
His essay is divided into three parts; the first treats of those cases in
which the progressive general palsy has not been preceded nor accom-
panied by insanity or dementia; the second describes those cases where the
palsy, without having been preceded by lesions of the intellectual faculties,
has been afterwards complicated with dementia ; and in the third will be
brought forward those cases in which the general palsy has been or seems
to have been preceded by mania or monomania, transformed or not after-
wards into dementia.

Progressive general palsy rarely reaches its second stage, or even the
termination of its first, without the occurrence of symptoms of dementia.
It is only at the commencement of the disease that there is not found any
lesion of the intellectual faculties. These cases are more frequently met
with in private practice. The absence of all lesion of the intellect at the
commencement of general palsy renders the diagnosis of the disease diffi-
cult. The symptoms of dementia are generally those first recognised by
the relatives or friends of the patient, and when a medical man is called in,
he is astonished to find the palsy already much advanced, and most
frequently completely incurable.

The first part contains the details of six cases; in the first, that of a man
named Lenoir, fifty-six years of age, the disease was hereditary, and the
patient himself was subject to attacks of cerebral congestion, for which he
had been in the habit of losing blood?a practice he had latterly neglected;
besides which, he had had a rather free hemorrhoidal flux, which had ceased
of late. Lenoir presented almost all the symptoms of the first stage of
progressive general palsy; weakness of the special sensations and of the
general sensibility, hesitation in walking, diminution of the strength of the
upper limbs, a slight embarrassment in speaking, loss of the generative power,
fleeting attacks of giddiness ; there was not, however, any affection of the
intellectual faculties. The treatment consisted in the abstraction of blood,
the administration of purgatives, low diet, and rest. Some of the symptoms
of congestion were thus relieved, but the palsy continued to make progress
slowly. In the second case, the hereditary character of the disease was
also shown, and more and more frequent and violent attacks of cerebral con-
gestion were induced by the suppression of an epistaxis. The disease in this
case was only commencing. The third case was that of a Pole, forty-three
years of age, much addicted to drinking and to venery. The disease was
also hereditary in this case. Eight years prior to coming under notice,
he had had an attack of apoplexy, followed by hemiplegia, respecting which
M. Lunier observes, it is not uncommon to see progressive general palsy
follow hemiplegia, the result of one or more attacks of cerebral congestion.
In such cases the hemiplegia progressively disappears, but at the end of a
certain time, if the patient be carefully examined, it will be found that the
palsy is not so clearly defined; there are irregularities, and one of the
limbs of the other side presents slight symptoms of palsy, or perhaps the
sensibility is greater in the arm of one side and the leg of the other, or
the patient sees better with one eye, and hears better with the opposite
ear. These singular anomalies form the transition, so to say, of the
hemiplegia into general palsy. When the paralysis begins to become
general, the hemiplegia becomes stationary : this is one of the signs which
should make us dread the occurrence of general palsy in the hemiplegiac;
when the general palsy is fully established, the hemiplegia, instead of
progressing towards a cure, increases in intensity, and follows the progress
of the general disease. In those persons in whom general palsy has thus
succeeded hemiplegia, there is always, even in the third stage of the disease,
a predominance of the palsy in the side primitively affected. The patient
in the fourth instance was a young man, eighteen years of age, in whom
the disease supervened in consequence of a fall from a height of several
feet, on the left side of the head, by which concussion of the brain was
caused. In this case, M. Lunier considers the immediate cause of the
general palsy to have been acute hydrocephalus become chronic. M. Re-
quin has published a case of progressive general palsy following an injury
to the head, which ultimately terminated fatally. The autopsy disclosed
evidences of chronic meningitis. The fifth case is one previously pub-
lished by M. Brierre de Boismont; and the sixth is that recorded by
M. Delaye, already alluded to.

The second series of cases, in which are recorded those in which the
progressive general palsy was not preceded by insanity, but was after-
wards accompanied by dementia, are four in number. The complication
or occurrence of dementia, M. Lunier regards as an almost constant symp-
tom of the disease, when it has reached a certain stage, and he believes it
to depend on the same organic cause as the lesions of motion and sensation.
The first case is that of a woman, fifty years of age, in whom again the
disease was hereditary. The disease advanced to the second stage, was
accompanied by symptoms of dementia, and then became stationary. The
second case is an instance of a predisposition to cerebral congestion, with
intermittent and alternative palsy of the arms consequent on hard labour
and general progressive palsy. The patient was affected with suicidal
lypemania. The man was thirty-five years old. The third is an instance
of general palsy in the commencement of the second stage. The disease
was hereditary. The abuse of mercurv was considered to have had some-
thing to do in causing the disease ; but this M. Lunier will not admit, and
seems more inclined to refer it to the abuse of tobacco. He says that great
smokers are peculiarly predisposed to cerebral congestion, and conse-
quently to general paralysis. The question he thinks worthy of further
examination.

In the second stage of general paralysis, and sometimes even in the third,
the vegetative functions are generally well performed. The appetite is
good, often even rather voracious, and the patients present some embon-
point. Emaciation, marasmus, and gangrenous spots occur later in the
disease. M. Baillarger was the first to point out the loss of the generative
power in the commencement of the disease. M. Lunier observes that he
has noticed it in several cases. It is a premonitory symptom of some im-
portance, but in some cases there occurs a kind of venereal orgasm, which
may be present, although rarely, even in the third stage of the disease.
The loss of the memory is undoubtedly the beginning of dementia. It
is often the only sign of intellectual debility that can be discovered during
the first and even the second stage of general palsy.

The fourth and last case in this series is one in which the disease was
hereditary, and was attended by two attacks of ambitious delirium. It was
ultimately complicated with dementia.

The third series in which the general paralysis was, or seemed to be, pre-
ceded by mania or monomania, transformed or not afterwards into dementia,
consists of one case only. The patient, a man fifty years of age, had a fall
from a height of eight or ten feet on the back part of his head, a few days
after which he was admitted into the Bicetre with symptoms of mania.
M. Lunier is of opinion that at this time the patient was labouring under
unrecognised general paralysis. At the date of the report, ten years after
the accident, the man did not present any signs of dementia.

Hallucinations in Early Infancy.?Dr. Thore, jun., in a communi-
cation published in the Annates Medico-Psychologiques, details the case of
an infant, fourteen months and a half old, who had been poisoned by the
seeds of the datura stramonium. In this case, hallucinations of the organs
of sight were well marked, as evidenced by the motions of the child. She
appeared to be incessantly seeking for imaginary objects in front of her :
she stretched out her hands to get at them, and clung to the sides of her
cradle to reach them the better. While these hallucinations were the most
marked, actual vision appeared to be abolished, thus affording an additional
proof that the integrity of an organ, which becomes hallucinate, is not
necessary in order that the false sensation may occur.

M. Thore observes, that those medical men who have especially devoted
themselves to the consideration of insanity, have not hitherto studied much
the hallucinations which occur during the early periods of life. Examples
after seven years of age are met with in their writings, but they are few in
number. Nevertheless, they are frequently noticed even before the age
just mentioned, and are developed under the influence of greatly differing
causes. It is not uncommon to notice them in the course of acute diseases.
M. Thore has frequently met with hallucinations of the sight and hearing
in children of from four to five years of age. He adds, that they are of oc-
casional occurrence in children, even while in perfect health. They then
appear to form part of a previous dream.

Prolonged Bathing and Continuous Irrigation in the Treatment
of the Acute Forms of Insanity.?M. Brierre de Boismont advances
the following propositions as among the results of this practice:?
1st. The greater slowness of the circulation and respiration?the intro-
duction of a large quantity of water into the economy?the general and
gradual refrigeration, show that these baths have an essentially calming
and sedative action.

2nd. The period of convalescence ought to be carefully watched, because
relapses are not rare, when the patients are too suddenly exposed to the
influence of the causes which have occasioned the disease.

3rd. When acute mania is complicated with acute delirium, and the
patient refuses drinks, the treatment is inefficacious.

4th. Prolonged bathing and continuous irrigations appear to M. Brierre
de Boismont to be useful in hysterical affections, and many other nervous
diseases with excitement.

5th. Prolonged bathing is without its disadvantages; the fatigue it
causes soon disappears; it does not deprive the system of any important
principle, nor leave behind it that utter debility so often caused by free
bleedings, and which has more than once terminated in dementia.

M. Brierre de Boismont's treatment by the plan above indicated appears
to have been very successful.?Gazette Medicate.

Endemic Cerebro-Spinal Meningitis.?M. Corbin, of Orleans, has
published in the Gazette Medicale an account of an endemic cerebro-spinal
meningitis, which affected the garrison of that city in 1847-48. The fol-
lowing are his conclusions :?

1st. In the disease called cerebro-spinal meningitis, which has raged
epidemically for ten years, especially in certain garrisons, the inflammation
sometimes extends to the nervous centres, principally to the spinal marrow,
which becomes softened. It is a cerebro-spinitis, or more correctly, a
meningo-myelitis, a meningo-encephalitis.

2nd. The disease prevails principally during the winter, and appears to
depend chiefly on the overcrowding (encombremenl), the alteration of the
atmosphere, perhaps from a too high artificial temperature: whence there
results, as a means of prevention, the necessity of inverse hygienic con-
ditions.

3rd. The treatment ought to be antiphlogistic and revulsive.
4th. Special circumstances, which have been called the epidemic cha-
racter, may require a special medication. Opium was very useful in the
treatment of the disease during the latter part of the time that the epidemic
prevailed in Avignon.

Experiments on the Respiratory and Arterial Motions of the
Brain.?M. Flourens had hitherto in his experiments only recognised the
respiratory motion of the brain; he denied the arterial. Additional re-
searches have since convinced him that, as Haller had already indicated,
there exist, in fact, two motions of the brain:?

1st. The respiratory, which all anatomists attribute to the alternating
flux and reflux of the venous blood. But while Haller and Lamure profess
that these flux and reflux are effected by the jugular veins, M. Flourens
believes that the principal source of the venous blood, which by its reflux
causes the swelling of the brain, is to be found in the two great vertebral
venous sinuses.
2nd. And the arterial, which, according to M. Flourens' experiments,
depends on the influx of the arterial blood, which is sent to the brain on
each contraction of the left ventricle of the heart.?Gazette Medicate.
Hysteria.?At a meeting of the Societc Medico-Pratique of Paris,
M. Michea detailed a case of hysteria, as follows:?

The patient, twenty-five years of age, of a robust constitution, and appa-
rently sanguine temperament, had a first attack of hysteria during her first
pregnancy. When summoned to see her, the attacks having become very
frequent, M. Michea ascertained that there existed insensibility of the skin
and mucous membranes, without palsy of motion. The urine of the patient
clear, slightly acid, without sediment, presented only a rose colour when
treated with heat and nitric acid. Under the microscope it presented a
diminution in the quantity of urea and uric acid. A thousand parts of the
blood, when analysed, showed?water, 804 ; globules, 74; fibrine, 2 ; solid
matter, 118. There was, therefore, a diminution of the quantity of red
globules.

Treatment of Hysteria and Chlorosis.?M. Delfrasse, of Cahors,
writes to the National Academy of Medicine, that he has derived great
benefit from the use of the acetate, or hydrochlorate of morphia, passed into
the cavity of the uterus, in cases of hysteria, chlorosis, and other nervous
affections.?Bulletin dc VAcademic Nationale de Medecine.

Chronic Sciatica.?M. Robert has published in the Annates de Thera-
peutique Mediccde et Chirurgicale, the case of a countrywoman, fifty years
of age, who had suffered for fifteen months intense pains in the right lower
extremit}', extending from the sciatic notch to the foot. The pains were
greatly aggravated at night, so that she could not rest in bed nor obtain
sleep. Various plans of treatment had been tried unavailingly. M. Robert,
after chloroform had been administered, applied an iron at a white heat on
the outside of the dorsum of the foot, in the direction of a line drawn from
the external malleolus to the third and fourth toes. When the patient
awoke, she declared the pain had entirely ceased, nor had it returned at the
date of the report, a fortnight after the operation.

Sonnamb uiJSM.?Professor Vannoni describes in 11 Progresso a singular
case of sonnambulism. He was summoned to see a young married lady,
and ascertained that she was pregnant. This declaration evidently caused
her extreme pain, the explanation of which was not made to him until a
few days afterwards, when it appeared that the husband, to whom she was
greatly attached, declared he could not be the father of her child, as he had
not had intercourse with her for five months. From some remarks that
fell from the lady, it was discovered that the husband had become a son-
nambulist, and that the attack came on about one o'clock each morning,
when he left his own room and visited his wife unconsciously. The son-
tiambulism appears to have arisen in consequence of alarm caused by an
accident to his mother.

Aconitum Napellus.?M. Teissier, of Lyons, has conducted a series of
experiments on the aconitum napellus, with the view of studying its stupe-
fying and antiphlogistic actions. The stupefying action is undoubted; it
differs from that of morphia, the influence of which is perceptible in more
or less relieving all kinds of pain; aconite, on the contrary, has power
only over special pains. This specialty of action of the aconite is one of
its principal characters, and it results from the fact that the stupefying
property of this medicine is only secondary : its principal, and in some sort
specific, action is exerted on the skin; it consists in eliminating the noxious
elements from the vessels of that membrane, and in re-establishing its
functions, when they have been disturbed either by the repercussion of the
perspiration or by the presence of any virus. Thus aconite is adapted for
the treatment of diseases caused by cold, the consequences of catarrhs, and
also of the diseases in which a morbid principle is retained in the cutaneous
tissue, such as the exanthematous fevers. The painful diseases in which
M. Teissier has obtained benefit from the sedative action of aconite, are
those depending on a catarrhal or rheumatic cause. The antiphlogistic
action of the plant is quite secondary and subordinate to its action on the
skin.?lievue Mediccile.

Chloroform in Neuralgia.?M. Barrier, of Lyons, and Messrs. I voile t
and Jeannel, of Bordeaux, have employed chloroform successfully in the
treatment of neuralgia. The first-named administered it by inhalation;
the others employed it topically, a flannel moistened with forty drops of
chloroform being applied to the affected part. The local action of chloro-
form has been compared to that produced by a sinapism. M. Amesille, at
a meeting of the Academy of Medicine, stated that he also had had recourse
to the topical application of chloroform, with benefit in diverse cases of
neuralgia,?in a case of suffocating, precordial pain, and in two cases of
very severe nervous colic.?Revue Medicale.

Treatment or Epilepsy.?M. Cheneau, in a communication read be-
fore the Academy of Sciences at Paris, in summing up his remarks on the
treatment of epilepsy, observes that the cure of that disease, when it takes
place, is not exclusively at the early period of life, but may be effected at a
rather advanced age : that the difference of age does not modify in a notable
manner the chances of success, nor the difficulty of the treatment; that the
complications of idiocy, and more or less extensive palsy, are not insur-
mountable obstacles to the cure; that the treatment may be of short dura-
tion, but that it is impossible to ascertain this beforehand ; that digitalis is
worth the attention of practitioners in the treatment of this disease; that
the opinion emitted by physicians that several fits cannot occur in the same
day is not sufficiently supported ; that it is an error to look upon an ex-
treme paleness, succeeding towards the close of the fits the redness which
had previously existed, as a characteristic symptom of epilepsy ; and that
man is subject to a kind of epilepsy, called tournis, which is not always
dependent on a lesion of the brain, or of the peduncles of the cerebellum,
and may be cured.?Gazette Medicale.

Hydrophobia.?Dr. Jackson, of Philadelphia, has published several
cases of hydrophobia in the American Journal of Medical Sciences, in one
of which chloroform was administered with relief to the spasms, but the
case terminated fatally. In another case, the cicatrix of the bite was
excised, the wound cauterized, and free suppuration induced. Chloroform
was also used whenever the spasms threatened. The patient recovered.
Dr. Jackson appears to be doubtful whether or not the case is to be con-
sidered one of-hydrophobia. Dr. Curtis, of Lowell, has published in the
same journal another case of hydrophobia, in which chloroform entirely
failed.

Epilepsy.?Dr. R. W. Evans, of Richmond, C. W., relates (" British
American Journal of Medical and Physical Science,") a case of epilepsy
successfully treated by an infusion of the Scutellaria geniculata, made ac-
cording to the following formula: li Scutell. genie., 3 ij ; aq. bullientis,
f ^ viij ; ft: inf. The mode of administration is to begin with two table-
spoonsful every eight hours, increasing the dose, after the termination of a
week, to double that quantity, with an occasional aperient.

The subject of Dr. Evans' case was a female, 26 years of age, who had
Suffered from the disease for eight years, the attacks coming on every six
or seven days. She had taken for months nitrate of silver, iron, zinc,
strychnia, digitalis, ammoniuret of copper, valerian, musk, &c., without any
benefit. Dr. Evans directed the Scutellaria according to the above for-
mula ; its use was continued for six weeks, when a profuse salivation took
place, with slight constriction of the fauces. The medicine was discon-
tinued, a Seidlitz powder directed, and in a few days the ptyalism ceased
At the date of the report, the patient had been taking the medicine daily
for four months, daring which time she lmrl not had a single attack. She
enjoys excellent health, and her memory seems to improve daily.

Dr. Evans states that he has under his care two other cases, which seem
to manifest the superiority of this medicine. They are in a manner almost
recovered, with the exception of a violent palpitation of the heart at the
expected period of attack, which passes off without any bad result by the
timely administration of a few doses of tincture of digitalis, and by
keeping the patient free from mental irritability, which is a frequent cause
of epileptic palpitation.

The Essential Pathological Conditions of the Brain in Insanity.
?Dr. Palmer, of Bow, in a communication published in the " Lancet," says,
no evidence is wanting to prove that the vesicular neurine of the convolu-
tions is the centre of the intellectual operations, and that, if it be not also the
emotional centre, it is, at least, most intimately connected with it. Here,
by means of some molecular changes, our sensations first become per-
ceptions, impressions are fixed, and trains of thought are worked out in
the various operations of imagination, abstraction, comparison, &c. This
view of the seat of the intellect is held by nearly all great anatomists
and physiologists, and may be regarded as a settled point; we have thus a
strong light to guide us in the investigation of the pathology of mental
diseases, and are led unhesitatingly and necessarily to refer all intellectual
unsoundness, of whatever form or grade, to some deficiency of, or morbid
molecular change in, the vesicular neurine of the convolutions. The re-
mote causes of insanity may be either physical or moral, eccentric or
centric, originating in other organs of the body or operating immediately
on the intellectual centre; but to whatever sources they may be traced,
some disturbance of the healthy molecular changes on which the nutrition
and functions of the cortical grey matter depend, must be presupposed
before insanity can be admitted. The appearances which have come under
Dr. Palmer's observation, in the post mortem examination of the brains of
eighty-two lunatics, are quite in harmony, he says, with these views, not
one case having been met with in which there was not distinct lesion of
this portion of the grey matter, associated in most cases with other morbid
conditions of the brain or other viscera, which had their corresponding
symptoms during life, but always bearing a direct ratio to the extent of
mental aberration. Cases of insanity, he adds, may, and no doubt do
occur, in which no traces of cerebral disease are discoverable after death,
but this cannot be received as evidence that such disease did not exist
during life, and was operating as the immediate cause of the mental
aberration.

Various degrees of defective development, anemia, atrophy, &c., of the
cortical matter, are commonly met with, but the most striking and appa-
rently specific lesion in insanity is asthenic inflammatory degeneration of
this substance, to which may probably be referred all the alterations in its
colour and consistence, noticed from time to time by various writers. It
proceeds from without in an inward direction, commencing immediately
beneath the pia mater, and advancing until the entire thickness of the cor-
tical substance is involved. On different parts of the hemispheres it may
be observed in different stages of its progress, but always more definitely
marked about the apex of the posterior lobes, in the posterior part of the
convolution, described by Solly as the great convolution of the second
order. It is also often observed in the middle lobes, and occasionally, but
less distinctly, in the frontal lobes. On minute examination, a well-
defined line is perceived to intervene between the outer degenerated por-
tion, which has already succumbed to the inflammatory action, and is of a
pale, ash-grey colour, without any appearance of vascularity; and the
inner, which is of a full, brownish, pink hue, highly injected, and distinctly
undergoing the inflammatory process. Dr. Palmer has not examined these
structures under the microscope, but he says he has no doubt that complete
disorganization of the vesicular neurine would be found in the ash-grey
layer.

Insanity?i. e., disease of the convolutional grey matter, has not of itself
a fatal tendency, but death usually results from some previously existing,
associated, or induced disease of other portions of the cerebral mass, or of
other organs. The nutrition of the cortical matter is often primarily dis-
turbed hy the influence of morbid blood circulating through it, and as
often by the influence of distant visceral disease conveyed to it through
the medium of the sympathetic grey matter of the cord, olivary columns,
sensory tract, and radiating fibres of the hemispheres. The reverse also
frequently takes place?viz., the cause of the intellectual disturbance being
purely moral, the quantity and quality of the secretions, and the process of
nutrition generally, may be morbidly altered, so that the blood becomes
changed in its properties, and vital organs impaired in their power of re-
sisting morbid impressions. Both these conditions are of common occur-
rence, and constitute distinct varieties of insanity in regard to symptoms,
prognosis, and treatment, although the cortical matter probably undergoes
the same change in each of them.

Watchfulness, and a rapid flow of ideas, with emotions not readily under
control, are the more prominent mental phenomena of the first stsge?that
of undue irritability of the grey matter. In the second, that of erethism,
(also the stage of invasion,) a rapid succession of illusions and false per-
ceptions, and their quick obliteration, are the more salient features. These,
however, are always in proportion to the amount of cortical matter impli-
cated. As structural lesions take place, the illusions and perversities of
character become less transitory, and are more or less numerous in propor-
tion to the superficial extent of disorganization, and more or less permanent
and complete in proportion to the depth to which the cortical matter is
diseased. This constitutes chronic insanity, which, when the inflammatory
action ceases, (as is often the case,) may be termed fixed chronic insanity,
in contradistinction to the still extending disease, which may be designated
progressive chronic insanity. These forms are very distinct in symptoms,
as well as in the treatment required. In the former, there are certain
fixed delusions and oddities of character without the watchfulness, excit-
ability, and hurry of ideas characteristic of erethism; in the latter, these
fixed delusions are still prominent, but the indications of erethism are
superadded. In the former, the general health may remain good for years;
in the latter, the organic nervous system may soon become deranged, and
the patient fall a victim to some abdominal or thoracic disease. At length,
when the vesicular neurine of the convolutions is both extensively and
deeply disorganized, the various grades of dementia, ending in a total
obliteration of the mental faculties, supervene.

Another form of dementia of an acute character is sometimes observed
to follow immediately on the erethismic stage, without passing through the
grades of progressive chronic insanity. It is not unfavourable as regards
prognosis, and is probably due to the capillaries relieving themselves from
congestion by inter-vesicular effusion, (edema of the grey matter,) and thus
causing suspension of the intellectual functions by mechanical compres-
sion of the vesicles. Diminished nutrition, and vital^ stimulus of the grey
matter from imperfectly filled capillaries produces simple delirium, (pre-
sent in the course of many exhausting diseases,) but if long-continued, and
especially if the blood be in an impoverished state, it also furnishes one of
the pathological conditions of senile insanity.

Hemicrania.?Dr. Turenne states that hemicrania is a pain in the bead
resulting from the compression of the trifacial nerve, more particularly of
its ophthalmic branch, caused by the accumulation of blood in the sinuses
at the base of the cranium, and especially in the cavernous sinuses.
Origin of the Vis Nervosa.?Mr. Strachan, in a letter published in
the Lancet on the origin of the vis nervosa, observes that, by every chemi-
cal action either positive or negative electricity is produced. It is clear,
therefore, he says, that the various and extensive chemical actions constantly
going on in the animal system?the change from venous to arterial blood
in the lungs?the change from arterial to venous blood in the capillaries?
the various secretions?the digestion of food?the nourishment and decay
of every organ, are sources whence an immense amount of electricity must
be evolved. And for the hypothesis that this is the source of the nervous
fluid, it is only necessary to suppose that the afferent nerves receive the
electricity set free, and convey it to the brain, whence it is constantly re-
turned by the efferent nerves, and thus an electric circle is produced, which
again modifies all the chemical changes going on, and is capable of produc-
ing all the effects usually ascribed to the nervous fluid. According to this
view, the brain and spinal marrow, instead of generating, serve the pur-
pose of accumulating, distributing, and directing the nervous force. They
hold a similar relation to the nervous fluid that the heart does to the blood.
Or they may be likened to the coiled wire of the galvanic machine.

Chloroform in Delirium Tremens.?Mr. Hyde, of Maryborough,
records in the Lancet a case of delirium tremens, which was apparently
cured by the production of anesthesia. About a drachm and a half of
chloroform were used. The anesthetic condition continued about eight
minutes, soon after recovering from which, the patient fell into a quiet,
deep sleep, in which he remained for nearly fourteen hours, when he awoke
with clear and sound intellectual faculties. The case afterwards did well.
Opiates were given before the chloroform was employed.

Chloroform in Quotidian Hemicrania.?Mr. Broxholme, of Isling-
ton, records in the Lancet a case of severe quotidian hemicrania, followed
by an attack in some degree resembling asthma, in which he successfully
had recourse to the anesthetic action of chloroform. Aperients and subse-
quently quinine were also used.

Puerperal Convulsions.?At a meeting of the Westminster Medical
Society, Dr. Cormack detailed the history of three cases of puerperal con-
vulsions which had occurred in his practice. The main object of his paper
was to point out the connexion between renal congestion and puerperal
convulsions, which exists in a very great proportion of cases. He considered
puerperal convulsions to be, though not always, yet generally, the toxico-
logical results of non-elimination of the excretion of the urine; and that in
by far the greater number of cases this non-elimination depends on the renal
congestion, caused by the pressure of the gravid uterus. Edema and albu-
minuria are frequently concomicants or precursors of convulsions, as shown
by Dr. Lever and Messrs. Devilliers and llegnault. The gravid uterus,
or any tumour pressing on the renal veins, must cause congestion of the
kidneys, and consequent toxemia; this is the more injurious to the preg-
nant woman, as her blood requires an extra degree of depuration, both from
the excrementitious matter from the foetus, and also from the elements of
milk. Retention of these should, Dr. Cormack thought, be considered as
the cause, not only of convulsions, but also of various other distressing
symptoms occurring during pregnancy. Uterine epilepsy probably
often arises from toxemia, and the suppression of the lochia may induce
post partum puerperal convulsions. When convulsions recur after delivery,
we must suspect structural renal disease. The explanation of delivery
generally arresting convulsions is not so much that uterine irritation is
lessened, as that the hyperemic state of the kidneys is relieved. The more
common subjects of puerperal convulsions are strong, healthy young women,
pregnant for the first time. In them the abdominal walls are most un-
yielding, and unable to relax under the pressure of the gravid womb.

Cases of puerperal convulsions in subsequent pregnancies may be either
toxemic or non-toxemic ; the toxemic cases may be classed under the follow-
ing heads :?1st. The persons who have never gone the full time; 2nd. per-
sons of extreme muscular development; 3rd. persons suffering from struc-
tural disease or obstruction of the kidneys; 4th. excessive volume of
uterine contents, including twin cases, &c.?Lancet.

Lunatic AsylA in the United States. ? Mr. Thornton, of West
Ham, in a letter published in the Lancet, states that the proportion of cures
of insanity is greater in America than in England. With few exceptions,
the American physicians regard all chronic cases as susceptible of cure, or
of much improvement, and that large class, usually called incurable, are
treated with a perseverance which is often rewarded with a successful issue.
Dr. Ivirkbride believes that of all who are attacked with insanity, and
subjected during its early stages to judicious treatment, faithfully perse-
vered in, at least eighty per cent, will recover. Many cases, Mr. Thorn-
ton observes, believed to be incurable, are placed in confinement for safety
only; and thus condemned to the exclusive society of incurables, whereby
anv chance of returning reason is frustrated. Every intelligent person
knows the effect of association upon his own mind ; he feels in himself and
sees in others that moral and refined society have an elevating influence,
while the companionship of the profligate, ignorant, and deluded bring
down the standard of the mind, and destroy its natural balance. Hence
moral means, which are to aid in the restoration of curables, are often
useful in keeping up the mental powers of those who may be incurable.

The chief excellence of the treatment in the asylums of the United
States consists in carefully classifying the patients, and in arranging the
inmates of the separate wards, so as to exclude those cases, the subjects of
which may in any way interfere with the progress of the majority; and
those who are practically conversant with the treatment of the insane will
admit that this class separation is as imperative for insuring the mental
restoration of the insane, as individual seclusion is necessary for improving
the moral condition of the criminal.
