A Singular Case Of Insanity
============================

In an article entitled Illustrations of Insanity, furnished by tile
Letters and Writings of the Insane," which was published in a
previous number of the Journal,* Dr. Brigham introduced the
following letter as a specimen of most entire incoherence ??
"Mt dear Sister?As the cedars of Lebanon have been walUn,,
through Edgeworth forest so long, you must have concluded that T
have returned to the upper world, but I am still in pureatorv fnt
James K. Polk's sins, which, if they do not end in smnl-i 1 \
as good a chance of beginning that way as the ideas bUan tVihooT
for if T. had not left his trunk on the cart at the Dpr>nf . ,
would have been a deuced sight nearer to Land's 77W1 fi ' ?r\U s|ial
son said they would by the time the Yankees rpbplWW 7 -'/?K'
-but I am now about between the porch ? ^1
^ wist Sr|e"hingf ttePP^S 1 ^ "7"**
some better place than the last. I could have i ' i" ? "rn to
seventh seal. aTe ilcke(1 PlaSlary ?>e
if toris ? * ?ff>
be a D.D. as that doctor wc read of in BlackwoodllmtToWrt sflon"
Polk traced his pedigree, a little too near the loins <Tf WiuLT the
* "American Journal of Insanity."
A SINGULAR CASE OF INSANITY. 491
Conqueror, for the pleasures of memory or sense either, for Thompson,
Bryant, Africaner, Ainsworth, or anybody else. I said I had been to
the Poles, and S. had been there, and let T. Y. be witness that it was
something more than stars, it is one thing neither you nor I can com-
prehend till we compare notes, but there is the least pit in hell that
you ever saw, or ever will see, and a certain little white Devil just as
ready now as ever to lend a helping hand to the cook to give her a lift
over those bars. If you should ever be inclined to try Nebuchadnez-
zar's hollow furnace, for he did not wash all my guilt away did he ?
No indeed for he silvered my head nicely, so as to make it shine afar
off. But the end of these things is not yet?consult S. I should like
to see H. Honor to whom honor is due?tribute to whom tribute
?srive the Devil his due."
The writer, a student in one of the Eastern colleges, was
brought to the institution about three months before the date of
the above letter, labouring under an attack of acute mental dis-
ease, induced by too intense application to his studies. Six
months afterwards he was discharged recovered; subsequently
rejoined his class, and completed his college course with honour.
He commenced the study of medicine, graduated at the College
of Physicians and Surgeons in New York city, and connected
himself with the New York Hospital, where he filled the office of
house-physician with great credit to himself and advantage to the
institution. Soon after the expiration of his term of office he
had a fatal attack of remittent fever.
The following extract from his diary is furnished by his father.
In connexion with the letter, it has a jieculiar interest:?
" Yesterday I found in the 'American Journal of Insanity,'
April, 1848 (p. 303), a copy of my letter written to Helen about
six weeks before I left Utica. It is the most absurd medley of
nonsense, but it recalled to my mind ideas of no little interest.
" My memory during the whole period of my violent illness was
preternaturally active, calling up scenes and recollections of very
early childhood ; the toys and various utensils then about me,
the little adventures and queer speeches which will cling to one's
memory, while more important matters escape?these, and almost
everything which, in a varied and not limited series of reading?
names, scenes, historical and personal incidents, fact or fiction,
phrases of other languages, passages of poetry and of the Bible
?all these, by the merest similitude of sound, of name, or any
other near or remote principle of association, were grouped in
my mind, and would flit across its vision with inconceivable
rapidity.
" Often, I remember, have I lain on my sleepless bed, and
strung one group of words together, as they thus occurred to me,
and, catching at some slight analogy in the last, would run off
into another distinct series; and thus, till the tongue fairly wearied,
492 A SINGULAR. CASE OF INSANITY.
and tlie lips refused to move, liave arranged the affairs and
settled the disputes of generations past, present, and yet to he ; of
princes and potentates, of injured queens, and defrauded heirs
apparent?rummaging the legends of the Tower, and all the dark,
romantic lore of Scottish feudal life; righting the "wrong in every
department or age of human existence, quarrelling most irreve-
rently and pertly with many characters which good people deem
sacred, and elevating in my own imagination many of those luck-
less hut interesting heroes who, with many dazzling and re-
deeming qualities, had yet the misfortune to be wicked.
" Here came out in full my sneaking liking for Saul and
Pontius Pilate (a very clever fellow, by the way, who occasionally
appeared in the hall, and had an unfortunate squint), Henry
VIII., Herod (whose valiant slaughter of Judea's infant-ry always
inspired my young mind with a dread feeling of admiration), and
Nebuchadnezzar. All these were living, breathing personages to
me?for death seemed but a voluntary step, and a slight one?
and with these I communed in the night-watches. I thought I
heard them answer me, and I spoke as in reply?sometimes
sadly, remembering some sorrowful scene gone by, with which I
intimately connected them ; sometimes in irrepressible glee ; and
again in anger?the mood varying with the turn of a word. Some-
times I would fall upon what, to me, was a sublime thought, and
remembering Napoleon's saying, was pretty certain to change to
a ludicrous interpretation, or some other such turn.
" Something of these fitful changes I recognise in this letter.
It represents, tolerably well,, the state of my mind?very well, for
it is almost a transcript of what I would have said, if speaking to
my sister. I well remember the day when the sheet of paper was
brought me, upon which I wrote this, in a scrawl of a hand, for
I dashed impetuously along, and what a sane person would say
was an ill-spelled letter. But the spelling had its associations.
This was the day, or one or two after, I had seen Helen.
t; Shortly after I got one from her which most grievously dis-
tressed me. From it, I first realized that I was under restraint,
and in an Insane Asylum. I held my head between my hands,
and pressed it against the wall; every pulse came bounding with
double force and rapidity; it seemed as if I should go mad then,
and for ever. I did not notice those who passed?nor spoke,
nor interested myself in the employments of others. I was
changing.
" When Dr. Brigliam passed through, I begged of him to take
me from this place. I was too proud for that before. He tried
to put me off. I followed him to the end. of the hall, and then
with my eyes till he passed out of sight.
" It was not many days before the doctor took me with him, as ?
A SINGULAR CASE OF INSANITY. 49 S
he went his rounds, and left me in a lower and a better hall.
Then the scenes with which many of my delusions were con-
nected, were changed. I looked no more at things around me
through the distorted medium of an assumed character. I was
H. B. M., not Mr. E. (my convenient # character for any number
of unknown personalities.)
" It was not without a voluntary effort, and that a painful one,
that I tore myself from a glorious world of my own creating, and
a throne of my own construction, to take my place in a real and
very commonplace lower planet, full of ordinary and intractable
characters. For did I not leave the inspiring and elevating
society of the great, and good, and heroic of every age?-and
glorious schemes of empire?and grand ideas of improvement,
whether commercial, or military, or literary, or in the fine arts ?
Were not tall monuments and noble temples to rise over this and
every other land ? Were not the thoughts of genius, expressed
as they never before had found expression, to glow in fresco, on
canvas, or to stand forth in pure dignity in the marble statue ?
Were not the scenes of my childhood's pleasures to be made
sacred by its offering ?
" Then should the pale scholar and the inspired poet no longer
waste unheeded away, but each in his place should enjoy his fit
reward. And the white sails of every nation, but rather of mine,
should be spread to the breeze in every sea, bringing back richer
freights than those of Solomon; and armies should stand ready
at my bidding, innumerable, and comprising in their legions
every force that ever in truth or poetry took the field?the batta-
lions that contended with each other when there was war in
heaven, the veterans of Napoleon, and the tiny squadrons of
faery land. But these I left: and, as I descended from my
throne, reason resumed hers.
" Not many days afterwards, I wrote a most urgent letter home,
as perfectly sane as ever I was or shall be, requesting to be
removed.
" Day after day, and hours, and minutes I counted, till I
reached my home?free."
NO. XI.?NEW SERIES. K K
