On Epilepsy and Epileptiform Seizures
=======================================

: their Causes, Pathology, and Treatment.
?>y Edwabd Henry Sieveking, M.D.. Phv-
sician to St. Mary's Hospital, &c. (Churchill, 1858.)
Tiiat dire disease which ever and anon suspends reason and convulses
the frame?which strikes with the suddenness of lightning and with
the awfulncss of unseen power, has always been a subject of intense
interest to the medical inquirer. The psychological plij'sician espe-
cially has been impelled to study it for two reasons. First, on account
of the intimate etiological connexion of epilepsy with mental alienation ;
secondly, because a large proportion of the victims of this disease,
driven from society, become permanent burdens upon the public and
private asylums. He is moved by the spirit of philosophical investi-
gation to inquire into the pathology of epilepsy; and stimulated by
the practical necessity of governing a body of epileptics to seek the
means of alleviating or of curing the disease. Accordingly, we find
that some of the most elaborate and valuable treatises on epilepsy have
emanated from special psychologists. It is certainly not our desire to
detract one iota from the sterling merit or usefulness of such contribu-
tions as those of Esquirol, Delasiauve, or Cazauvieilh. But it may be
permitted to us to welcome with cordiality and satisfaction the work
of a general physician who has studied the disease from a point of view
distinct from that of the psychological specialist. There is a peculiar
advantage in carrying back our inquiries into the etiology and patho-
632 REVIEWS.
logy of epilepsy to the epochs which stand nearest in time to the origin
of the disease.
The general physician stands in a position to do this. He wit-
nesses all those earlier phenomena which attend and usher in the
outbreak of the malady. He sees its growth, and he is able to watch
the circumstances which, for good or for evil, modify its progress. The
testimony of the general physician is necessary to complete the history.
He alone in fact can read the first chapters, without which the sub-
sequent ones, written in the lunatic asylum, must remain imperfect,
unintelligible, and unprofitable.
This consideration would alone be sufficient to give value to the work
of Dr Sieveking. But those who may peruse his work will not fail
to acknowledge that its value is enhanced by the excellent qualities
which have enabled him to turn his special advantages to the best
account. The work extends over 267 pages of small octavo. Not
only on account of its moderate bulk, but also from the mass of valu-
able matter and judicious reflections it contains, Dr Sieveking's book
will be generally studied by the profession. It is not, therefore, neces-
sary to enter into any lengthened analysis. It will be sufficient if we
call prominent attention to the leading points which the author has
more particularly illustrated.
Dr Sieveking deprecates exclusive regard to the paroxysm as con-
stituting the essence of epilepsy. He agrees with Dr Watson in
objecting to definitions of epilepsy, because its forms are so various,
and its modifications so numerous, that no description can be given of
it. He inclines to think that our knowledge of the disease will not
gain by such definitions, as they tend to limit the attention to the
paroxysm, and often mislead the observer, by inducing him to overlook
conditions to which the definition does not apply, but which will ap-
pear, after a further examination of the whole subject, to belong to the
same category of diseased conditions as epilepsy. We concur with
the author thus far, that we should be keeping out of sight important
etiological and pathological conditions if we restricted our investigations
to the paroxysm itself. By losing sight of these conditions we shouldalso
vastly diminish the guides to curative or preventive treatment. Yet the
study of the paroxysm is replete with physiological interest, and we will
add, with promise of useful therapeutical application. The brilliant light
which Brown-Sequard is throwing upon the functions of the nervous
system, will probably before long clear up the mystery of the imme-
diate cause of the epileptic seizure. When we shall have attained this
point, an immense gain will have been made. The remarkable, we may
say the cardinal, experiments of this far-sighted physiologist tend to
define more closely the individuality of the function of the various
parts of the nervous system. There can be no doubt that the epi-
leptic seizure depends primarily upon a particular condition of a parti-
cular part, perhaps a very small part, of the nervous centres. It will be
by the careful comparison of Nature's experiments upon the human sub-
ject with the physiologist's experiments upon the lower animals, that
we shall one day demonstrate the essence of the epileptic paroxysm. It
must, moreover, not be forgotten that the physiological analysis of the
epileptic paroxysm has already led Marshall Hall to the discovery of
REVIEWS. 633
the means of cutting-off one of tlie most disastrous elements of the
paroxysms, and thus of making one grand step on the road towards its
total abolition. We do not fully assent to the truth of the flowery
metaphor of Dr Sieveking, and " regard the fit as (simply) the
flower of a noxious weed." We rather regard the fit as the essence
of the disease ; hut that, like many other diseases, the fit may he
produced by a variety of causes. Many roads may lead to the same
goal. But difference in the mode of production and variation in the
route do not change the identity of the result. For these reasons we
would continue to fasten our attention upon the fit as the foremost
object of study ; not, be it well understood, neglecting the close ob-
servation of those conditions which precede and determine its out-
break.
In discussing the paroxysms, Dr Sieveking appears to question their
subjection to the law of periodicity. He says:?
"Neither in my own observations, nor in the histories of the disease pre-
served by other authors, has there appeared to be any uniformity in the mode
in which the paroxysms took place. In many, granted even the majority of
cases, no regularity of return can be detected. But certainly our own observa-
tion affords distinct examples of periodicity. A young gentleman, destined
for the Dutch navy, was seized with his first epileptic paroxysm on board-ship;
a second occurred just one month, less twenty-four hours, after; he noted this
interval, and being sent to London to be placed under our care, declared his
expectation that another attack would occur after the like interval. He was
domiciled in our own house. A fit of a severe character, lasting nearly an hour,
seized him at the very moment he had predicated. On the return of the next
period, the ruse was resorted to of putting the clock forwards; nevertheless,
and although he was cheerful up to the moment, not apparently meditating the
attack, he was suddenly arrested in an occupation which appeared to engross
his mind, and at a time when he had reason to believe his hour was past, by
the paroxysm. This periodicity exhibited itself on other occasions. It was
never disturbed until he was altogether cured, an event which took place in
a few months. Again, a gentleman engaged in an arduous commercial pursuit
was subject to a cataleptic suspension of consciousness, the petit mat, even/
Sunday. It occasionally attacked him at other times, but on the Sunday it
never failed until he was put under treatment. A^ain, we have now under our
care a sailor, in an institution, where constant observation is exercised, who
has three several times had a fit at as nearly as possible intervals of thirty
days. We might multiply such examples. We cannot therefore doubt the
fact of a periodical tendency. We even see in this tendency an important
clement towards the pathological elucidation of the disease."
Some excellent chapters follow on the phenomena and causes of
epilepsy. The pathological anatomy is treated with especial care.
The author dwells particularly on the observations of Dr Boyd, which
show an increased weight of brain in epileptics; he analyses at some
length the less known researches of Wenzel, who seeks to place the
pathological seat of epilepsy in the pituitary body and pineal gland.
He does justice to this observer by correcting a misapprehension which
has attached to his views ; he repeats the warning before pointed out by
Dr Sims, not to confound, as has been done, the cerebellum with the
pituitary body ; this error he conjectures to have arisen from the use
of the French translation of Wenzel, which gives the title ".Cervelet"
for t: HirnanhangDr Sieveking, although considering the bearing of
634 REVIEWS.
disease of the pituitary body upon epilepsy, like that of Addison's
disease to the bronzing of the skin, as a moot point, yet attaches
great importance to the completeness and accuracy of Wenzel's twenty
autopsies of epileptics. He gives a summary of each case.
The chapter on the theory of epilepsy is well deserving of attention.
Dr Sieveking's mode of discussing the value of different facts and
hypotheses is eminently philosophical. His appreciation is that of a
calm, reflective, and unprejudiced critic. He believes that in the great
majority of instances of epilepsy, the first attack is due to an irrita-
tion produced by derangement in the amount or quality of the blood
circulating in the brain. In a person predisposed we frequently find
over-fatigue, a long walk, carrying heavy loads, or prolonged mental
exertion, the manifest cause not only of the first, but of many succeed-
ing seizures. Hence there will be occasion, in discussing the treatment
of the disease, to dwell much upon the necessity of bodily and mental
rest, so as to allow the system to recover that balance the disturbance
of which gave rise to the seizure.
The two concluding chapters are devoted to the treatment of epilepsy.
They exhibit, equally with the preceding ones, the quiet sagacity and
excellent judgment of the author. Consistently with his view, that the
general condition of the patient rather than the paroxysm should be
regarded, he points out the special importance of treating the patient
for the intervallic phenomena. It is here, again, that the experience
of the general physician is useful in correcting or completing the ex-
perience of the psychiatric specialist. Esquirol has declared an absolute
scepticism as to the influence of remedies. But the remark of Dr.
Sieveking is true, that a lunatic asylum is generally made the ultimate
resort of epileptic patients in whom the usual remedies have been ex-
hausted, and in whom incipient mental fatuity has already indicated
organic intra-cranial lesion. The experience of Dr Sieveking certainly
agrees with our own, namely, that medicine, taking a large view of the
term, is capable of effecting much. ?* If I were to formularize " (says
Dr Sieveking) " the prevailing mode of treatment which I myself adopt,
I should say it consisted in local derivation, or counter-irritation
directed against cerebral congestion, and in general roborants or tonics."
Of the presumed specific remedies he is disposed to place the prepara-
tions of iron and zinc first. Of zinc he would speak very favourably;
he prefers the soluble sulphate to the oxide. He was probably unac-
quainted^vith the diphosphate, the preparation recently introduced by
Dr Barnes, and recommended by arguments deserving of attention.
This skilful practitioner observes, that the combination of zinc with
phosphorus seems particularly indicated by the expenditure of phos-
phorus in brain labour, by the prevalence of phosphorus in grain
and many important articles of food; and by the system tolerating
better the phosphate than the sulphate. If the object be to get
more zinc into the system, phosphoric acid is the better vehicle. In
many cases, Dr Barnes' combination of diphosphate of zinc, quinine,
and valerian seems to be especially promising. He speaks slightingly,
and our experience agrees with his, of indigo and cotyledon umbilicus.
Passing from specific remedies, Dr Sieveking dwells with much
EEYIEWS. 635
emphasis on tlie influence of moral and hygienic treatment. The cold
hath is especially extolled.
The book concludes with a tabular summary of fifty-six cases
observed by the author. Our notice must conclude with the expres-
sion of our thankfulness for so valuable a contribution to the patho-
logy and treatment of this obscure and intractable disease.
