Physiological Psychology
=========================

Art. V.?
No. V.
BY BOBEBT DUNN, F.B.C.S. ENG.
(Continued from No. VI., p. 367.)
Recapitulation.?Consciousness we have viewed in tlie light of
an ultimate fact, beyond which we cannot go,?as the distinguish-
ing attribute of animal life ; and self-consciousness as the primary
condition of intelligence,?in a word, as mental existence. It is,
in fact, equivalent to the knowledge which we possess of our own
personal identity, for it is implied in every sensation which we
experience, and in every mental act that we perform?in feeling,
perceiving, thinking, and willing. Consciousness and immediate
knowledge are universally convertible, and psychology itself is
318 PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY.
only developed consciousness. Reid and his follower, Dugald
Stewart, were clearly in error in restricting the function of con-
sciousness to that of a particular faculty, co-ordinate with the
other intellectual powers, instead of regarding it as the universal
condition of intelligence, for?
" In consciousness, as the original spontaneity of reason (vovg, locus
principiorum), are revealed the premordial facts of our intelligent
nature. Consciousness is the fountain of all comprehensibility and
illustration, but as such cannot itself be illustrated or comprehended.
To ask how any fact of consciousness is possible, is to ask how con-
sciousness itself is possible ; and to ask how consciousness is possible, is
to ask how an intelligent being like man is possible."*
Now, we can best conceive of consciousness, as " one and indi-
visible" in relation to time, as an incalculably rapid succession of
acts or states, and as passing from the moment of birth?the
helplessness of infancy?to the maturity of age, through a pro-
gressive series of developments?through the different phases of
sensational, perceptive, and intellectual consciousness. To feel,
to perceive, and to think, or, in other words, sensation, per-
ception, and intellection, are distinctly progressive stages in our
psychological progress. They are the three great and distin-
guishing phases of mental activity and development, under which
are comprised all our psychological phenomena, of whatever kind ;
and they each severally have and require, for the manifestation of
their respective phenomena in this life, a distinct organic instru-
mentality, of corresponding elaboration and complexity, in the
nervous apparatus of the cerebro-spinal system of man.
Sensori-motor, consensual and instinctive feelings and actions,
are the phenomena which formulate the sensational conscious-
ness; to these are superadded, ideation and volition, with their
associates, memory and emotional sensibility, as the essential
phenomena of the perceptive consciousness; and to these, ima-
gination, imitation, articulate speech or language, ratiocination,
and the processes of thought and reflection, as the distinguishing
attributes of the intellectual consciousness.
But to ask a reason, as Sir William Hamilton has justly re-
marked, for the possibility of our intuitions, sensational or per-
ceptive, above the fact, of their reality or consciousness, " betrays,"
as Aristotle has truly said, " an imbecility of the reasoning principle
itselflor the facts, as ultimate, are inexplicable. " What we do
know of sell, or person, we know only as given in the conscious-
ness : there is revealed to us, as an ultimate fact, a self and a
noil-self; each given as independent?each known only in antithesis
to the other. And 110 belief can be more intuitive, universal, im-
* Sir William Hamilton.? Vide "Edinburgh Review," vol. lii. p. 17G.
PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY. SI 9
mediate, or irresistible, than that this antithesis is real, and known
to he real; ancl no belief is therefore more true. *
Whatever may he the notion entertained of the abstract nature
or essence of mind, one thing is manifestly obvious, that the
sensori-motor phenomena?in other words, that sensibility and
motility?indicate its primordial points of contact with the ex-
ternal world or nature. And as to the universality of instinctive
endowments, Sir Henry Holland has well observed
" Wherever there is organization, even under the simplest form, there
we are sure to find instinctive action, more or less in amount, destined
to give the appropriate effect to it. This is true throughout every part
of the animal series, from men and the quadrumana down to the lowest
form of infusorial life. When we consider how vast this scale is?
crowded with more than a hundred thousand recognised species, ex-
clusively of those which fossil geology has disclosed to us?we may
be well amazed by the profuse variety of instinctive action; as mul-
tiplied in kind as are the organic forms with which it is associated, and
all derived from one common power?that of instinct "f
But amazing as this may be, are we not still more in " wonder-
ing mazes lost," when we reflect upon all the endowments of the
primordial cell (vegetable or animal), with its granular nuclei,
microscopically minute, and upon the community of function of
its ultimate constituents; bearing in mind, at the same time, that
within this solitary cell are potentially contained not only the
instinctive activities above indicated, ranging from the infusoria
up to man, but the perceptive, the affective, and the intellectual
faculties of every class,?the god-like attributes of man himself,
and even distinguishing peculiarities and idiosyncracies heredi-
tarily transmitted from parent to offspring ?
Of the three forms of mental activity?the sensational, percep-
tive, and intellectual, and under which all our varied psycholo-
gical phenomena arrange and group themselves?self-consciousness
is the earliest, and consequently the lowest, phase of develop-
ment ; for in it the mind at first exists in a state of bare recep-
tivity. The senses, indeed, come into play from the moment of
birth, and soon acquire the utmost perfection of which they are
capable ; but the intelligence is purely sensational, the feelings
are simply those of pleasure and pain, and the impulses to action
are innate and instinctive. In perceptive or world-consciousness,
an increasing amount of mental activity obtains, arising from the
conflict of the perceptive faculties of the mind with the external
world or nature. ^ Indeed, all our immediate knowledge, of what-
ever kind, is intuitive, and has its origin in perceptive experience.
^ i^e "Edinburgh He view," ante cit.
Sir Henry Holland's " Chapters on Mental Physiology."
NO. X.?KE\Y SERIES. Y
320 PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY.
Here we liave superadded to sensational, the perceptive intuitions,
ideation, and the cognition of outivard realities; to sensorial
feelings, the emotional and moral sensibilities ; and to innate and
instinctive impulses, volitional poiuers and intelligent actions.
But it is in the intellectual consciousness that the mental activity
reaches its culminating point, in the region of representative
knoivledge. It is here, through imitation, imagination, and ratio-
cination, that the mind attains to its highest phase of deve-
lopment?grasping, through the range of the intellectual and
reflecting faculties, abstract ideas, and necessary and universal
truths, and finding articulate utterance and expression for them
through the faculty of speech in language.
Now, nervous actions are of a threefold character?physical,
sensory, and voluntary. There are?
1st. The physical and reflex actions of the excito-motory
system, which occur without sensation;
2ndly. The sensori-motor ? the consensual and instinctive
actions of the sensational consciousness; and
3rdly. The voluntary?the volitional, emotional, and intelligent
actions of the perceptive and intellectual consciousness.
We recognise and detect the first of these, the physical and
reflex, exclusively only in the lowest animal organisms. They
are essentially automatic, and occur without sensation. The
sensori-motory actions are typical of animal life, and in conjunc-
tion with the first, or excito-motory, characterise the whole of
the invertebrate sub-kingdom ; whilst in the vertebrate series, to
the first and second, the third, or purely voluntary, are super-
added, and constitute the distinguishing feature of the cerebro-
spinal system.
Accordingly, the nervous system of man, from the nature of its
office, and its functional endowments, admits of a threefold
division also, into?
1. The physical or excito-motory, and reflex?the true spinal
system of Dr. Marshall Hall;
2. The nutritive and secretory, or ganglionic system; and
3. The sentient, psychical, and voluntary, or cerebro-spinal
system.
But it is only with the last of these, the cerebro-spinal system,
that we are now more immediately concerned ; for the physical
or excito-motory phenomena are ivithout the domain, and beyond
the control of intelligence,?and the reciprocal relations of the
ganglionic and the cerebro-spinal systems have but an indirect
though most important practical bearing upon our present sub-
ject of inquiry. As we have said, in its totality, the nervous
apparatus of the cerebro-spinal system comprises the organic in-
strumentalities through which the phenomena of sensation, percep-
PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY. 321
tion, and intellection are manifested in this life; in otlier words,
the nervous centres of the sensational, perceptive, and intellec-
tual consciousness. Now, we have seen that the sensory ganglia
are the seat of the sensational consciousness of whatever kind,
and not only of sensorial, hut of emotional feeling ; and that the
cranio-spinal axis, and the corpora striata at its summit, are the
centres and source of all the movements of the body?reflex, sen-
sational, emotional, and volitional ;? so that the nervous appara-
tus of the sensational consciousness?the system of automatic
life and instinctive action, subservient to sensation, and to those
consensual and instinctive actions which are indissolubly linked
on with sensations?consists of the spinal axis and nerves, the
medulla oblongata, and the chain of sensory ganglia, including
those of the special senses at its summit. For, as I have before
observed, if we follow up the cranial prolongation of the spinal
cord, the medulla oblongata, into the fibrous strands of which
we see imbedded the respiratory, auditory, and gustatory ganglia,
and carefully trace out its ramifying branches, we find it sending
off distinct fasciculi of fibres to the ganglionic centres at its
summit, to the cerebellum, the corpora quadrigemina, the
tlialami optici, the corpora striata, and to the peduncles of the ol-
factory ganglia, and thus to the sole exclusion of the cerebrum>
which is an organ superimposed and superadded, and whose con-
nexions are strictly commissural, the whole series of the ganglia
of the cerebro-spinal system, including those of the spinal senses,
are in direct fibrous connexion with the cranio-spinal axis, form'
ing with it, as an aggregate or whole, the sensorium commune, or
great circle of sensational consciousness, and of consensual and
instinctive action.
Now, as the functions of an independent centre of action,
seated in a distinct nervous apparatus, the phenomena of the
sensational consciousness are not to be confounded with voli-
tional or intelligent actions. But upon this nervous apparatus
of the sensational consciousness, for the purpose of combining
and associating, in the development of the active powers of his
mind, instinctive impulses, sensational feelings, emotional and
moral sensibilities, with the higher intellectual activities, and for
offices and purposes the noblest and most exalted in the eco-
nomy of man, there is superimposed and superadded?the cere-
brum, or great hemispherical ganglia, and which, in its totality,
is the seat of the instruments or organs both of the perceptive
and of the intellectual consciousness. For if there be one point
in the physiology of the brain more unequivocally demonstrated
than another, it is this?that these ganglia are the instruments
of intellectual action and volitional power; and that, wherever
they exist, even in their simplest rudimentary condition, when.
Y 2
322 PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY.
compared with their complex and full development in man, there
we invariably find manifested the essential phenomena of the
perceptive consciousness?ideation, memory, and volition.
Restricting the functions of the cerebrum solely to per-
ceptive and intellectual operations, to the entire exclusion of
sensation, Dr. Carpenter, to my mind, has fully established the
composite nature of the animal propensities and social affections,
and of the emotional, moral, and religious feelings of man; and has
admirably shown, that in the exercise of each there is a percep-
tive or ideational element, as well as sensorial feeling, involved.
And here it is worthy of remark, that that sagacious metaphysician,
Mr. James Mill, in his contemplations on human mind, apart
from all physiological considerations, had previously arrived at the
same conclusions. The separation and localization, within the
encephalon, of the nervous centres of sensation and of ideation, of
feeling and of thought, is a real and an acknowledged step in ad-
vance on the physiological psychology of man, and it is one
which has yet to be fully appreciated, in all its variety of bear-
ings, in relation to the practice of psychological medicine.
Now, although the cerebrum, in its totality, is indisputably the
seat of the organs both of the perceptive and of the intellectual
consciousness, perception and intellection are not to be con-
founded with each other.
To perceive and to think are distinct mental processes, and
they have?for they must require?distinct organic instrumen-
talities for the manifestation of their respective phenomena. Per-
ception is but one and the first step above sensation ; its intui-
tions are closely interwoven with feeling, and are often, indeed,
intensely felt. It is intermediate between sensation and intel-
lection, and it is the portal to intellectual action, for the intui-
tions of its faculties furnish the pabula of thought. But intel-
lection is the highest, the crowning phase of mental develop-
ment and introspective or reflective consciousness?the distin-
guishing attribute of humanity?and as to feeling, it finds no
place in the constitution of abstract ideas, or in the processes of
logical reasoning.
Perception speaks to us from without, and intellection from
within; for whilst, in the perceptive consciousness, ideation is
affected, in response to impressions made upon us from without,
by virtue of the primeval harmony which exists between the
perceptive faculties of the mind and external nature,?in intellec-
tion, the mental process is different and reversed, and the mind,
separating itself from outward restraints, and impelled by the
inherent activity of its intellectual faculties and reflecting powers,
embodies idealized impressions and perceptive intuitions?its
inward images and representative ideas, in objective realities.
Thus symbolized or objectified, they are removed from the region
PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY. 323
of immediate and perceptive experience, and exist in the mind
as independent intellectual realities, and become fixed and defi-
nite objects of thought, and which can be placed at pleasure
either within or without the consciousness of the moment. In
this way it is that the mind, impelled by the imitative faculty, by
means of the hands and chisel, moulds, forms, and fashions images
of the objects of nature, into which it has embodied its own gene-
ralized ideas ; and so, again, urged on and impelled forward by
the same imitative faculty, by means of the hands and the pencil,
it delineates and produces pictorial representations of the idealized
objects ;?such were the hieroglyphics of old. But still the mind
cannot be said to have achieved its first step in the freedom of
human thought until it has created, invented, and constructed its
own sign, phonetic or visible, for the embodiment of the intellec-
tual idea ; and such, as we have seen, is language?for, in reality,
" it is idea objectified."
It is important, physiologically as well as psychologically, to
bear in mind the distinction between immediate and representative
knowledge, and the difference in their origin or source. For all
our immediate knowledge, of whatever kind, is intuitive, and has
its origin in perceptive experience?in the direct intuitions of the
perceptive faculties; and all representative knowledge is the
product or creation of the mind's intellectual and reflecting
powers.
Now, in the structure of the cerebrum there are manifestly two
well-marked and distinct series of convolutions. There is a lon-
gitudinal, and there is a transverse series ; and my own mind
rests on the conviction, that the functions of these two distinct
series of convolutions are different; and that the former, or lon-
gitudinal series, constitutes the nervous apparatus of the per-
ceptive, and the transverse series that of the intellectual con-
sciousness.
But, besides these two distinct series of convolutions, there is
a third or commissural series in the cerebrum, and through the
instrumentality of which the intuitions of the perceptive are
brought into association with the higher activities of the intellectual
consciousness. Such are the internal anastomosing convolutions,
the third order of Foville, which connect the ourlet, or great in-
ternal, with the transverse convolutions on the surface of the
cerebrum the common central organs of the perceptive, with
those of the intellectual consciousness.
Foville, as we have seen, has invested the locus perforatus, or
quadrilateral spot, with peculiar interest; considering it, as he
does, the nucleus, or starting-point, from whence all the other
convolutions of the hemisphere are evolved. Nor can the fact be
denied, that the ourlet of Foville, or great internal?the primitive
basement convolution of the hemisphere?may literally be said
324 PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY.
to spring out of, or to be evolved from, the locus perforatus, and
that all the other longitudinal convolutions of the hemisphere are
directly connected and associated with this primitive basement
convolution; forming as a whole, in the aggregate, in my opinion,
the nervous apparatus of the perceptive consciousness. But it is
equally true that the transverse series of convolutions on the
surface of the cerebrum have no direct connexion either with the
locus jperforatus, or with the ourlet of Foville. They are a dis-
tinct series of convolutions ; and it is through a system of
internal anastomosing convolutions that these transverse convo-
lutions are brought into association with the central organs of the
perceptive consciousness. They constitute, in my mind, the
nervous apparatus of the intellectual consciousness, for they are
essentially human; and it is only where they do exist, and in the
ratio or proportion of their existence, among the lower animals,
that we find and detect any traces of ratiocination and of intel-
lectual action.
Foville has traced out and demonstrated the connexions of all
the other primitive longitudinal convolutions of the cerebrum
with the basement convolutions of the hand; and Plate XII. of
the Quarto Atlas to his " Traite Complet de l'Anatomie, de la
Physiologie, et de la Pathologie du System Nerveux-Cerebro-
spinal," is "destinee montrerles rayonnements de l'ourlet fibreux
dans le circonvolutions de la face interne de l'liemisphere." In
this plate, with the great commissure divided in the mesial line,
there is seen, above the corpus callosum, a vertical section of the
great internal convolution?the ourlet or hem of the hemisphere
?its concentric circumference?surrounding it internally like a
riband, and attached at each extremity to the locus perforatus.
The great marginal convolution of the longitudinal fissure is seen
forming the eccentric or outer boundary of the hemisphere; and
between these, crossing the internal surface of the hemisphere,
are displayed the convoluted branches which unite them with the
anterior, middle, and posterior longitudinal convolutions of the
brain, establishing the connexions, and forming a sort of anasto-
mosis of the basement convolutions with all the other primitive
convolutions, and with the transverse convolutions, on the convex
surface of the cerebrum. In Plate X. is represented the external
surface of the hemisphere. All the convolutions of the convexity
of the hemisphere are seen running, from the convolution around
the fissura SilviHo that which encircles the hemisphere, the great
marginal one. The transverse superciliary, medio-parietal, and
occipital convolutions are displayed, and, besides their connexions
with the two convolutions of the second order, their anastomosis
with each other.
The great internal convolutions, as I have said, are clearly
PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY. 325
tlie primitive basement convolutions of the hemispheres; and
we recognise their liomologues in the thin laminae of vesicular
matter "which encrust the corpora striata in the brain of the fish.
Forming, as they do, the concentric or inner circumference of the
hemispheres, as the great marginal convolutions do their outer
boundary, must they not necessarily be the primary and common
portals to intellectual action?the great central organs of the
perceptive consciousness?the seat of ideation, memory, and
volition ? For, be it remembered, that it is in the case of the
fish, where their representatives are reduced to mere laminae or
crusts, covering the corpora striata, that we have the earliest
instance, and the first clear and distinct evidence, of the exercise
of perception, memory, and volition, as opposed to mere consen-
sual and instinctive actions. These convolutions of the band con-
stitute the distinctive and boundary lines of demarcation between
the sensory and perceptive ganglia of the encephalon?between
sensation and ideation. They are, in fact, the common portals to
intellectual action and volitional power?the seat of ideation,
memory, and volition. It is here that sensory impressions?the
intuitions of all the organs of the special senses?are idealized
and registered, perceived and associated, and that the ideation
or world-consciousness of external existences?the things which
we see, feel, taste, and smell?is effected; and it is from here
that the mandates of the will issue. We have seen that with
these central organs and fundamental convolutions are directly
connected and associated all the other longitudinal convolutions
in the anterior, middle, and posterior lobes of the brain, admi-
nistering to the several perceptive ideational activities of man,
and to the development of his composite nature as an animal
and social, a moral and religious, as well as an intellectual being.
Now may it be fairly concluded, that the intuitions not only of
a.11 the special senses, but also of all the perceptive faculties, are
perceived by us through the central organs of the perceptive
consciousness ? Most certain it is that we have an [esthetic
sense of the true, the beautiful, and the good,?moral intuitions
of right and wrong, and emotional of awe, veneration, and reve-
rence, which come to us before all teaching,?and indeed, that the
?elements of all our immediate knowledge, physical, moral, and
religious, have their origin or source in perceptive experience.
To determine the special functions of the primitive convolu-
tions is the great problem of physiological psychology; and
although something may be said to have been done towards its
solution, much remains to be accomplished, for the problem is
virtually unsolved. Nor can this be a matter of surprise, when
we consider its conditions and requirements.
The natural history of the development of the cerebrum,
326 PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY.
throughout the whole vertebrate sub-kingdom, is but the first
step in the process, and it is one that has been or may be ac-
complished ; but the far more difficult task remains,?a work of
labour as necessary as it is difficult,?that of studying the cha-
racters, habits, and behaviour of the animals throughout the
series, ? their animal and social propensities, and intellectual
activities, in connexion with their respective cerebral develop-
ments ; and how few are there among us who possess the mental
endowments and requisite qualifications, and can command
opportunities, even on a limited scale, for such an undertaking.
But, "Nil, sine magno labor e, debit mortalibus;" and with such
active labourers in the field as Holm, Vimont, and Frederick
Cuvier have proved themselves to be, great things will assuredly,
in the process of time, be accomplished in furtherance in this direc-
tion of the study of the physiological psychology of man.*
* Professor Owen has proposed a fourfold primary division of the mammalia,
based upon four leading modifications of the structure of the cerebrum, under the
following designations:?
1. Lyencephala (\voj, to loose; eyKupaXoc, the brain), the loose-brained impla-
centals, in which the great transverse commissure, or corpus callosum, is wanting?
such are the marsupialia and monotremota.
2. Lessencephala (Xtogoq, smooth), the smooth-brained placentals, where the
corpus callosum is present, but the brain is not convoluted ? such are the
rodentia, insectivora, &c. t
3. Gyrencephala (yvpoio, to wind about), in which the superficies of the brain
is folded into more or less numerous gyri, or convolutions, of which among the
higher are the quadrumina and carnivora. The mammalian modification of the
vertebrate type attains its highest physical perfections in the gyrencephala, as
manifested by the bulk of-some, by the destructive mastery of others, by the
address and agility of a third order. And through the superior psychological
faculties?an adaptive intelligence predominating over blind instinct?which are
associated with the higher development of the brain, the gyrencephala afford those
species which have ever formed the most cherished companions and servitors, and
the most valuable sources of wealth and power to mankind.
4. Archencephala, Homo ('Ap^w, to overrule). "In man,' says Professor Owen,
"the brain presents anascensive step in development, higher and more strongly
marked than that by which the other sub-classes are distinguished. Not only do
the cerebral hemispheres overlap the olfactory lobes and the cerebellum, but they
extend in advance of the one, and farther back than the other. Their posterior
development is so marked that anatomists have assigned to that part the character
of a third lobe; it is peculiar to the genus llomo, and equally peculiar is the 'pos-
terior horn of the lateral ventricleand the ' hippocamus minor,' which characterize
the hind lobe of each hemisphere. The superficial grey matter of the cerebrum,
through the number and depth of the convolutions, attains its maximum of extent
in man.
" Peculiar mental powers are associated with this highest form of brain, and
their consequences wonderfully illustrate the value of the cerebral character,
according to my estimate of which I am led to regard the genus Homo as not
merely a representative of a distinct order, but of a distinct sub-class of the mam-
malia, for which I propose the name of Archencephala."+
t" Vide a paper by Professor Owen, ' On the Characters, Principles of Division,
and Primary Groups of the Class Mammalia," read before the Linnosan Society of
London, Feb. 17th, aud April 21st, 1857, and in the "Journal of the Pro-
ceedings of the Linnaean Society, for June, 1857," vol. ii. No. 5.
PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY. 327
The facts, indeed, of developmental anatomy, comparative and
human, point to the most important deductions, for they indis-
putably prove?firstly, that the perceptive faculties of our physical
experience or knowledge, subservient to our cognition of external
objects, their sensible qualities and physical attributes, the pheno-
mena of their action, or events, and their relative relations,
arrangement and number, &c., must have their "local habitation
and abode" in the convolutions of the anterior lobes; secondly,
that the posterior lobes, as exclusively human, must necessarily
be the seat of the exclusively human affections, and administer
to our social affections; and thirdly, the inference appears to be
legitimate, that the convolutions of the middle lobes are the
seat of the personal affections of the ego, and of the social,
moral, and religious intuitions?the distinguishing attributes of
man.
The general harmonious accordance of these deductions with
the multiplied cranioscophical observations of Gall, Spurzlieim,
and Combe, speaks in favour of their foundation in truth and
nature; and I think it may be legitimately inferred that in
the primitive basilar convolutions are seated the organs of the
faculties subservient to the formation of the inferior region of
the true or conscious mind. Thus, on the lowest plane of cere-
bral development, and of which we may recognise the analogues
in the inferior vertebrata, the perceptive apparatus seems limited
to the basement or internal convolutions, with their anterior and
basilar connexions; that is, to the common central organs of the
perceptive consciousness,?the seat of ideation, memory, and
volition,?to the anterior perceptive organs, through the instru-
mentality of which, by the inlets of the special senses, we acquire
a knowledge of the sensible qualities and physical attributes of
external existences,?and to those basilar organs which admi-
nister to the preservation and maintenance of animal life. The
love of life is paramount; and around the organs of the alimenta-
tive propensity are marshalled and associated those of the pro-
pensities subservient to the defence, protection, and conservation
of existence. It may, indeed, be fairly inferred that the intui-
tions of the special senses and their allied feelings, appetites,
and instincts, form the chief and predominant part of the mental
life of the inferior vertebrata, while at the same time it must
not be forgotten that these, too, constitute the inferior region of
the true or conscious mind, and enter largely into the complicated
web of human existence. Again, on a higher plane of develop-
ment, and of which, too, we may recognise the analogues among
the highest mammalian and quadrumanous groups, the longitudinal
convolutions are carried upwards above the lower perceptive
organs, and prolonged backwards even beyond the median lobes,
328 physiological psychology.
and the perceptive apparatus is thus proportionately elaborated
and extended. . .
Contrasting the endowments of the higher mammalia with the
ruminants, in accordance with this is the remark of Leuret when
describing the convolutions of the Indian elephant. " Suppose,"
says he, " that all the superior convolutions, and the prolongation
of'the great internal convolution which is united to them, to be
obliterated, then the fourth anterior convolution might be united to
the fourth posterior,?the third to the third,?and we should have
-one of the groups of convolutions of the brain of the ruminants
and solipedes." It is through these superior perceptive organs
that we rise above the bare perception of external objects, their
sensible qualities and physical attributes, to that of the differences
and relations of things, their order or arrangement, and number,
and to the phenomena of their action, or events, with the adjuncts
of time and place. The higher individual or personal affections,
too, such as the love of self, or self-esteem; the love of approbation;
and love for others, or benevolence, are brought into play. But
there is a still higher plane of perceptive development exclusively
human, in which the towering longitudinal convolutions reach
the fulness of their evolution backwards, and the nervous appa-
ratus of the perceptive consciousness its most elaborate and
complete development. The moral and religious intentions are
the sole 'prerogatives of man, and they constitute an immutable
distinction between him and the whole animal creation. In
man's moral and religious attributes the lower animals do not
participate. Equally destitute are they of those enduring, tender,
and endearing relations which are the charm of his existence
ll0I*0
And now, may it not be fairly concluded, from the close
proximity and intimate association of this highest plane of per-
ceptive development with the transverse series of convolutions,
that the exalted, pure, and holy intuitions of the one will be
directed, guided, and strengthened by the dominating influence
of the noblest faculties of the other; that tliiough the latter, our
{esthetic sense of the true, the beautiful, and the good will not
always end in fruitless aspirations, but fructify; and that, also,
through them, while they control, direct, and strengthen our
moral intuitions of right and wrong, and our emotional of awe,
veneration, and reverence, we will be led to see clearly the basis
upon which moral obligation rests, and religion will become to
us " a reasonable service," and ours an intelligent, voluntary, and
cheerful dependence upon an all-perfect Being, infinite in wisdom,
power, and goodness ? It is in this association of the pure and
elevating moral and religious intuitions with intellectual power
that the true greatness of the human character consists; and, in
PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY. 329
fine, tliat from the joint operation of the highest perceptive facul-
ties with the reasoning powers, from observation and experiment,
result the creation of science and the achievements of science.
" For the proper function of reason is to create knowledge or science.
The understanding alone can never do this. It can analyse, distinguish,
form concepts, construct propositions, weave them into arguments?
perform, in a word, any formal process within the data furnished to it??
but it can never go beyond the barriers of its own definitions. When,
however, we grasp a truth by the power of reason, on the other hand
it implies far more than the attainment of a bare definition of it. It
implies that we have penetrated to the centre ; that we can trace its
pedigree in the world both of matter and form ; that we can regard it
as one link in a connected chain, of which we are able to tell the ante-
cedents and foretell the consequents; that we can recognise it, in fine,
as a particular manifestation of some great and universal law, the ope-
ration of which we have learned to comprehend and apply."*
In connexion with the processes of thought, we have evidence of
an automatic action of the intellectual faculties, unattended with
consciousness, designated unconscious cerebration by Dr. Car-
penter, who was the first to bring it under the notice of psycho-
logical inquirers, and who, in support of its existence, has
obtained the confirmatory experience of two of the most dis-
tinguished metaphysicians and profound logicians of the age?the
late Sir William Hamilton and Mr. John Mill.
" Most persons," says Dr. Carpenter, " who attend to their own
mental operations are aware that, when they have been occupied for
some time about a particular subject, and have then transferred their
attention to some other, the first, when they return to the considera-
tion of it, may be found to present an aspect very different from that
which it possessed before it was put aside, notwithstanding that the
mind has since been so completely engrossed with the second subject
as not to have been consciously directed towards the first in the
interval. Now, a part of this change may depend upon the altered
condition of the mind itself, such as we experience when we take up a
subject in the memory, with all the vigour which we derive from the
refreshment of sleep, and find no difficulty in overcoming difficulties and
disentangling perplexities whicli checked our farther progress the night
before, when we were too weary to give more than a languid attention
to the points to be made out, and could use no exertion in the search
for these solutions. But this by no means accounts for the entirely
new development which the subject is frequently found to have under-
gone when we return to it after a considerable interval?a development
which cannot be reasonably explained in any other mode than by attri-
buting it to the intermediate activity of the cerebrum, which has, in
this instance, automatically evoJced the result without our consciousness.+
* Morrell's "Psychology."
Dr. Carpenter's "Human Physiology,"
5th edition.
330 physiological psychology.
To tlie same effect is the following remark of Sir Benjamin
Brodie:?
" It has often happened to me to have been occupied by a particular
subject of inquiry?to have accumulated a store of facts connected with
it, but to have been able to proceed no further. Then, after an interval
of time, without any addition to my stock of knowledge, I have found
the obscurity and confusion in which the subject was originally enve-
loped to have cleared away, the facts seemed all to have settled
themselves in their right places, and their mutual relations to have
become apparent, although I have not been sensible of having made any
distinct effort for that purpose."*
And such, from personal experience, I conceive to be the
common experience of every thinking mind. I have already
observedf that automatic or reflex action is not peculiar to the
true spinal system; but, on the contrary, that it is the common
attribute of the sensori-motor, emotional, and cerebral systems,
and that Dr. Laycock was the first to connect it with the cere-
brum. Dr. Carpenter goes on to remark:?
" Strange as this phenomenon may at first sight appear, it is found,
when carefully considered, to be in complete harmony with all that has
been affirmed respecting the relation of the cerebrum to the sensorium,
and the independent action of the former. Looking at all those auto-
matic operations by which results are evolved without any intentional
direction of the mind to them, in the light of reflex actions of the
cerebrum, there is no more difficulty in comprehending that such reflex
actions may proceed without our knowledge, so as to evolve intellectual
products, when those results are transmitted to the sensorium, and are
thus impressed on our consciousness, than there is in understanding
that impressions may excite muscular movements through the reflex
power of the spinal cord, without the necessary intervention of sen-
sation. In both cases, the condition of this mode of independent
operation is, that the receptivity of the sensorium shall be suspended
quoad the changes in question, either by its own functional inactivity,
or through the temporary engrossment by other processes."
Dr. Carpenter extends the same unconscious or automatic reflex
action to the feelings of the emotional states, and says ?
" That our feelings towards persons^ and objects may undergo most
important changes without our being in the least degree aware, until
we have our attention directed to our own mental state, of the altera-
tion which has taken place in them. A. very common but very
characteristic example of this kind of action is afforded by the powerful
attachment which often grows up between individuals of opposite
sexes, without either being aware of the fact; the full strength of this
attachment being only revealed to the consciousness of each when
* " Psychological Inquiries," by Sir B. C. Brodie.
t Vide page 402, vol. ix. of this Journal.
PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY. 331
circumstances threaten a separation, and when each becomes cognizant
of the feelings entertained by the other. . . . .
"We continually speak of the 'feelings' which we unconsciously
entertain towards another, and of our not becoming aware of them
until somecircumstances call them into activity; so that it would seem
as if the material organ of these feelings tends to form itself in accor-
dance with the impressions which are habitually made upon it, and that
we are as completely unaware of the changes which may have taken
place in it, as we are of those by which passing events are registered in
our minds (in the memory), until some circumstance calls forth the
conscious manifestation, which is the ' reflex' of the new condition
which the organ has acquired." *
To the category of the icleo-motor phenomena belong, as Dr.
Carpenter has shown, a variety of aberrant actions, bordering on
insanity, of which the history of mankind in all ages furnishes
us with abundant examples; and among the most recent, but
not the least remarkable instances, is the table-turning and table-
talking epidemic which spread through almost the whole civilized
world in 1852-3 ; and to his able disquisition on the subject the
reader is referred.f
After the mind has been pondering over the perplexities of a
difficult subject of thought, that the automatic or unconscious
reflex action of the intellectual and reflecting organs should,
during a period of repose?that of profound sleep?evolve clear
ideas and new developments of thought in connexion with the
subject, may be truly wonderful; but is it more wonderful that
during sleep, when the controlling influence of volition is sus-
pended, a mathematical problem should be solved, than that a
poetical fragment like the " Kublakhan" of Coleridge should be
composed? Condorcet saw, in his dreams, the final stage of a
difficult calculation which had puzzled him during the day; and
Condillac, when engaged in his " Cours d'Etude," frequently
developed and finished a subject in his dreams, which he had
broken off before retiring to rest. Coleridge says of himself,
that his fragment, " Kublakhan," was composed during sleep,
" the images rising up before him as things, with a parallel pro-
duction of the corresponding expressions, without any sensation
or consciousness of effort." The imagination, it is true, is prone
to run riot when the controlling influence of the will is with-
drawn, and, as in dreams,?
" To combine a medley of disjointed things?
A court of cobblers, and a mob of kings."
At all times, indeed, the imaginative are less amenable to the
dominion of volition than are the reasoning processes; but still
* Dr. Carpenter's " Human Physiology," pp. 609-10, 5th edition.
+ Ibid. pp. 610-18, 5th edition.
532 PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY.
we must bear in mind the mental relations of the imaginative
faculty and the reasoning powers.
Out of the fanciful combinations and groupings of external
objects, neiv conceptions are formed; and by the imaginative
faculty, ideality, we are placed in scenes, circumstances, and
relations in which our actual experience has never placed us, and
from which, in consequence, as new sources of thought, neiv con-
ceptions arise. But while these new creations may bear strongly
the impress of the aesthetic and emotional character and tenden-
cies of our minds, the highest efforts of the creative faculty
involve equally the agency of the intellectual powers?of colloca-
tion, analysis, and comparison?to achieve their loftiest triumphs.
And thus, while, on the one hand, ideality is dependent upon
the intellectual powers for the development of its highest and
sublimest flights; so, on the other, is the understanding indebted
to the imaginative faculty for those ideal combinations and con-
ceptions which, independently of their artistic value and impor-
tance, are seen to be so operative in the common affairs of human
life,?"suggesting those pictures of the future which are ever
before our eyes, and are our animating springs of action, with
those visions of enjoyment, never perhaps to be realized, and
their prospects of anticipated evil, that often prove to be an
exaggeration of the reality?prompting the investigations of
science, that are gradually unfolding the sublime plan on which
the universe is governed, and leading to a continual aspiration
after those higher forms of moral and intellectual beauty which
are inseparably connected with purity and love."
Conclusion.?In the attempt, however crude and cursory,
which in these papers lias been made towards an exposition of
some of the leading points of Physiological Psychology, while 1
may put forward some claim to originality of view, in respect to
the nervous apparatus of the perceptive and intellectual con-
sciousness, I am free to confess that I have not hesitated to
adopt the opinions and sometimes the language of others, but
never intentionally without due acknowledgment, and at all
times in the hope of exciting the attention of others, and of
rousing into activity the energy of other minds of higher
endowments, possessing better opportunities and more leisure for
the prosecution of such an interesting and important subject of
inquiry.
The establishment of the " Psychological Journal" has given
a new impetus to such investigations; and the philosophy of the
mind, like the philosophy of nature, is now cultivated in a
manner worthy of its objects. The phantasms of Aristotle, the
animal spirits of Descartes, and the vibrations of Hartley, alike
have passed away as physiology and psychology have progressed.
PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY. 333
Still, we are under great obligations to Hartley ;* for however
unfruitful and visionary his " Doctrine of Vibrations may be, he
appears to have been the first in this country, and Bonnet on
the Continent, who brought and employed a sound and experi-
mental knowledge of the human constitution to the attempt to
discover the physical conditions of sensation and intelligence. X
am fully aware how important it is to keep in view the distinctive
boundaries of physiology and psychology, and that it is only in their
correlations?when certain phenomena of observation are found
uniformly to co-exist with certain phenomena of consciousness?
that their direct bearing upon each other can be really esta-
blished. I am, nevertheless, impressed with the idea that physio-
logical bears to medical psychology a relationship analogous to
that which physiology does to pathology, so that a clear com-
prehension of the principles of the former appears to me to be
essentially necessary for a proper and full appreciation of the
abnormal and morbid phenomena of the latter. It has been well
observed by Feuchtersleben, in his admirable treatise,?
" Where psychical phenomena appear abnormal, there is mental
disorder, which has its root in the mind, so far as this is manifested
through the sensual organs; and has its root in the body, so far as
this is the organ of the mind. To search after phenomena in which
these relations are revealed, with the unprejudiced eye of experience,
to investigate them scientifically in every point that is of importance
to the physician, and to collect them into one whole, is the province,
of medical psychology." +
The human mind must be studied in connexion with the ma-
terial conditions of the encephalon, since it is upon the vesicular
matter of the encephalic ganglia that the mind is dependent for
the manifestation of all its activities in this life. And it has
long been my own settled conviction that the metaphysician can
make little progress independently of the physiologist, and that
it is to the medical philosopher and physiologist we are to look
for the most valuable contributions to the science of mind. To
be reminded of what they have done, Ave have only to recall the
names of Locke, Hartley, Brown, &c.
The expressive language of Dugald Stewart, in reference to
* " Dr. Hartley's ' Observations on Man,'" says Dr. Southwood Smith, "is a
work which does honour to human nature. One feels proud to belong to the same
order of intelligences with the mind which could compose it. All that relates to
the Law of Association, and the whole of the 2nd volume, can never be perused
without making the reader better acquainted with himself and with his duties, and
more in love with his fellow-beings and with his Creator. The conclusion, on the
Final Happiness of all^ Mankind, is truly worthy of the philosopher, the philan-
thropist, and the Christian."?Illustrations of the Divine Government, by Dr,
Southwood Smith. London. 1822. Pp. 445.
?f " Medical Psychology." Translated and published by the Sydenham Society.
1847. ? ? ' ?'
334 PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY.
Locke, in his admirable dissertation on the progress of philosophy,
admits of general application :?
"No science," says he, "could have been chosen more happily cal-
culated than medicine to prepare such a mind as that of Locke for the
prosecution of those speculations which have immortalized his name;
the complicated and fugitive, and often equivocal phenomena of disease,
requiring in the observer a far greater portion of discriminating saga-
city than those of physic strictly so called."
The praise which our English Hippocrates, Sydenham, the
E.'eatest authority of his time, bestows on the medical skill of
ocke, affords a brilliant proof of the high estimation which his
acquirements in the science of medicine, his penetrating judg-
ment, as well as his many private virtues, had procured for him
from all who knew him. In the dedication prefixed to Sydenham's
" Observations on the History and Cure of Acute Diseases,"
published in 1676, he boasts of the approbation bestowed upon
his method by Mr. John Locke, who, to borrow Sydenham's own
words, " had examined it to the bottom ; and who, if we consider
his genius and penetrating and exact judgment, has scarce any
superior, and few equals now living."
" Nostri prseterea quam huic meae methodo suffragantem habeam,
qui earn intimeus per omnia perspexerat utrique nostrum conjunctis-
simum dominum Joannem Locke ; quo quidem viro, sive ingenio
judicioque acri et subacto, sive etiam antiquis, hoc est, optimus mori-
bus, vix superiorem quenquam, inter eos qui nunc sunt homines reper-
tam, iri confido, paucissimus certe pares."*
In conclusion, I may reiterate what I have elsewhere said:?
" To Locke we are indebted for dispelling the mysticism of the
schoolmen. Freed from the tyranny of ancient names, and regardless
alike of the Stagyrite and his categories, he discarded the syllogism,
and instituted a searching analysis of the phenomena of thought. In
the metaphysical world, like the immortal Newton in the mathematical
world he stands forth pre-eminent. No age or nation ever produced
two greater luminaries of science. 1 hey live in the veneration of their
countrymen, and are borne down the stream of time with a reputation
ever gathering, and with the triumphs of a distinction that will never
die." t
In this essay I have alluded to the illustrious Gall, and his
able associate, Spurzheim, as being the founders of physiological
phrenology ; but it is to Unser and Procraska that the honour is
due for having accurately defined the boundaries of the sensorium
commune. And since their time, and both in this country and
abroad, there have been many labourers in the field, and much
* Vide Lord King's " Life of Locke."
?{? " Physiological Psychology." Commentary, p. 17, ante cit.
MIND AND BODY. 335
has been effected towards a better understanding and a more
exact knowledge of the functions and sj>ecial endowments of the
nervous centre of the encephalon.
We must not forget the labours and researches of Rolando and
Bellengeri, and still more recently of Matteueci, in Italy,?of
Magendie, Serres, Des Moulins, and Flourens in France,?of
Tiedemann in Germany,?and of Retzius in Sweden, &c. And
while the discovery of Sir Charles Bell marks a new era in phy-
siological science, the researches of his contemporaries, Shaw,
Mayo, &c., and in our own day those of Swan, Owen, Marshall
Hall, Solly, Todd, Carpenter, &c., have thrown a flood of
light upon the subject. Among living physiologists, Dr. Car-
penter has done more than any other man to specialize the
functions of the nervous centres of the encephalon, and through
comparative anatomy, by analytical reasoning and strict induction,
to advance our knowledge of the physiological psychology of man.
With the labours and researches of Gall and Spurzlieim the
name of Mr. George Combe is indelibly associated, and will be
held in enduring remembrance. His last work, " On the Relation
between Science and Religion,"* is worthy of the author of the
" Constitution of Manfor, to use the words of one to whom
I am under great obligations, " Every system of philosophy rests
in God, as its highest idea and its final aim. To see the Divi-
nity as the beginning, the middle, and the end of all things, is
the culminating point of all human thought. Thus it is the goal,
not only of providence, not only of redemption, but also of the no
less divine laws of reason itself, that God should be all in all." +
* "The Relation between Science and Religion," by George Combe. Edin-
burgh. 1857. Fourth Edition.
?f* Morel's " Psychology," p. 253, ante cit. One of the most valuable contri-
butions to the Science of Mind which we have in our language.
