Notes of A Visit Made in the Tear 1855
=======================================

Aet. ill
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND
TRANCE.
)

BY JQHN T. AKLIDGE, 31. B., A.B. (LOND.),
Member of the Royal College of Physicians of London; formerly Resident Medical Officer of
St. Luke's Hospital, London.
(Continued from Vol. x. page 775.)
Venice possesses two public asylums?viz., one for males,
occupying the small islet of St. Servilio, a sliort distance from
the city; and the other for females, situated at one extremity of
the town, and forming a department of the large civil hospital.
Wieket W3.s open, and through it the enemy kept up a heavy fire upon tliem. Ser-
j?. Carxnichael was killed while laying his powder-bag, Havildar Mahor being
d le same time wounded. The powder being laid, the advanced party slipped
it?wjl mto the ditch to allow the firing party, under Lieutenant Salkeld, to perform
th C i* endeavouring to fire the charge, Lieutenant Salkeld was shot
who Mi arni and and ^ianc'e^ over the slow match to Corporal Burgess,
dutv ^ TIrnortally wounded just as he had successfully accomplished the onerous
same ^ar Tilluh Sing, of the Sikhs, was wounded, and Kamloll, Sepoy of the
most COr^s' Was killed during this part of the operation.' The demolition being
soundSltfCeSS^' kieutenant Home, happily not wounded, caused the bugler to
Fearintr tf ^^mcntal call of the 52nd, as the signal for the advancing columns,
the call re a,rni(^ the noise of the assault the sounds might not be heard, he had
with com nlet ^ree times, when the troops advanced and carried the gateway
glorious deed6 S^cess' I feel certain that a simple statement of this devoted and
history. The ^ ?su?ce to stamp it as one of the noblest on record in military
the day and T f8Ct success contributed most materially to the brilliant result of
peans and natives I?0me and Salkeld> with- their gallant subordinate Euro-
enemy so distinguished - a +?U-bt ,not' re,reive the rewards which valour before the
o d as theirs has entitled them to."
60 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
The origin of both of these institutions or the insane is compara-
tively very recent. No State provision was made for the insane
poor until 1802, when Ludovico Manin, the last Doge of "Venice,
gave by will a sum of 55,000 ducats for their maintenance, under
the direction of the brethren (Padri Ospitalieri) of St. John
the Divine (S. Giovanni di Dio), popularly known in Italy as
the " Fate-bene-Fratelli." Prior, indeed, to that date?from the
year 1737?a few patients belonging to the upper classes of
citizens had been committed to the care of the brethren,
at the expense of their families, and in 1797 had reached 30
in number. But the charge of such patients remained only
subordinate to the general purpose of the institution as a military
hospital; and it was not till after Manin's munificent bequest was
received that the care and treatment of those mentally disordered
became a primary object with the benevolent monks, and that
an asylum for the insane of Venice rose into existence.
In 1822, the increasing number of lunatics in the monastic
institution at St. Servilio induced the authorities to seek further
accommodation elsewhere; when the ancient hospice of the
mendicants connected with the great civil hospital of St. John
and St. Paul, within the city, was selected, and, by various altera-
tions and additions, fitted for their reception.
Soon after the institution of this second asylum, it was judged
expedient to retain refractory and noisy cases at St. Servilio, and
to transfer the quiet, convalescent, and the imbecile to the esta-
blishment in the city. As yet the monks had admitted both
male and female patients under their care; however, in 1834, it
was resolved to separate the sexes, and to locate the males in
St. Servilio, and the females in the city asylum. This scheme
was carried out in the following year, and is still adhered to. In
each asylum two classes are received?viz., paupers and pensioners.
We shall commence with a description of the asylum for the
female sex, of which we have, thanks to the kindness and
courtesy of M. Pelt, the able chief physician, ample details
both of its structure and management.
The Venetian asylum for female lunatics is situated at one
extremity of Venice, bordered on the north side by the Lagoon;
on the west, by the wide canal " de' Mendicanti " on the south, by
the General Hospital and the Chapel; and on the east, by a narrow
street of adjoining houses. In position, therefore, it is much con-
fined ; and the only prospect from it is on the north side, extend-
ing over the Lagoon to the mainland and its distant mountain
chain.
As before intimated, the building was originally destined for
an asylum for aged and infirm mendicants, and has only of late
years been converted to its present purpose. According to the
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 61
prevailing system of construction of Italian public institutions,
it is so built as to enclose a square court, with a covered arcade
running round it: and is of three stories. The basement is occu-
pied by the offices of the physician; the visiting-room; the
work-room; the refectory or dining-room; the "spinning" or
weaving-room; a dormitory for epileptics, one for melancholic,
and one for demented patients; by the bath-room, the kitchen
of the infirmary, and store-rooms. On the first floor are?the
large dormitory, partially subdivided into three rooms for
maniacal patients ; the dormitory for monomaniacs, the infirmary,
and the apartments set apart for the class of pensioners, and
reached by a distinct staircase. On the floor above are other
dormitories?one for the reception and observation of new cases
prior to their distribution, and another for the most refractory
cases.
The central court-yard is the only available space for exercise,
except a garden situated at some distance from the asylum, and
therefore little available for general or frequent use. In the
centre of the court is a fountain of good water. The court was
paved, but not in a satisfactory state. The surrounding corridor,
supported upon columns, had a pleasing appearance, and afforded
a welcome shady walk in hot weather. It is beautifully paved
with a sort of concrete, common in the country, composed of
fragments of marble rolled and fixed into some kind of cement,
which becomes very hard, and has a fine, smooth surface. The
floor of this arcade is unfortunately?so far as concerns feeble
patients?elevated between 1 foot and 18 inches above the level
of the central court, and thus forms an awkward and dangerous
step. The roof of the arcade constituted a promenade to the first
floor?little available, however, to the inmates, from being too
dangerous.
The work-room, which also serves at other times as an amuse-
ment-room, is of considerable, although of insufficient size for
the number of patients daily resorting to it. It is bare of orna-
ment, and dull from the height of the windows above the ground,
and from their being closed by Yenetian shutters, reaching two
feet from the bottom. Adjoining it is the "spinning-room"
(Filanda), so called because the patients are occupied in it at
spinning-wheels and small looms, in preparing the flax, &c. The
class so employed consists of those inexpert in needle-work, or
who are unfit to mingle with the cleaner and more orderly
inmates of the common work-room.
ihese rooms, as well as the dormitories, have the same sort of
concrete floor as the arcade; but M. Pelt has, in some of them,
had a wooden floor laid above it, as it was found to be cold and
injurious to many weak patients. The rooms on the basement
62 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
are about 13 feet high, and are lighted with gas at night. The
work-rooms have also a central stove, protected by a stout wooden
railing. The walls are whitewashed and bare"; the furniture
consists of plain wooden tables (not fixed), chairs, and settees.
The " spinning-room" is entered from the corridor by a very
prison-like barred iron door, kept always locked : like the other
rooms on this floor, it is elevated by two or three steps above the
corridor, a constructional peculiarity open to many objections.
The baths are constructed of marble, and can be supplied
with hot and cold, salt and fresh water. A douche-pipe is
attached above each of them, and by screwing a rose on the end
of it, a sort of shower-bath is obtainable.
In the small visiting-room, on the ground floor, was a piano for
the use of the patients. This room conveniently communicated
on one side with the large work-room.
The dormitories are intended only for night use ; when patients
require from any cause to keep their bed, they are transferred
to the infirmary, a large and lofty apartment on the first floor,
containing 28 beds, arranged along the walls on either side,
having the usual concrete floor, and a large stove in its centre.
The windows are placed some five feet above the floor?a very
faulty arrangement, whether the ventilation or the cheerfulness
of the apartment be considered. To each bed in this infirmary
are allotted a " table de nuit/' and a shelf for books.
The dormitories hold from 20 to 30 beds each, and contain no
other furniture. A crucifix or a Madonna is commonly affixed
against some part of the wall; and a gas-light, suspended from
the centre of the room, serves to illuminate it at night. There
is a special provision made to secure efficient ventilation, by
the formation of apertures just above the floor, of about a foot
square each, placed at considerable intervals, and communicating
with the external air. These are closed on the inside by swinging
doors or shutters, and externally by stout wire-work.
On this first floor was a room for seclusion, of about 14 feet
by 15 feet, with a window placed high up, which could be
closed by a shutter, when it was desirable to darken the room.
The more refractory patients sleep together in a dormitory on
the second floor?the majority of them being under some sort of
restraint during the night. A few indeed are retained in it
during the day confined to their beds.
The portion of the asylum set apart for the pensioners (who
are of two classes) consists of a common dining or day-room, of
two dormitories, having six beds each for those of the second-
class, and of four single rooms for first-class inmates, besides
a chamber furnished with a restraint bed. Every first-class
patient has her own attendant, who sleeps in the same apart-
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 63
merit with her. These single rooms, and likewise the general
day-room, are comfortably furnished.
The bedsteads for the indigent patients are of very cheap con-
struction, consisting of an iron framework with a headpiece,
supported on a pair of iron trestles at the head and foot. The
bedding consists of a paillasse stuffed with straw or shavings, of
a flock bed, an upper and under sheet, a coloured woollen coverlet,
and over this a printed and coloured cotton one. Some of the
coverlets were quilted, to give them greater strength ; the sheet-
ing was also of coarser or finer material, according to the exi-
gencies of the cases.
In northern Italy the bed and paillasse constitute, among the
poor, the marriage portion of the bride, and are transmitted from
generation to generation, the possession of several such heir-
looms being a matter of pride. Hence it is common to see one
or two beds or paillasses piled one on the other, giving the
happy possessor an elevated resting-place, but one, by the way,
from which it would be disagreeable to fall. This partiality for
high beds persists in the asylums, and is indulged to a certain
extent ; some patients being allowed a very thick paillasse,
or two of them, beneath the thick bed. The bedsteads them-
selves are actually low; yet by the quantity of bedding laid on
them, the patient would appear raised to a dangerous height
above the ground. However, I was assured that no accident
had ever occurred from this custom ; and we must conclude that,
by habit, their movements asleep are so circumspect that they
risk no fall from their high estate, but poise themselves securely,
just as our German friends manage, by their much-to-be-admired
quietude in bed, to balance and retain the light upper bed upon
them, and nestle under its warmth, whilst our unskilled country-
men speedily part company with it, and tire in the attempt to
ensconce themselves beneath it. #
The luxury of a high bed, as may be supposed, is denied the
epileptics ; yet no specially constructed bedsteads aie in use for
them. Paralytics are occasionally furnished with feather-,
in place of the common wool-beds. Water-beds and water-
cushions are unknown, and even air-cushions seem never to have
been introduced into use in any of the Italian asylums. For
dirty cases, a sort of trough or case is fitted into an iron frame-
work, and filled with straw ; over this a piece of stout linen
or canvas is extended, upon which the patient is placed. The
urine percolates through the straw, and is collected in a clumsy
wooden tray beneath.
I he laundry and the dispensary are common to the asylum
and to the general hospital, of which the former is _ only a
section. The laundry gives employment to a considerable
64 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
number of patients; but by its distance from their own
section, and by its appertaining equally to the general hospital,
they are to a certain and injurious extent removed from the
special supervision and control required; an evil further aug-
mented by their being under the direction of servants uncon-
nected with the asylum. Another objection to the laundry was
the employment there of two or three men, who mixed among
the female patients.
Like those just named, the other domestic offices, such as the
kitchen for the cooking of food, the clothing and victualling de-
partments, were common both to the asylum and hospital, and
under the jurisdiction of the officers of the latter.
The staircases are straight, but some of them open on one side,
and are so far dangerous. The windows are everywhere protected;
those on the ground-floor by bars externally, and by wire-work
within; and those on the upper floors by the wirework alone.
Internal Organization and Treatment.?As the asylum forms
a part of the Civil General Hospital, it is placed under the
supreme control of the director-general of the whole establish-
ment. Nothing can be undertaken, and no expenses incurred,
without his assent; and he is supposed to supervise the entire
management and internal economy of the institution. The
appointment of chief physician and of the assistants to the
asylum is vested in him. In the economical details he is assisted
by the steward (administrator). The moral discipline and
medical treatment are left to the chief physician, who is respon-
sible for their due execution to the director-general, but not for
the particular medical treatment he may adopt in any case. He
is non-resident, and makes two visits daily?the principal one at
8 A.M. He has under him two assistants, or " internes," who reside
in the asylum, receive their board, and one of them a very small
salary. They are appointed for two years, and, if recommended,
may be re-appointed for two more; they are, however, not
occupied throughout the whole period in the asylum, but from
time to time act as " internes" in the general or other hospitals,
according to the excellent system prevailing in France. They
are required to attend the physician during his visits, to write
out the tables of diet, to supervise the distribution of the medi-
cines, to bleed and to perform other minor surgical as well as
medical duties which may arise in the asylum, whether by night
or day; consequently they are not allowed to absent themselves
from the building, except by permission of the physician or of
the director.
Next in order is the head attendant, who has two deputies
beneath her; and is, with them, under the direction of the physi-
cian as to all medical and moral matters affecting the patients, and
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 65
also responsible to the steward for the clothing, furniture, &c.,
under their charge. " A good head-attendant (Dr Pelt well
remarks) is not only equivalent to the continued presence of the
physician, but also a great aid to him in his duties; for he lives
among the patients, is domesticated with them, and has it in his
power to note their failings, and to arouse the latent energies of
their torpid intellects."
The number of nurses varies according to the demand for their
services; usually there are about thirty. Their relative number
is greatest in the refractory ward, and next to this in the in-
firmary. In the other sections, containing more orderly patients,
the attendants are in the proportion of one to fifteen. The pay-
ing patients of the first class have each an attendant, and it is
chiefly due to the varying number of such inmates that the total
of the staff of nurses fluctuates so considerably from time to time.
The remuneration of the attendants increases with their length of
service. Those who are married are allowed to go out one day in
every five; the unmarried, once in fifteen days; the night duty
is taken by them in turns.
Besides the ordinary attendants, there are five others to
instruct and to superintend the employments of the patients.
One is chief, and has the especial charge of the great work-room.
Unlike the nurses, they are hired to attend only during the
hours of labour?viz., for four before, and three after dinner.
At the time of my visit, 260 patients were under treatment:
a number almost as great as the institution could accommodate.
A scheme has been talked of, to extend the present building, by
purchasing the houses in the narrow street bounding it on the
?nly side where enlargement is possible ; but this, I trust,
will never be carried out, for it would tend to perpetuate the
existence of the asylum in a most unfit locality, and under the
trammels of the general hospital.
The asylum receives patients from the entire province of
Venice,?from Yicenza, Padua, "Verona, Polesino, Treviso, Feltre,
-Belluno, and Friuli. Some are also sent from Dalmatia ; and,
until the asylum of Halle, in the Tyrol, was instituted, patients
were likewise forwarded from that province.
A ^ system prevails of collecting the insane in the general
hospitals of the larger cities, from which they are sent on in
batches to Venice .The misfortune and evil of this plan is, that,
just as happens among ourselves in our workhouse infirmaries,
tne patients are placed under unfavourable circumstances, are
o ten maltreated or neglected, and their disease suffered to grow
worse, and too often beyond the prospect of cure. This evil,
" ' e . 1^10st sensibly pointed out in his printed reports.
entirely dependent, or pauper class of patients, when
NO. IX.?NEW SERIES. F
66 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
attacked with acute or insidious mania, are supported from the
imperial treasury ; but when harmless?not dangerous?incura-
bles, when idiotic from birth, or when pellagrous, they are main-
tained at the cost of the commune in which they were born, or
of that in which they have been domiciled for the last ten years.
It is left for the commune to recover the cost from the relatives,
on whom it should rightly fall, where this course is practicable.
The charge to those who have just sufficient for their main-
tenance is their actual cost to the institution?viz., about ten-
pence per day. These fare with the indigent; but those who
are able to pay a shilling a day constitute the second-class of
pensioners, and live, as before noted, in a distinct portion of the
institution, and have a superior table. Lastly, the first-class
patients pay at the rate of half-a-crown a day, have the same
table as the second grade, and individually a separate room and
attendant.
Pensioners are admitted into an asylum on producing a medical
certificate, visdd by the commissary of police, and accompanied
by a petition setting forth the class to which they wish to be
attached, by a month's payment in advance, and by a guarantee
to continue the payment during their residence in the esta-
blishment.
The affair is much more complicated when a pauper case
seeks admission. A paper has to be filled up, exhibiting a parish
certificate as to his or her poverty; a statement by the medical man
in previous attendance ; the assent of the communal authorities
to undertake all the necessary cost; the opinion of the physician
of the province, respecting the stage aud form of the malady,
except in the case of Venice ; a certificate of age, of parentage,
place of birth, residence, occupation, civil position, date of attack,
the history of predisposition, of the acts of insanity committed,
of the course of the treatment pursued. One copy of this
document is retained by the police authorities, and another by
those of the hospital.
In Venice, much power is lodged in the hands of the medico-
fiscal of police, who can amend the returns made by the provin-
cial physicians, and transfer patients to or from the charge of
the communes, according as he judges them to belong to the
category of acute cases, or to that of the harmless and chronic.
On the entrance of patients into the asylum, they are stripped
of their clothes, washed, and then clothed in the common uniform
of the institution Their old clothes, after being cleansed, are
laid aside, and entered in an inventory. Each patient's name
is entered in a register, in which all the particulars gathered from
the certificates supplied, and all details obtainable respecting the
past history and habits, are recorded. A daily account is also
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 67
kept, by the physician and assistants, of the diseased manifesta-
tions both of mind and body, of their modifications, of the treat-
ment, the employment and diet prescribed, and of any other
particulars required to fill up the medical history of the case.
When any intercurrent disease arises, and the patient is trans-
ferred to the infirmary, the case is entered on the distinct and
special register of that section of the asylum. The advantage of
this proceeding is very doubtful.
A commission meets every month, composed of the physician
of the province, of the fiscal and one commissary of police, of the
police registrar, and of the chief physician of the asylum, who
submits his reports of the cases. This commission determines
-what patients are to be discharged cured ; which may be en-
trusted to their friends, owing to their improved state; and
which have become harmless, and may be transferred to some
other institution.
Five varieties of diet are in use : Broth (bouillon) alone, as
low diet.
I. A soup containing one ounce of vermicelli at dinner, and a
like quantity of bread for supper.
II. A soup having in it an ounce and a half of vermicelli, an
ounce of bread, and one of boiled veal, at noon ; the supper as
above.
III. A cup of coffee and one ounce of bread in the morning;
for dinner, once in the week, a soup containing three ounces of
nee, or two of barley; on other days, two ounces of boiled beef,
two of bread, and four of wine; for supper, an equal allowance of
^6a ' foiled in the broth. This description of diet is allowed
the pensioners when in health, but it is cooked separately, and
better seasoned; and at breakfast they have coffee with milk,.
ai*d a sort of fancy bread (ciambella).
IV. The fourth description of diet includes an ounce more of
each article contained in the last, besides the quarter of a fowl or
two ounces of roast veal, or else of fried liver with cream, one or
the other alternately. In the evening, besides three ounces of
bread, either an egg, or some cheese, or legumes, with a smaller
allowance of wine than at dinner, is allowed.
* ? The common diet of the majority consists alternately of two
ounces of bread and six of porridge on one morning ; of eight of
p rn ge and half an ounce of cheese on another ; four ounces
o rice or three of barley, two ounces of boiled veal, four of bread,
an six of wine, for dinner; four ounces of bread, four of
wme, wi i haif an ounce 0f cheese 0f legumes, or of salad,
ior supper. 5 ? '
It is in the power of the physician to vary the diet in any
mannei le sees fit, and to allow extra articles. The diet table is
F 2
68 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
made out every day, according to his directions, by his assistants.
The women employed in the laundry are always allowed, in
addition to the ordinary dietary, a pound of porridge and half
an ounce of cheese in the course of each day.
The breakfast is given at half-past eight; the dinner at half-
past twelve; and the supper at seven in the evening. The
meals are eaten together in the common dining-room. The
patients are kept at their several employments from nine till
twelve, and from three till six; and thus sufficient time is'afforded
them, in the middle of the day, for rest or recreation; the mis-
fortune is, that the institution affords no better scope for the last
than the limited central court, and its surrounding arcade. At
night, in the winter, the common rooms are lighted with gas,
and, from time to time, dancing goes forward, or music or
marionnettes chase away the monotony and dreariness of the
time.
Morning prayer is not forgotten, for those who can participate
in it; and on feast days the majority attend mass in the chapel,
and afterwards receive visits from their relatives. On such days,
too, the patients are treated, after dinner, to fruit or cakes; and if
the weather be bad, amuse themselves indoors with dancing and
singing, or attend the musical services in the chapel?sacred
music, and the organ, almost invariably affording delight. When
the weather is good, a select number are allowed to walk in the
garden belonging to the hospital.
The visits of friends are restricted to the two hours between ten
and twelve o'clock, except those to pensioners, or where the
relatives come a considerable distance, when a degree of indul-
gence is granted. The pensioners receive their friends in their
own apartments; the rest of the inmates see theirs in the common
visiting-room.
Uniformity of dress is the rule of the asylum; but it is slightly
infringed by the grant of finer or more ornamental articles of
clothing, given by way of encouragement and of reward, chiefly to
those profitably employed in the institution. For the work done
by the inmates, a regular valuation is made by the steward, and
a certain proportion of the estimated value is set aside for their
use and gratification. In winter, the outer dress is woollen; in
summer, of striped cotton. I observed a few of the women dis-
orderly in dress, but in general their condition was very satisfac-
tory. The plan of strengthening the dress, or of otherwise
modifying its form to meet the wants of special cases, did not
appear to have occurred to the medical directors. In the instance
of the shoes, we must, however, admit an exception to this state-
ment ; for in order to retain them on the feet, in certain cases,
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 69
a leathern strap was crossed over the instep and fastened by a
screw in the thickened sole, beneath the hollow of the foot.
. The head nurses were very neatly dressed, but some of the
inferior attendants were less tidy than could be wished. A
particular style of dress is assigned for the use of all the
attendants.
.Mechanical coercion is much resorted to in case of violence, of
destructiveness, and of suicide. In certain cases it is deemed
indispensable; those are particularly cited in which the patient
attempts to inflict injury without exhibiting marked furor, but,
as it were, maliciously and insidiously.
The means employed are?the strait-waistcoat, made with
long sleeves, which are fastened behind, the arms being crossed
in front; leathern straps, used to confine the hands, the body, or
the feet,^ in bed; a restraint bed, constructed as a long wooden
b?x,_ which is filled with straw, and covered in by a strong open
trellis-work?in this, the patient is fastened by the feet to the
end of the "bed" by means of straps, sometimes also by the
hands, and in extreme cases by a broad canvas band stretched
across the body.
This terrible contrivance, which as little deserves the name of
bed. as any machine devised for torture and to chase away repose,
has, in order to meet the requirements of the pensioners, and to
adapt it to their more refined notions of elegance and ease, been
constructed of a " sufficiently elegant pattern, in iron/' and has
its edges padded.
Again, patients are confined in the ordinary beds by one or both
hands or feet. Thick leathern gloves are also used at night, chiefly
in cases of self-abuse. Handcuffs made of two leathern rings, con-
nected by one or two iron links ; a strap round the waist, to which
the hand on each side is fastened by another strap, are among
other instruments of restraint still in use, and conscientiously
relieved to be imperatively necessary to the welfare of the
patients and the good conduct of the establishment. The feet
are rarely fastened together by day ; but in the refractory dormi-
t017 I saw one woman confined by one leg, by means of a ring
and strap, to a fixed seat.
At the time of my visit I did not count more than eight
Un er restraint; at night this number would be greatly in-
creased. ?
of ^ec^us*?n in a darkened room is reckoned among the means
repression or restraint. " The sudden forced suspension of the
Ho-SeS' "acts at times upon the mind with advan-
0e, an requently allays furor in a few minutes. In some cases,
lowever, 1 augments the incipient cerebral congestion, and is a
70 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
resource not to be indifferently employed." The plan of secluding
patients lie disapproves of, and prefers restraint to it.
In the medical treatment of the insane, M. Pelt is guided by
the nature of the concomitant disorder?whether this affects the
digestive or the sanguiferous system. He insists much upon
derangements of the liver and digestive canal as concomitants or
consequences of the mental disorder, and considers their relief to
be the primary object of treatment. To relieve disorders of the
circulating system, he employs local bleeding by leeches or cup-
ping, blisters, issues, setons, the douche, the application of ice to
the head, and baths. Venesection is, in his opinion, very seldom
required, although it may be called for in threatened conges-
tion, or when a patient is very robust, or has contracted the habit
of losing blood at intervals. He also very justly remarks that
the excitement of mania induces and is followed by prostration,
which can only be increased by' the withdrawal of blood; and
that the less elastic or depressing character of the air at Venice
is of itself a reason against so debilitating a mode of treatment. In
lieu of it he prefers to apply leeches to the anus, or, in cases of
nymphomania, to the nape of the neck. Blisters are of limited
applicability, on account of the generally hot and dry state of the
skin, when they cause greater irritation than they can do good.
The actual cautery, although cruel in appearance, may be used
without misgivings on account of the ordinary insensibility of the
insane, and is of great advantage in active mania, dependent on
the exacerbations of chronic meningitis. M. Pelt showed me a
case of epilepsy complicated with chorea, in which the paroxysms
were very frequent, where he applied the actual cautery 011 each
side of the spine, for the length of eighteen inches, with very
marked benefit.
The douche is commonly given when the patient is in a warm
bath ; it is allowed to fall either in a strong stream, or by drops, or
through a rose, in a fine shower, upon the head, and is principally
used in cases of mania and monomania. Its application in force for
a few minutes is sufficient; if continued longer, it produces faint-
ing. The bore of the pipe is varied in size according to circum-
stances ; but the use of a large stream is rare, except as a
means of repression. "Warm-baths are employed medically and
frequently, but not regularly or systematically, for the purpose
of cleanliness. They are always abstained from in cases of
paralysis, apoplexy, and epilepsy. Ice in bladders to the head
is principally useful where there is actual cerebral inflamma-
tion.
Tartar emetic is much used to allay excitement. Opium is
rarely given, because it is supposed to produce hallucinations, to
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 71
fail in ensuring healthy sleep, and to be further objectionable by
its stimulating properties.
The moral management of the patients is carried out by
insisting on kindness and patience of manner towards them on
the part of their attendants and others ; by encouraging them to
employ themselves ; by returning to them a portion of the pro-
ceeds of their labour, &c.; by providing them with all possible
recreation, and with amusements. No coercion is used to induce
them to work. Reading is almost entirely limited to the pen-
sioners, most of the common patients being unable to read.
An attempt was made to give them " readings," but it failed,
chiefly from not sufficiently arousing their attention, and from
the drowsy inclinations of the majority.
In the female population of this asylum, 20 of the 260 were
epileptic at the time of my visit; but M. Pelt states 15 to be
about the average number. General paralysis is very rare?at
least, it is so stated; but it appears that many of the Italian
physicians are but indifferently acquainted with its true character,
ihe statement of M. Pelt, that he has cured cases by nervine
remedies, epispastics, and frictions, must, I think, be received
cum grano sails ; for a doubt arises whether they were genuine
examples of the disease.
Before quoting the statistics, a few miscellaneous particulars
are worth noting.
The following classification is adopted in the Venice Asylum i?
Class I,?Mania.
1. Sub-class Monomania.
2. ?  Melancholia.
Class II.?Dementia.
1. Sub-class Acute.^
2. ,  Chronic.
Appended division Idiocy.
A peculiar plan was started in this asylum a few years ago, by
^r- Fassetta, of indicating the class or sub-class of mental
disorder by a particular colour?viz., mania, by red ; monomania,
"y blue; melancholia, by green ; acute dementia, by yellow;
chronic dementia, by a different shade of (pinkish) yellow ; and
i !ocy, by olive. "With the notion of promoting order and method
m the establishment, these distinctive colours are woven in the
. le^s the patients, so that the particular form of their malady
1S ouce Patent to the eyes of the initiated observer.
e asylum is inspected every month by the Physician of the
epai ment, and the Commissary of Police; and a monthly report
72 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
is required by the Government, in addition to one returned
every fortnight to the local authorities.
An excellent regulation enforces six months' attendance at this
asylum of all candidates for a degree in medicine. We may well
take shame to ourselves, that in this country our governing bodies
have not yet seen the necessity for such a regulation; but, on
the contrary, have ignored the study of psychological medicine,
whilst they have made natural history an integral part of the
medical curriculum.
TABLE I.
Movement of the Population in 1846, according to the form of Insanity.
Form. Existing. Admitted. Discharged. Dead. Remaining.
Mania  86 ... 102 ... 62 ... 20 ... 07
Monomania . . . 34 ... 25 ... 17 ... 6 ... 36
Melancholia ... 34 ... 24 ... 23 ... 12 ... 23
Acute dementia . . 41 ... 36 ... 10 ... 28 ... 30
Chronic dementia . 65 ... 8 ... 1 ... 10 ... 53
Idiocy 12 ... 1 ... 1 ... 5 ... 7
Total . . 272 106 114 00 255
The mortality this year was rendered so considerable by the
prevalence of pellagra among those newly admitted. In 1844
and 1845, the total in figures stood thus in each year:?
Existing. Admitted. Discharged. Dead. Remaining.
1844 ... 268 ... 102 ... 77 ... 115 ... 268
1845 .... 268 ... 180 ... 113 ... 72 ... 272
In 1844 the high range of death was due to the same cause
as in 1846, which in 1845 had been in a great measure overcome.
Still, even in this, the most favourable year as far as concerns
the mortality, this last is exceedingly great when compared with
that in our own asylums, although explicable by the havoc caused
by pellagra, as subsequent Tables will presently show. The total
number in that year under treatment being 457, and the deaths
72, above one-sixtli (6*347) died?i.e., about 17f- percent. The
year 1844 was exceptional, on account of certain changes going
forward in the organization of the asylum : setting it aside, there-
fore, and taking 1845 and 1846, we find that of the total number
under treatment, nearly one-fourth was discharged, or 25 per
cent. No division of the number discharged, into cured and
relieved, is attempted ; however, M. Pelt says the proportion of the
latter does not exceed 6 per cent., although it includes incurables,
who are sent away to some other establishment, or to their friends,
as harmless. Deducting this 6 per cent, from the 25 per cent,
discharged, it would appear that the ratio of cures to the total
number under treatment in the year is about 19 per cent.
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FKANCE. 73
TABLE II.
Relative Ages of Patients.
Under 10 years
From 10 to 20
? 20 ? 30
? 30 ? 40
? 40 ? 50
? 50 ? 60
? 60 ? 70
? 70 ? 80
? 80 ? 90
Existing. Admitted. Discharged. Dead. Remaining.
2 ... 3 ... ?
13
68
71
72
32
8
1
1
16 ... 10
119 ... 68
165 ... 90
119 ... 68
86 ... 45
48 ... 18
16 ... 5
5 ... ?
3 ... 2
14 ... 5
58 ... 61
60 ... 86
61 ... 62
47 ... 26
27 ... 11
10 ... 2
6 ... ?
Total . . 268 577 304 286 255
This Table exhibits tlie great proclivity of females to insanity
during the period of greatest uterine activity. The maximum is
reached between the 30th and the 40th year?the fourth decen-
nial period.
TABLE III.
Civil Condition of the Patients.
Existing. Admitted. Discharged, Dead. Remaining.
Married . . 122 ... 260 ... 136 ... 149 ... 97
Widows . . 36 ... 110 ... 59 ... 49 ... 38
Unmarried . 110 ... 207 ... 109 ... 88 ... 120
Total . . 268 ... 577 ... 304 ... 286 ... 255
Hence it is shown that the married are most frequently the
subjects of insanity. The value of this fact would be more pre-
cise, did we know the civil condition of the whole adult popula-
tion of Lombardy, and the relative proportion of married and
single women.
TABLE IV.
Causes of tlie JSLaladrj.
- Existing. Admitted. Discharged. Dead. Remaining.
Moral, generally . 112 ... 153 ... 93 ... 72
" 80 ... 36 ... 60
17 ... 13 ... 8
34 ... 15 ... 7
248 ... 130 ... 103
18 ... 4 ... 11
22 ... 3 ... 19
5 ... 10 ... 6
-p, socially . LIZ
physical, generally . 61
luxury and pride . 16
Excesses
Pellagra
Epilepsy .
Old age .
Unknown
Total
4
42
11
2
20
100
45
12
16
57
14
2
9
268 ... 577 ... 304 ... 286 ... 255
Table brings to our notice one of the greatest modern
74 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
scourges of Lombardy?viz., Pellagra, which we find tabulated
as the cause of insanity in 290 cases of 845 under treatment; as
fatal in above two-fifths of those admitted suffering from it, or in
more than one-third of the total number of cases; and as the
cause of 103 out of the total of 286 deaths.
The admissions are most numerous in summer, particularly
in June and July. The deaths, on the other hand, augment
between July and November; but the difference in their relative
frequency in the several months is not nearly so striking as that
of the admissions.
TABLE Y.
Immediate Causes of Death.
DISEASES.
3?
R
Meningitis
Bronchitis
Pleuritis
Gastritis
Hepatitis
Enteritis
Arthritis
Phthisis
Marasmus
Ascites .
Pulmonary catarrh
Precordial disease
Apoplexy . . .
Paralysis . . .
Epilepsy . . .
Diarrhoea .
Dysentery . .
Scurvy
Cerebral congestions
Erysipelas
Articular abscess
V ariola
Old asje
4
1
5
6
10
3
4
3
3
3
28
G
1
1
1
2
1
2
14
1
3
1
1
1
12
83 ! 20
40
2
1
2
18
1
1
4
7
15
7
1
G5
1
11
3
1
3
7
3
21
03
3
0
1
6
1
10
2
11
58
8
12
4
11
18
10
81
1
29
2
1
3
3
5
280
Diarrhoea takes the lead among the immediate causes of death?
a fact at once explicable by that disorder being the most frequent
complication of pellagra. It occurs either in a colliquative or
ulcerative form. The next most prevalent cause stated is, maras-
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 75
mus; but, unfortunately, this is usually only a symptom of some
internal or constitutional disorder. That it figures so largely in
the above Table is doubtless due to its being a very frequent
consequence of the most widely-acting cause of insanity in this
region?viz., pellagra. Scurvy stands third in order among the
causes of death, and is due, like pellagra itself, to the insufficient
nutriment obtained by the poorer classes, which mainly consists
of Indian-corn. The relative proportion of the other assigned
causes in the Table calls for no particular observation.
From a review of the history of this Venice Asylum, the reader
will, we think, be ready to admit that much merit is due to its
managers for its internal organization and superintendence. They
have to contend against the greatest disadvantages of site, the
very indifferent adaptation of its structure to the wants of
lunatics, and the daily difficulties involved in its connexion with
the general hospital. It is sad to have to record the employ-
ment ol so much mechanical restraint; but we must allow for
the prevailing prejudices of the physicians of the country in its
favour, and for the impediments to its entire abolition existing
in its confined site and inappropriate structure: and we may
hope that the diffusion of the knowledge of what has been and
is done in British Asylums will encourage our Italian coad-
jutors in psychological medicine to imitate our practice. On the
contrary, it is highlv gratifying to see how much has been done
in Italy for the helpless insane; how evidently their medical
guardians are animated by the most generous feelings and zeal for
their welfare. Thus we find them here, at Venice, encouraged
to employ themselves; rewarded for their work; diverted by
amusements and recreations ; and instructed in religion. Their
excellent and skilful physician, Dr Pelt?to whom I owe my
best thanks for much kindness?is fully alive to the deficiencies
of the asylum, and anxious in every way to remedy them. He
deplores its confined limits, and expresses himself decidedly
against the separation of the laundry, as a place of employment
for Ins pelticntSj from Ins own jurisdiction 8>nd tliG confincs of tb.6
asylum. But in Venice Proper?built as it is on a group of mere
mud-banks, but a few feet above water-mark, and united by
bridges?no spot can be found at all fitted for an asylum. Such
the mainland alone can supply; yet, in spite of the multitude
and the magnitude of the evils attaching to the present institu-
tl?m'/tlle day is> 1 fear, far hence before a transfer will be made.
Hie Asylum of St Servilio, for the male lunatics of Venice
and of a considerable part of Lombardy, is, as we have already
1 t Ullc^er the management of the religious brotherhoo
of fet. Jean de Dieu. It occupies a small island in the Lagoon,
about a mile from Venice, of which it commands a fine view.
76 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
The whole area of the island does not exceed four acres, and
nearly one-half of it is covered by the buildings, which, although
principally arranged around an inner court, as a hollow square, are
also extended irregularly by additional sections. Besides a chapel,
there is a good-sized church, distinguished at a distance by its
two ornamental towers. The edifice, which was originally built
for a convent, and is of considerable age, is of stone and brick,
and of three stories. The visitor reaches the principal door in his
gondola : for the walls on two sides are washed by the Lagoon,
which, fortunately, has at this part a considerable current; few
cases of fever are therefore met with.
The windows are everywhere guarded externally by iron bars:
the present director, however, proposed to remove them from
most parts of the building. The windows of single rooms, in
which refractory patients sleep, are defended inside with
wooden shutters, perforated by a square opening, high up, to
admit light. The windows throughout are of sufficient dimen-
sions?generally about 5ft. high and 3ft. wide?and constructed
with wooden frames.
The height of the rooms on the ground floor is considerable?
from 15 to 20 ft. : the largest of these rooms are subdivided by
two rows of columns along their length, to support the floor
above. On the first and second floors the elevation does not
exceed 10ft. The floors are everywhere formed by the marble
concrete.
Besides the principal court, there were two smaller ones :
one set apart for the noisy and refractory patients; the other
surrounded by the general offices,?the kitchen, dispensary,
bakehouse, flour-store, &c. The wash-house formed a separate
out-building. The kitchen was not in a good state ; but it was
the intention of the authorities to build another.
The visiting-room was fitted with a sort of counter extended
across it, on one side of which the patients were placed during
their interviews with their friends, who stood on the other.
Among other necessary apartments were, a dead-house and post-
mortem room, an office for the director, and a .small museum.
The church used by the patients is of moderate size, orna-
mented with a few good paintings and with decorated altars,
according to the practice of the Church of Rome. All the
patients whose condition admits it attend once every Sunday,
and many also on other days of the week.
The great majority of the patients sleep in dormitories, most
of which contain from twenty to thirty beds, and several of them
occupy the entire width of the building. Their walls are
whitewashed like those of other rooms, and bare of ornament,
except here and there a crucifix or the figure of a saint: at
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 77
night they are faintly lighted by a lamp. Some of them,
chiefly those on the ground floor,?were less clean than could be
wished, and smelt disagreeably of urine. The infirmary is
large and lofty, and adjoining to it is a spacious and cheerful
dormitory, set apart especially for convalescent infirmary
patients. .
Single rooms are placed both on the ground floor and on the
upper floors, on each side a corridor, about lift. wide. They
are about 13ft. square, and are severally furnished with a bed
and a small night-commode, and in some cases with additional
furniture. Small inspection doors, about 9in. square, are
placed in the door of each single room ; one such room, having
its walls covered with a composition to give them greater
softness, was used for seclusion, and no light being admitted, the
patient was in complete darkness.
In a few rooms two patients were placed together, each
having a separate bed. Every dormitory has a small lamp
burning in it during the night.
The ordinary bedsteads and bedding resembled those in use
in the female asylum. Dirty patients were provided with a
wooden crib, which is filled with straw, and fitted with a
wooden frame supporting a piece of canvas, not stretched out,
but hung loosely, resting upon the straw, so that it may form
a sort of fixed sheet. Upon this the patient lies, and is covered
over by the usual coverlets. By this contrivance the advantage
of the straw as a bed is secured, for the patient cannot get at it to
strew it about; while at the same time he has a softer and
better bed than could be afforded him if the canvas were
tightly extended upon the frame, upon the plan of the stretch-
ers so much used in this country, and which are both hard and
cold. To resume the description. The bottom of the crib is
perforated by a hole, through which the water escapes into a
wooden drawer about 2ft. long and 1ft. wide. The stiaw is
changed when found wet; but the fixed sheet upon it does not
receive that attention which is desirable, for it frequently appeared
to be allowed to dry in its place, instead of being removed and
properly washed.
An attendant sleeps in each dormitory, and during the night
four are employed watching and perambulating the building.
The patients are attended to on going to bed ; but the dirty
cases are not afterwards disturbed, for the director holds it to
m,very injurious plan to break the rest of the insane.
ihere were two bath-rooms, each containing two stone baths,
sunk m the floor two-thirds of their height, and without lids;
leJ. ^ n?t appear to be much in use, and were employed only
medically. Arrangements existed for affixing above them a
78 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
douche-pipe. A third bath-room was occupied by a cold
plunge-bath, eighteen feet by ten feet, with four feet of water,
which was daily used during the continuance of warm weather.
No provision for washing the hands and face was seen in any
part of the building.
At the period of my visit there were three hundred and thirty
patients in the institution, of whom about forty paid for their
maintenance, the rest being paupers. Just as in the case of the
female asylum, the pensioners lived in a separate section of the
building, fared better, and had a separate day-room. The in-
digent patients eat together in the dining-rooms which severally
belong to their separate divisions. The tables are of stained
wood : they are allowed forks and spoons, but no knives; and
three meals a day, in two of which meat enters as a part, except
on fast days. Like the female patients, the men are dressed
uniformly?during winter, in woollen jackets and trousers of a
dark-brown or nearly black colour, with cloth caps; in summer, in
blue linen or cotton trousers. Blucher boots are worn in winter; in
summer, only a sort of slipper. It was pleasing to witness in this
asylum an attempt to modify the clothing to meet the exigencies
of particular cases; for not only could the boots be secured on the
feet, where the tendency was to run barefoot, but a canvas dress, of
waistcoat and trousers, was in use for destructive and dirty cases.
The management of the establishment is entirely in the hands
of the Freres of St. John. The director, M. Portalupi, who is
also the chief physician, is one of the fraternity, and has under
him seven of his own order. These act as heads of departments
and chief attendants, and employ a number of hired sub-
attendants, who are under no religious vows. There is also a
visiting physician.
The asylum was conducted .on a similar system to that for the
opposite sex. The value of employment was very justly appre-
ciated, and the encouragement to work was aided by the distri-
bution of rewards. Everything required for the use of the
establishment was prepared within its walls; hence, for the first
time out of England, we met with shoemakers, tailors, carpen-
ters, smiths, bakers, &c., at work at their several trades. The
washing was also done on the premises. In all, about eighty
were regularly employed in mechanical work. Among the
provisions for the comfort of the inmates was a library of books;
and the gallery of communication between the private apart-
ments of the managers and the workshops, was constructed as a
greenhouse and filled with flowers, tended by patients.
Those not engaged in any sort of work are taken out twice a
day into the garden ; for, in respect of space, the male asylum
enjoys a great advantage over that for the females. Although
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 79
the island is so small that it cannot allow much room for garden
or cultivated ground, yet it suffices to give employment to a few,
and furnishes a tolerably-sized garden for exercise. This garden
is planted with trees, laid out in walks, and has in its centre a
high artificial mound, surmounted by a summer-house, from
which a charming view is obtained over the whole vicinity, in-
cluding the beautiful city of Venice itself, the islands dotting
the Lagoon, and the mainland in the distance. Two other plots
of land, like the garden, walled round, are set apart for cultiva-
tion?one of them as a kitchen-garden; and to render the rustic
character of the establishment complete, cows are kept to supply
its inhabitants with milk.
The same system of classification was in use here as in the
sister asylum, and the same principles of treatment. Bleeding
was very rarely resorted to ; opium and morphia were occasion-
ally used as narcotics; prolonged baths had not been tried, and
the use of the douche was limited to refractory cases, as an
instrument of repression. The stomach-pump was very seldom
employed to feed refractory patients, their rejection of food
being overcome by other means.
Mechanical coercion is considered a necessary instrument of
treatment, and is effected by similar means to those enumerated
in preceding pages. Still, its use was not widely extended; for
out of the three hundred and thirty patients, not more than five
were seen by me under restraint. It is chiefly resorted to for
homicidal and suicidal cases, of which some twenty-four were
reckoned to exist at the date of my visit. The contrivances in
use were, the camisole, belt, handcuffs, the "muff/'' stiff leather
gloves, and a woollen jacket made to button in front, and at the
side seams, so that when buttoned upon the patient the arms
were confined to the sides. In rare cases, the legs were confined
by a belt of sufficient length to allow the wearer to move along.
The leathern gloves were exclusively used in cases of self-abuse,
and, as I understood the director, except these no instruments
of restraint were employed during the night.
It should be mentioned that this establishment of St. Servilio,
although chiefly limited in its purpose to the care and treatment
of the insane, is, in addition, an hospital for a limited number
of surgical cases, which occupy two large wards, and are under
the charge of the brethren. The retention of such cases is ex-
plicable by reference to the history of the institution, which
makes known to us that, prior to its adaptation for lunatics, it
was an hospital chiefly for surgical patients, and that the care
o le insane was only a subsequent task undertaken by the
good monks.
My visit to this Asylum of St. Servilio afforded me much gra-
80 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
tification. Its managers were evidently at work in the right
direction. Its wards were generally in good order, and clean;
its mechanics well occupied, and its non-industrial population
well looked after and exercised; and I am persuaded, from
the humane and intelligent character of the director, that he
would be one of the first to abolish restraint, could he shake off
the trammels of the dominant opinion of his country, and witness
the non-restraint plan of treatment in practical working.
Verona.?This ancient Italian city, which offers so many
objects of interest and attraction to the tourist, and is of so great
importance to its possessors as a first-class fortress, possesses no
asylum, properly so called, for the insane. The only provision
made for them is such as reflects the highest discredit upon the
Austrian administration of this province, and is in itself produc-
tive of misery, wretchedness, and cruelty to the unfortunate
patients.
The accommodation provided is in connexion with the large
general hospital?an irregular group of buildings, some of con-
siderable age, and others of modern construction. The lunatic
department is very subordinate, and greatly neglected : it occu-
pies several small buildings and wings, very ill adapted to their
purpose?some of them very ill built, and all of them wretchedly
kept?assigned to the helpless insane as the least eligible and
useful for any other purpose, and because some sort of habitation
must perforce be found lor them. Both sexes are received, and
the credit must be given to its managers that they are placed in
completely distinct buildings. The women occupy three small,
low-vaulted dormitories on the basement, with stone floors, badly
lighted and ventilated, and altogether very dull and miserable.
A few of the male patients, who are very quiet and tractable,
live separate from their refractory companions, but are, never-
theless, very indifferently off for accommodation. They have a
small garden to themselves for exercise. The refractory, who
constitute the majority of the male patients, are lodged in a
small, detached, low building of one story, with barred windows
and a stone floor, so laid as to slope from each side towards a
grooved drain running from one end to the other. The whole
aspect of this apartment was rather that of a stable than of a
dormitory for the residence of human beings?indeed, many
English stables are far more warm, sweet, and comfortable.
The occupants of this room were disposed in beds arranged in a
row on each side, and, so far as I could learn, were very rarely
permitted to leave their beds. No effectual means of enforcing
this condition of repose were omitted ; the hands and feet were
made fast by leathern straps to the bedstead, and, if required, a
belt across the body could be added. The bedsteads were of
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 81
wood, very thick and heavy, and constructed in a crib-like
fashion, filled with straw, over which a very coarse brown linen
sheet or piece of canvas was laid, to serve as an under-sheet for
the patient. Another such sheet covered him, with the addition
of a very coarse woollen coverlet. Being unable to help them-
selves, the urine was always necessarily passed under them, and
after percolating through the straw, diffused itself over the stone
floor, until it reached the central gutter, whence it could flow
along to one end of the building and escape. The mode of
distributing food to these unfortunates was on a par with the rest
of the treatment. The soup?their only diet, except bread?
was brought to them in pails, out of which a basin was filled for
each. As they were helpless by restraint, the services of their
attendants were required to feed them. We must add to the
above account, that the heads were generally shaved, and that
the phlebotomist had constant employment to keep under (?)
the cerebral excitement, indicated by the perpetual noise and
restlessness of the refractory inmates.
To render to every one his due, we must state that the soup
and bread appeared of good quality, and well adapted for nourish-
ment?better, indeed, than unfortunately falls to the lot of a large
part of the poor of Lombardy.
The male attendants belonged to a religious order?as I un-
derstood, of St. Euphemia. There was no special physician for
this section, its duties falling casually upon the physicians of the
general hospital?particularly upon the medical director, as super-
intendent of the entire establishment. The offices, kitchen,
laundry, dispensary, &c., were common to the whole institution.
When I made my visit, there were forty insane patients in this
section of the Yerona Hospital; of these, eight were pensioners,
permanently resident. Happily their condition was tolerably
satisfactory ; they occupied a distinct building, having a small
garden, and each one had his own room, sufficiently furnished
and comfortable. When quiet, considerable liberty was accorded
them to walk about in the grounds of the hospital.
-Lhe pauper patients are, unless there is speedy prospect of
their recovery, retained at Yerona for only two months, at the
end of which time they are sent to the asylum at Yenice, with
small prospects, we apprehend, of deriving much benefit when
Set there, the preliminary treatment they have undergone at
eQ0na being taken into consideration.
L*r J'eaders will peruse with pain and astonishment this ac-
coun o the treatment the insane receive in a large city of the
on men in these latter days of enlightenment and charity ;
out we greatly fear that, if the condition of the insane in many
ot tne large Lombard cities (in the general hospitals of which
NO. IX.?NEW SERIES. G
82 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
they occupy an inconsiderable and neglected section) were
inquired into, Yerona would not be found exceptional in its
mode of treating them. Lombardy, alas ! is not only now a
very impoverished country, but is held in rigorous subjection to
a foreign race by military force, to the support of which, as well
as of the civil government, it is made heavily to pay; and, as a
consequence, no funds are to be found for such purposes as the
building and endowment of proper lunatic asylums.
Brescia.?Within the walls of this city is a nearly new asylum,
which constitutes an appendage of the general hospital, and to
which it is united by corridors. As in similar instances, the
general offices are common.
The building forms two hollow squares, one assigned to each
sex, with an intervening garden of about half an acre in extent.
It has only two floors?a basement or ground, and a first floor :
around each is a covered corridor. That, on the first floor is
nearly ten feet wide, and on its open side, looking into the
central court, forms a series of circular-headed spaces with inter-
vening square columns, the open spaces being filled in with
upright iron rods, crossed by others at intervals of about two
feet. This corridor would have a very good effect were it not for
its barricaded spaces, which give it a cage-like appearance. The
ground floor is occupied by the day and dining-rooms, by some
single rooms, and by the bath-room. The concrete of the floors
of these rooms is laid immediately upon the earth, and, in conse-
quence, is frequently moist from the transudation of moisture.
One of the day-rooms on the women's side was small, badly
lighted by one window, and so constructed that one half was at
right angles to the other.
On the first floor were . two dormitories, called infirmaries,
'both of which were unoccupied on the male, and one on the
female side. The larger one on each side would contain from
twenty-four to thirty beds; the smaller was about half the size.
My visit was made in March ; later in the spring, I was assured,
these vacant rooms would be filled with cases of pellagra. The
elevation of these dormitories was good, viz., about fourteen feet;
but they were rendered dull and dreary by the half-circular
small windows being placed seven feet above the floor. Except
the portion occupied by the infirmary dormitories, the rest of
the first floor was constructed with a corridor, having a row of
single rooms on each side, but not terminated by an end window.
"These rooms were about twelve feet by ten feet, and contained
each a bed, a fixed seat at one corner, and generally a recess in
the thickness of the wall, to serve as a receptacle for the clothes
of the occupant.
The window of each single room was rather high up, barred
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 83
on the outside, and its wooden frame covered, in place of glass,
with canvas sufficiently thin to admit light. This mode of filling
a window-frame has certainly the merit of economy, and may not
be uncomfortable on a warm summer's night in this part of the
world ; but we much pity the unfortunate patients who have to
pass a long winter's night in rooms so imperfectly shut from the
outer air. In the infirmaries, indeed, the windows were glazed.
The doors of the single rooms opened outwards : the floors were
of concrete or stone.
Some of the stairs were winding, and, to obviate danger, their
" well" was covered at the landings by wirework. In this, as in
the other Italian asylums described, little attention was bestowed
upon warming the rooms in cold weather; the discussions of
systems of warming and ventilating asylums in this more northern
clime have not, it would appear, aroused the attention of Italian
physicians and architects. Certainly they have much less need
to make provision against cold ; yet, notwithstanding, a winter in
northern Italy is not to be braved without fires, and much suffer-
ing must be entailed upon the inmates of public institutions by
the prevailing absence of any attempts at systematic warming.
Here, in Brescia, an Italian stove, placed in the centre of one or
two of the day-rooms, surrounded by stout guards, was all the
means provided.
A small chapel, calculated to accommodate about fifty per-
sons, had been built for the patientsj it presented nothing re-
markable to note.
I found many patients in bed, not apparently labouring
under any bodily sickness demanding repose, but placed there
apparently as a means of seclusion and confinement. In the
case of the men, I noticed that all, or nearly so, were under
restraint, attached by a foot or an arm to the bedstead. Indeed,
restraint was used in this asylum in an irregular, loose, and
most reprehensible manner. No employments and no amuse-
ments for the patients were attempted j the construction and
very limited space of the building admitted of no proper classi-
fication, and, what was worse, none appeared thought of; hence
confusion, disorder, noise, and misery reigned supreme, and the
only check the managers could devise was that furnished by
mechanical restraint. This appeared not only in the poor priso-
ners in their rooms, condemned to seclusion and the tedium of
bed, left to cherish their disordered fancies and to sink deeper
into despair, but in many more besides, wearing camisoles, hand-
cuffs, and here and there one with hobbles on the feet.
lo the same want of management, to the same neglect, were
due the frequently disorderly or ragged clothes, the naked feet,
and the dirty habits of many of the inmates.
G 2
84; THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
The bedsteads for refractory cases were well supplied with
rings at the head, foot, and sides, for the passage of straps for
restraint: the dirty slept upon straw, through which the urine
percolated on to the floor, no attempt being made to collect it.
No special provision for epileptics and paralytics was thought of;
but they were treated as ordinary cases, and slept on straw as
dirty cases, or had beds like the clean,?consisting of a paillasse,
a flock bed, a pair of sheets, a woollen, and over all, a striped
cotton coverlet. The bedsteads, except those for foul cases, were
of iron.
Rather over two hundred patients were detained in this asy-
lum at the period of my visit, and, as elsewhere, formed two
classes?pensioners and paupers?the former, however, in very
small proportion. For the number resident, the accommodation
was much too small.
Although a section of the general hospital, it had its special phy-
sician, who visited once or twice daily. An interne on the male
side, and a sort of matron on the female, each with the title of
inspector, are in constant residence within the building.
Not having had the advantage of being accompanied over the
institution by the physician himself, but by a colleague attached
to the general hospital, there are many matters touching the
internal regulation of the asylum, and the treatment pursued,
which I could not ascertain. Respecting the medical treatment,
I learnt that bleeding, both general and topical, was very much
resorted to, and that opiates were very seldom employed.
Pellagra affected at least one-half of the population of the
asylum.
The garden between the two divisions was common to both
sexes; but they were taken for exercise in it at different hours
of the day. the view from the garden, and indeed from the
asylum itself, is very limited, by the proximity of the ramparts
of the town, which are considerably raised above the level of the
land inside them.
Unlike several of the Italian asylums, that of Brescia had the
advantage of being specially built for its purpose?an advantage,
however, almost completely negatived by the very faulty plan of
its construction, and, for every good result, entirely sacrificed
by bad management. All the modern improvements and ame-
liorations in the condition of the insane, and all the teachings of
modern pathology respecting their treatment, appear either un-
known or uncared-for by the authorities at Brescia. There is
great need for some asylum reformer to visit the institutions
of Lombardy, and to teach the doctrines of Pinel, Esquirol,
Conolly, and of the other noble men who have laboured in the
cause of the insane.
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 85
A versa.?The town, of Aversa is situated about midway be-
tween Naples and Capua. Its name is well known to psycho-
logical physicians, because the principal public asylums of the
kingdom of Naples, which are in its immediate neighbourhood,
gained for themselves much credit by being among the first
to employ their lunatic patients in various kinds of work. How-
ever, at the present period they would occupy but a low place
in the scale of merit among the asylums in Europe; for, al-
though the advantages of employment are still duly appre-
ciated, yet they have not in other respects followed the
march of progress in the moral management of the insane,
which has so rapidly advanced in this country and else-
where.
The two sexes are accommodated in distinct buildings : that
ioi the women is in the town of Aversa ; the one for males
is some distance from the town, on the high road towards
C-apua. A third institution exists in the vicinity, for epilep-
tic and imbecile cases, under the direction of a religious
fraternity. The asylum for females, in Aversa, I did not
see, but heard that it was a very indifferent and unsuitable
building. The one for the men is considered the best; unfor-
tunately, my examination was imperfect and hasty, as I found
110 medical officer in the establishment, and had only one of
the attendants to act as my conductor through it, and had
no opportunity of repeating my visit.
J-he situation of the asylum is very good ; the surrounding
country of great beauty, and well cultivated ; but, owing to
walls and out-buildings, the beauty of the scenery is hidden from
the inmates, except when in their sleeping-rooms upstairs.
-Lhe building is partly erected in the form of a hollow square,
but is rendered irregular by other portions added from time to
time. The principal edifice is of three stories in height, whilst
other parts have only two floors. Except three moderately-sized
airing-courts, no other ground is attached to the institution.
n entering the building, the visitor first reaches ail enclosed
c?urt, surrounded by the general offices and work-rooms, which
occupy the ground floor, and have dormitories above them.
is court is surrounded by a covered corridor or arcade.
therWl?^' doubtless, to progressive alterations and additions,
j-fp 6 ls ,an irregularity in the interior, some wards being on a
and th others, properly speaking, on the same floor,
? ere re reached only by mounting or descending a few
fprpiif' moreover, from the like cause, the elevation of the dif-
n 10?ms varies considerably, and in some is deficient. Their
i +iaie PaTed with tiles, their walls whitewashed and bare,
tne Wlnd?ws barred externally. Although little objection
86 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
could be taken to the degree of cleanliness generally presented
by the asylum, yet, taken as a whole, its interior aspect was
dull and heavy, and did not realize an Englishman's idea of
comfort.
I saw no single rooms, although several small ones existed in
which two patients were placed together. The dormitories dif-
fered in size?the largest contained from twenty to thirty beds:
in each of them an attendant sleeps, in a small apartment
partitioned off, but so constructed as to command a view of the
entire room. A light is burnt in every dormitory during the night.
To meet the wants of the patients when in their sleeping-rooms,
a large pail or tub is attached by a chain to the wall at one end
of the room, for chamber utensils are not allowed. The upper
floors are, at most parts, built with a central corridor, having
rooms opening from it on each side.
The bedsteads consist simply of some flat boards, resting on
iron trestles at the head and feet: on these are placed a palliasse,
a flock bed with sheets, a woollen and a cotton coverlet. Dirty
patients were allowed a palliasse only, and no bed or sheets.
For the particular forms of insanity complicated by paralysis and
epilepsy, no specially constructed beds were supplied. During
the day the bedding was rolled up towards the head of the bed-
stead, after the fashion seen in barracks and in a few of our own
asylums.
The patients were nearly three hundred in number, and of
two classes?pensioners and paupers?the former in compara-
tively very small proportion. The attendants seemed tolerably
numerous; and owing to the greater part of the inmates being
occupied at work, there was an air of activity, quiet, and content,
not witnessed in those asylums where employment is omitted or
neglected. Some of the inmates work as tailors, others as shoe-
makers, &c.; but the majority are occupied in the large weaving-
room, at hand-looms, making cotton and linen cloth for the use
of the institution, and as an article of sale. The room for the
weavers was of large size : the duration and the amount of work
exacted from the patients seemed too great, whilst means of
amusement and opportunities for recreation were too much neg-
lected. Of the several modes of employment in which the
insane are engaged, that of weaving appears to me one of the
worst adapted to their condition, by reason of the confinement
it involves, the monotony of the task, and the imperfect character
of the exercise it calls upon them to take. The work certainly
is anything but exhilarating; the atmosphere of a weaving-room
becomes dusty and close, and the clatter of the machines dreary
by its sameness, and musical to no other ears except those of the
master, who reaps the fruits of the work. In short, weaving is a.
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 87
description of labour inimical to mental discipline and develop-
ment, and opposed to the physical well-being of the body.
I should have rejoiced to have seen the inmates of Aversa
engaged in gardening and tillage ; but this, the most healthy and
ch eerful employment, is neglected; in fact, the asylum possesses
no land for cultivation. The only outdoor provision for the
patients is furnished by the three small exercising courts, which
are of themselves sufficiently agreeable, although inadequate to
the wants of the asylum, and dull by not affording any view
beyond their restricted boundaries. They were,. however, plea-
santly planted with trees and flowers, and gave occupation to
two or three inmates.
Restraint, I was told, was little resorted to; but neither of
this matter, nor of the general moral and medical treatment,
have I, unfortunately, any details. The general impression I
formed respecting this asylum of Aversa was, that it was far
behind, in construction and management, the asylums of this
country, and many of those of France and Germany. The
irregularity of the interior, its bare walls, barred windows, the
absence of the means of amusement, and the seeming pursuit of
employment as a source of profit, imparted to the whole institu-
tion a dull, heavy, comfortless aspect, and, owing to its limited
outdoor space, the air of a place of confinement.
I have met with the following statistics of the asylum under
consideration, in connexion with that for the females :?Between
1813 and 1841 inclusive, there were admitted 4165 men and 1741
women; a total of 5906. Of these, 1535 males and 600 females
were discharged cured; 612 men and 148 women, uncured or
as found not insane; whilst 1486 and 758 of each sex severally
died ; a total of 2244. Taking these figures, the per centage of
cures on the number of admissions appears to be 36*1; and that
of deaths, 37'9. The statistics of 1841 were as follows:?Re-
gaining in the establishments, 532 males and 146 females; total,
"78. Admitted of each sex severally, 186 and 90?276 in all.
-discharged cured, respectively, 63 and 18; uncured and not
insane, 39 and 13?a total of 133 discharged; deaths, 84 men and
70 women; in all, 154. Hence the per centage of cures was 29'3
?n the admissions alone, and when calculated on the total of
admissions and the previous number under treatment, only 8*4 ;
55.^ Proportion of deaths to the admissions was as high as
? / , or to the admissions, plus existing cases, or the total popu-
a ion ot the year, 16*1. Between 1846 and 1848, inclusive, the
gures were;?Admissions, 599 males, 248 females ; cured, 201
qo mi' uncured and not insane, 143 and 55; died, 267 and
+1 ' i . e cures to the admissions were 32-5 per cent., and
the deaths 42-5.
88 THE CONDITION OF THE INSANE.
These statistics prominently show, among other facts, how
much larger is the number of male lunatics admitted than of
females?viz., two-thirds more. Another striking fact elucidated
is the very high rate of mortality, which exceeds that of most
asylums of Europe, if we except the Parisian, in which general
paralysis makes such terrible havoc.
