The Legal Doctrine of Responsibility in Cases of Insanity, Connected With Alleged Criminal Acts
=================================================================================================

Art. II.?

BY FORBES WINSLOW, M.D., D.C.L.
Read at the Juridical Society, December 1 ith, 1857,
I WILL, without any prefatory remarks, and with great submis-
sion to those whom I have the honour to address, endeavour to>
direct the attention of the Society to the following salient and
relevant questions connected with the important subject selected
for discussion.
I will consider seriatim:?
1st. The nature of insanity in its medico-legal relations.
2nd. The legal doctrine of responsibility in connexion with
insanity associated with alleged criminal acts.
LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY. 215
3rd. The doctrine of partial insanity, or monomania.
4th. The existence of homicidal insanity and insane irresistible
impulses.
5th. Anomalous or mixed cases of mental disorder, involving
the' question of modified responsibility and the propriety of
punishment.
There is no fallacy more generally entertained by those who
have had but limited opportunities of studying or becoming prac-
tically acquainted with the phenomena of insanity, than that, in
the great majority of cases, the disease consists, in its elementary
and essential features, in a disorder of the intellectual, as contra-
distinguished from a derangement of the moral faculties of the
mind; that the intellect is in a condition of aberration; that the
ideas are 'perverted; that the senses convey illusory images to the
sensorium ; that the perceptions are false, the mind being inva-
riably under the dominion of some creation of the distempered
fancy; in other words, that delusions or hallucinations are always
present in every case of fully developed insanity.
This is the popular and, I may add, the generally received
notion of mental derangement.
This mistaken view of the nature of insanity has, I believe, led
to much discrepancy and conflict of opinion in our courts of law
respecting the legal question of responsibility in connexion with
certain cases of imputed alienation of mind.
In all the great criminal trials involving a consideration of this
question, the judges have almost invariably laid a stress on the
presence or absence of delusion; associating it, however, with the
question, "Is the person whose mind is said to be insane, capable
of distinguishing right from wrong?"
In the case " Bainbridge v. Bainbridge," Lord Campbell ad-
mitted that insanity might exist without delusion. I have no
douLt other judges, if they have not propounded literally the
same doctrine, have practically acknowledged its truth, by sanc-
tioning the acquittal of prisoners on the ground of insanity unas-
sociated with any obvious delusion or affection of the reasoning
powers.
It is difficult for an inexperienced person to realise the great
medical truth, that disease of the mind, and disease of a serious
character, may exist without any appreciable aberration of the
ideas, or apparent impairment of what are termed the intellectual
powers. I do not refer to conditions of morbid mental exaltation,
often dependent upon a transitory congestion of the blood-vessels
on the surface of the brain, or to that mental depression so fre-
quently consequent upon an obstruction to the free circulation of
the blood through the heart, or even to the extravagance of
thought and conduct exhibited in many cases of unrecognised
216 LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY.
insanity; but to positive creations of tlie morbid fancy, to
delusive images leading the person to believe that to exist
which no sane person would believe to exist, and which, in
reality, has no existence apart from himself and his distempered
imagination.
In the majority of cases, the premonitory stage of insanity is
evidenced by some palpable disorder1 of the affections, temper,
propensities, moral sense, character, and conduct of the individual.
This may exist for a long period before any positive aberration
of the ideas is recognised.
It is unusual for delusions to exist in the early stage of mental
derangement. The poison of insanity, if I may use the term,
seizes, in the first instance, hold of the moral powers of the mind,
and the disease often runs its course without obviously deranging
the ideas, perceptions, or apparently impairing the integrity of
the intellectual operations. Men talk coherently, and often with
great shrewdness and sagacity, and they occasionally write
rationally whilst in an indisputable condition of mental aberra-
tion of such a kind and degree as clearly to absolve them from
all legal responsibility.
Although, as Dr. Prichard justly observes, " the intellectual
faculties in every case of well-marked insanity are more or less
involved;" and this will be apparent when I address myself to
the question of partial insanity and the metaphysical doctrine of
the indivisibility of the mind and unity of the consciousness ;
still he allows that " in reality the moral character is more
affected than the understandingIn other words, he maintains
that the salient, prominent, characteristic, and diagnostic symp-
toms of insanity are not to be sought for in those faculties of the
mind by which (to speak with metaphysical exactness) wo appre-
ciate the perception of relation; but in those states and condi-
tions of the intellect more immediately associated with the moral
sense, the affective or motive faculties, the passions, affections,
and appetites. As a general rule, insanity implicates those
powers of the mind which are supposed to regulate the actions
and conduct. The intellectual as well as the moral faculties
(from the nature of the constitution of the human mind) are in
all cases of insanity to a certain degree disordered; but the
affection of the reason, the judgment, and reflection, does not in
many cases stand out in bold and prominent relief, so as to con-
stitute well-marked legal or medical diagnostic indications of the
actual state of the mind when affected by disease. If this be
a true theory of insanity, it will be apparent that, in estimating
the actual condition of the mind in connexion with the question
of legal responsibility, we must not confine our attention to the
question, whether the ideas are perverted or in a state of positive
LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY. 217
aberration or derangement; whether the senses are under the
influence of subjective or objective morbid psychical phenomena,
in the form of hallucinations or illusions; but the important
point for consideration should be, what is the state of the affec-
tive ox motive powers? what is the condition of the volition?
and to what degree has the mental disease destroyed the healthy
power of self-control over the thoughts and actions ? If delu-
sions are present?if hallucinations and illusions can be detected,
the diagnosis is greatly simplified ; but although delusions and
aberration of the ideas often exist, they must not be viewed as the
essential or the exclusive diagnostic symptoms of a diseased and
irresponsible mind. If a man is said to be insane, the immediate
question is, what are his delusions ? If evidence is given of
insanity in a court of justice, the same question is often put to
the witness.
I do not complain of this course of interrogation; but I argue,
that by always searching for delusions and hallucinations, or
some form of aberration and derangement of the mental opera-
tions, we are diverted from the legitimate and philosophical course
of inquiry, and a case of insanity, and insanity clearly inducing
a state oi' criminal irresponsibility, eludes our observation.
I proceed to consider, secondly, " the legal doctrines of irre-
sponsibility in connexion ivith alleged criminal acts."
This necessarily compels me to direct the attention of the
Society to the lucid, logical, and able paper on Insanity in its
Legal Relations, read by Mr. Fitzjames Stephen in the month of
?Tune, 18o5, and since published in the Transactions of this
Society. This gentleman, when speaking of legal tests of in-
sanity, argues that medical men liave no right to charge the
judges with having propounded a fallacious "test' of insanity,
or with inconsistency in excusing the insane on the one hand,
whilst on the other they apply a criterion bringing nearly all
those who are insane within the range of the law. The judges,
it is said, have laid down no test of insanity whatever?that they
have been most scrupulously cautious and careful in committing
themselves to anything like a test of insanity. Instead of so
doing, Mr. Stephen affirms they have merely laid down tests of
responsibility, or, more strictly speaking, have specified facts
from which, when juries have found them, judges are to infer
malice; but it is no part of their duty to say how far particular
diseases aflect the relation of persons to such tests ; that, in the
language of Mr. Justice Maule, is a question not of lawT but of phy-
siology,. and one not of that obvious nature to be inferred without
proof. The tests of insanity, as I conceive, propounded in our
courts of law, are as follows, viz.:?
1 st. That of the presence of delusion.
218 LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY.
2nd. Of delusion directly associated with the criminal act.
3rd. A capability of distinguishing between what is lawful and
unlawful?the capacity of knowing right from wrong, good from
evil.
All these legal criteria of insanity necessarily involve in their
elucidation the question of responsibility.
It is true, as Mr. Stephen argues, that, stripped of all techni-
calities, the transaction, as between the criminal arraigned for the
crime and the prosecution, stands thus:?
The prosecutor says, " I charge this man with having volun-
tarily and wickedly killed A. B." The prisoner replies, " I did
kill him, but not voluntarily or wickedly; for I was compelled
by the involuntary action of my muscles, and exercised no voli-
tion in the matter; or, I was prevented by disease from distin-
guishing good from evil, and, therefore, could not act wickedly."
But does not this trial of the question, whether the accused, by
reason of his incapacity, could not act feloniously, unavoidably
raise the questions, what is the nature of this incapacity ? how is
it manifested ? what are its symptoms ? is it partial or general
incapacity ? is it associated or dissociated with delusions ? does
the mental disorder destroy the prisoner's power of distinguish-
ing between what is " lawful and unlawful," " good and evil,"
"right and wrong?" Am I not justified in maintaining, without
arguing the question in a " Nisi prius" spirit, that legal tests of
insanity connected with alleged criminal acts have at various
times been propounded from the bench for the guidance of
juries ?
Dr. Johnson defines the word "test," as being "that with
which anything is compared in order to prove its genuineness."
It is true, as Mr. Justice Maule says in the passage quoted by
Mr. Stephen, that the questions submitted to the jury are those
questions of fact which are raised on the record. In a criminal
trial the question commonly is, whether the accused be Guilty or
Not Guilty?
"The jury are to inquire into nothing which is not in issue.
They are impannelled to decide certain questions of fact in the
negative or affirmative, and nothing is admissible in evidence
unless it tends to enable them to answer these questions, or some
of them.
" The questions are raised by the prosecutor and the prisoner
?the prosecutor affirming certain facts respecting the prisoner,
and the prisoner either confessing or denying them, or alleging
some reason why he should neither confess nor deny. Such
denial, confession, or allegation, is the prisoner's plea; and if it
raises a question, asserted 011 one side and denied on the other,
the jury are to decide it. First, then, madness is not a plea.
LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY. 219
The prisoner does not plead it as lie would plead a pardon under
the Great Seal, a former acquittal or conviction, or as lie would
plead to the jurisdiction. He gives it in evidence under the plea
of Not Guilty. So that the very form of the proceedings implies,
that, in order to entitle him to an acquittal, the prisoner must
not only show that he is mad, but that lie is thereby not guilty.
In more technical language, his madness must be such as to
enable him to traverse some one or more of the material aver-
ments of the indictment."
Madness may not, to speak with technical accuracy, be the
" plea," as Mr. Justice Maule avers; but are not the jury guided
in their decision as to the acquittal of the prisoner on the ground
of insanity by the judge's exposition of the legal doctrine of in-
sanity in relation to crime ? Does he not instruct the jury that
" partial insanity" will not acquit the prisoner ? That the ex-
istence of a delusion, partial in its character, will not exonerate
liim from responsibility ? That if the prisoner was labouring
under the idea or delusion that he was " redressing a supposed
grievance," and that under " the impression of obtaining some
public or private benefit" he committed the crime, lie is equally
liable to punishment ?
Surely these instructions, propositions, doctrines, or theories
may, without an abuse of language, be also termed tests of in-
sanity and responsibility, in relation to certain alleged morbid
conditions of thought and conduct. The law has a certain
preconceived standard of criminality. The mind of the alleged
criminal must be in a condition to act voluntarily, of free will,
and with malice. He must, to use the language of Foster, as
quoted by Mr. Stephen, be capable of committing an action
flowing from a wicked and corrupt motive; he must be in a con-
dition to act malo animo maid conscientid.
" If a man," says Foster, " has either no motive at all, or no
power of discerning what motives are wicked, and what are not
?in more popular language, if he cannot discern good from evil,
he cannot be said to act maliciously in the legal sense of the
word; and if he can show, by reason of any disease, he is
wholly unable to distinguish between good and evil, he has re-
butted the presumption of malice."
Let us for a moment apply Dr. Johnson's definition of the
word " test" to this lucid exposition of the principles of the
criminal law, and how doss it affect the question at issue ?
A standard of criminal responsibility is erected; in other
words, certain well-defined principles of criminal responsibility
are enunciated. A culprit is indicted for murder; he pleads
Not Guilty, on the ground that he was incapable of acting
voluntarily, maliciously, and of free will, on account of his
220 LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY.
mental infirmity destroying liis power of distinguishing between
good and evil, right and wrong. This condition of alleged and
imputed disorder of mind is then reviewed by the Court, and
its " genuineness" tested by " comparing" it with those mental
states of admitted legal responsibility in which the criminal is
capable of acting mcilo animo maid conscientid.
What are the doctrines of criminal responsibility in cases of
alleged insanity, as propounded authoritatively in our courts of
law ? I will not refer in detail to the conflicting criteria of
responsibility which have at different periods been laid down by
the bench. (For the existence of such discrepancy of opinion
was candidly admitted by Lord Campbell, in the House of Lords,
when he said, " He had looked into all the cases that had
occurred since Arnold's trial, in 1723, and to the direction of the
judges in the case of Lord Ferrers, Bellingham, Oxford, Francis,
and M'Naughton, and he must be allowed to say that there was
a wide difference of opinion both in the meaning and in the
zvorcls of their description of the law.") The principle of
law as expounded in 1843, by the judges in the House of Lords,
appears to me (without quoting the decision at length) to be
embraced in the following propositions:?
1st. A person labouring under partial delusions only, and
who is not in other respects insane, notwithstanding he commits
a crime under the influence of the insane delusion that he, is
redressing or revenging some supposed grievance or injury, or
producing some public benefit, is liable to punishment if he knew
at the time of committing such crime that he was acting contrary
to the law of the land.
2nd. To establish a defence on the ground of insanity, it must
be clearly proved that at the time of the committing of the act
the party accused was labouring under such a defect of reason
from disease of the mind as not to know the nature and quality
of the act he was doing, or, if he did know it, that lie did not
know he was doing what was wrong.
3rd. If a person under a partial delusion only, and not in
other respects insane, commits an offence in consequence thereof,
he is to be considered in the same situation as to responsi-
bility as if the facts in respect to which the delusion exists were
real.
These rules of law in relation to offences committed in an
alleged condition of insanity, suggest for consideration?
1st. The doctrine of partial delusions in their legal relation to
crimes committed by persons in other respects insane, under an
insane idea of redressing a real injury, or revenging some sup-
j)osed grievance.
2nd. The legal doctrine of partial insanity.
LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY. 221
3rd. The knowledge of right and wrong viewed as conclusive
evidence of responsibility in cases of imputed insanity.
Before discussing the question of "partial insanity," I would
premise that the rule of law by which persons are held legally
responsible for actions committed whilst under the dominion of
a delusion, provided the person imagined that he was redressing
a supposed grievance, or under the impression of obtaining some
public or private benefit, was propounded by Lord Erslcine in
his celebrated speech in defence of Hadfield. He there declared,
" That when a madman commits a crime under the influence of
an impression which is entirely visionary, and purely the hallu-
cination of insanity, he is not the object of punishment; but
that though he may have shown insanity in other things, he is
liable to punishment if the impression under which he acted was
true, and the human passion arising out of it was directed to
its proper object." He illustrates this principle by contrasting
the case of Hadfield with that of Lord Ferrers. Hadfield
laboured under the delusion that the end of the world was at
hand, and that on the death of the king, the Messiah would
immediately appear on earth, and the reign of the Millennium
begin.* Lord Ferrers, after showing various indications of
insanity, murdered a man against whom he was known to
harbour deep-rooted resentment on account of real transactions
in which that individual had rendered himself obnoxious to him.
The former, therefore, is considered as an example of the pure
hallucination of insanity; the latter, as one of human passion
founded on real events, and directed to its proper object. Had-
field was accordingly acquitted, but Lord Ferrers was convicted
of murder, and executed.
It will be for us to discuss whether it is consistent with an
enlightened jurisprudence, and a philosophic view7 of insanity, to
consider that a man in an insane state of mind should be held
amenable to the punishment of death, because his delusion is to a
degree based upon actual circumstances, and because there is in
his conduct evidence of his having been under the influence of
passion apparently rationally and sanely directed ?
In considering this section of our subject, it is essential that
we should fully appreciate the fact, that it is one of the well-
known characteristics of insanity for persons to labour under
* Although very insane, Hadfield exhibited great acuteness, coolness, and self-
possession, common features in cases even of dangerous insanity. It is stated that
when standing at the pit-door of the theatre, waiting for admission, the people
around pressed and crowded inconveniently upon him, when a young woman,
putting her hand on his shoulder, said, '' Sir, you are hurting me ; the handle of
your umbrella is running into my bosom." "I could not/' he added, "help
smiling at the time, for the handle of what she supposed my umbrella was the
handle of my pistol, which I held concealed within my coat under my arm."
222 LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY.
delusions connected with, and originating in, actual circum-
stances. This is one of the common features of insanity, the
mental disorder exhibiting itself in a morbid and false view of
the actual objects of sense, and a diseased and exaggerated
estimate of the daily occurrences of life.
A man in a state of incipient or advanced insanity notices a
person paying more than (he considers) the ordinary, legitimate,
and conventional attention to .his wife. A case can easily be
conceived in which a man may, in this respect, unintentionally
slightly overstep the line of prudence and propriety. The fact
is observed by the quasi suspicious madman, and made the sub-
ject of deep thought and meditation, until the mind, being up to
this period only in an incipient condition of lunacy, yields to
the morbid mental suggestion that his wife has been actually
unfaithful, and that the man who has been seen in apparent
familiar converse with her is her seducer. Thus may a delusion
?a dangerous, an insane delusion?a delusion based upon a
distorted, perverted, irrational, and insane view of actual cir-
cumstances, originate and impel the person to destroy human
life. I will imagine a case like M'Naughton's. A person is
under a delusion that he is the victim of a conspiracy. His
insanity may be somewhat general in its development?his delu-
sions not, in the first instance, attaching to any one particular
individual, or, in legal phraseology, his insanity is not yet
" partial" in its manifestation.
It is possible that a man in such a state of mind may have
some trifling claim upon the Government for either insignificant
services rendered to a Cabinet Minister, or on account of pro-
perty sacrificed in defence of the Crown in one of our colonial
possessions. He writes and demands compensation?extrava-
gant compensation?for a questionable service rendered, and a still
more doubtful injury sustained. He is told that his claims are
all illusory. This disappointment preys upon his mind, until
his bodily health becoming vitiated, and his mind palpably
disordered, the idea of the wrong inflicted becomes a fixed,
false, and delusive impression, exercising a tyrannical and auto-
cratic sway over his passions and conduct. His disordered
fancy fixes upon one of the Government officials?it may be one
of the clerks of the office with whose chief he has been in cor-
respondence?and under the dominion of this phantom of his
imagination, that he has a bond fide claim which will not be
recognised, and rights which are unjustly ignored, he revenges
himself by taking his life! Alter the circumstances, and it
constitutes a type of case frequently coming under the obser-
vation of persons conversant with insanity. Many of the
delusions of the insane may thus be traced to actual existing
circumstances.
LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY. 223
?A merchant becomes to a degree affected in his pecuniary
circumstances ; he has sustained a trifling loss of property. This
disturbs his thoughts, interferes with his regular sleep, and
eventually damages the general health. His mind ultimately
succumbs to the brain disorder, and symptoms of unmistakeable
insanity appear. He is under a delusion that he is reduced to
a state of abject poverty, declares that he is not worth a farthing,
and asserts that he and his family must go to the workhouse.
It is useless to reason with a man so insane. A clear state-
ment of bis affairs is laid before him, he listens heedlessly to the
representations of his kind relations and friends, and appears
to examine his banker's book with care, but nothing dissipates
the delusion ; there it remains a fixed, permanent impression
of hallucination, until death puts a period to his unhappy life.
This is a case of insanity springing out of actual circumstances;
the disease of the mind evidencing itself in a false, perverted,
insane, and irrational estimate of events that have in reality
taken place. In many of these cases the mind is in an incipient
state of disorder before the occurrence of the shock, and the pal-
pable demonstration of derangement which afterwards exhibits
itself is only a continuation of a previously existing state of
mental alienation; but this does not in the slightest degree affect
the principle for which I am contending,?that many commit
offences against the law in an irresponsible state of insane mind,
who are considered accountable agents and amenable to punish-
ment, because they act under a delusion that they are redressing a
supposed grievance; and, having some slight justification for
their impressions, proceed and conduct themselves as a man in
sane and healthy possession of his reason would under similar
circumstances. The law assumes that persons in an irresponsible
state of insanity do not redress injuries like sane men; that they
are oblivious to all feelings of revenge and resentment; that they
are incapable of feeling the
" Whips and scorns of time,
r's wrong?the proud man's contumely.'
The oppressor
So much for the rule of law laid down for the guidance of
those into whose hands are entrusted the administration of
justice?viz., that " notwithstanding the party (the insane party)
committed a wrong act while labouring under the idea (delusion,
I presume) that he was redressing a supposed grievance or injury
(a fanciful and imaginary grievance and injury), or under the
impression (hallucination) of obtaining some public or private
benefit, he is liable to punishment." I maintain that this is
an erroneous doctrine of responsibility in cases of alleged in-
sanity, and an unsafe principle of law; because it is based
NO. X.?NEW SERIES. Q
224< LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY.
upon false views of tlie true characteristics and phenomena of
mental alienation. I am not now addressing myself to the
consideration of incipient forms of disturbed mind, to pseudo
states or phases of insanity, or to certain abnormal deviations
from mental health, not amounting to derangement of mind ;
but to clearly, positively, and obviously developed insanity,
associated with palpable and appreciable delusions or halluci-
nations. With reference to the legal doctrine of right and wrong
as applied to cases of alleged insanity, I suggest no metaphysical
objection. I use the words in their admitted and recognised
legal acceptation. The word wrong, as Mr. Stephen observes,
is " that which the law and not that which the prisoner considers
wrong."
It is questionable whether the English language could produce
two words so incapable of uniformity of construction as those of
right and wrong when applied to criminal cases of insanity.
If the doctrine of right and wrong be admitted as a legal test,
and acted upon as a principle of law, would it not (owing to the
essential difference in the character of the cases of insanity to
which it would be applied) be partial, restricted, and circum-
scribed in its. operation ? There are, undoubtedly, cases of in-
sanity which come within the range of this test; but in many
forms of mental disorder associated with an irresponsible con-
dition of mind, the doctrine of right and wrong could not with
justice or safety be relied upon.
If it be a fact that there are a large number of insane persons
confined as lunatics, in whom this power of distinguishing
between right and wrong, lawful and unlawful, good and evil,
remains apparently intact, then, I ask, is it a safe standard of
responsibility?a just principle of law ?
I say advisedly, " apparently intact." A lunatic may have one
or two prominent delusions, and in this state of disordered in-
tellect retain the power of conversing coherently, rationally, and
even with brilliancy, upon many subjects connected with science,
literature, and the fine arts. He may even be competent to
make a testamentary disposition of his property, and to transact
ordinary matters of business with unusual shrewdness and a keen
regard "to self-interest; the fact of his brain being in a morbid
state, in a condition of exalted function, may develop an amount
of intelligence, acuteness, and sagacity he never exhibited pre-
viously to the attack of mental disorder. Hence the extreme
cunning, cleverness, and design often exhibited by persons pal-
pably insane. Men in a state of insanity become orators and
poets, who previously to their illness were entirely ignorant of
tropes, and innocent of ever having penned a stanza. But we
must be careful not to confound such conditions of morbid exal-
LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY. 225
tation of thought and intelligence with those complex operations
of the mind, involved in the consideration of the question of right
and wrong, under circumstances the most painful and trying that
can occur to a human individual. In other words, I argue, that
the capacity to draw nice distinctions between right and wrong?
the power of correctly estimating the relation between a sug-
gested line of action, and its penal consequences,?the ability to
appreciate in a healthy manner the moral and legal principles
laid down for the conduct of society, and the safety and protec-
tion of human life, are not to be confounded with an apparent
lighting up of the intelligence so often witnessed in certain
morbid conditions of the brain, disordering the operations of the
mind. We are not justified in inferring, because the alleged
lunatic exhibits more than the usual degree of cleverness, cun-
ning, and sagacity, that therefore he is in a condition of intellect
to weigh nicely and accurately (when impelled, in an insane state
of mind, to commit an act of violence upon a fellow-creature who
had subjected him to a slight provocation) the questions?Am I
doing what is right ? what is lawful ? what is good ? am I about
to act in disobedience to human and Divine laws ?
Dr. Ray has placed this question in a clear and forcible light:?
" The first result, therefore, to which the doctrine leads, is, that no
man can ever successfully plead insanity in defence of crime, because it-
can be said of no one, who would have occasion for such a defence, that
he was unable in any case to distinguish right from wrong. To show
the full merits of the question, however, it is necessary to examine1
more particularly how far this moral sentiment is affected by, and what'
relation it bears to, insanity. By that partial possession of the reason-
ing powers, which has been spoken of as enjoyed by maniacs generally,
is meant to be implied the undiminished power of the mind to con-
template some objects or ideas in their customary relations, among,
which are those pertaining to their right or wrong, their good or evil,
tendency; and it must comprise the whole of these relations, else the
individual is not sane on these points. A person may regard his child
with the feelings natural to the paternal bosom, at the very moment
he believes himself commanded by a voice from heaven to sacrifice this
child, in order to secure its eternal happiness, than which, of course, he
could not accomplish a greater good. The conviction of a maniac's
soundness of mind, on certain subjects, is based in part on the moral
aspect in which he views those subjects ; for it would be folly to con-
sider a person rational in reference to his parents and children, while
he labours under an idea that it would be doing God's service to kill
them,?though he may talk rationally of their characters, dispositions,
and habits of life, their chances of success in their occupations, their
past circumstances, and of the feelings of affection which he has always
cherished towards them.
" Before, therefore, an individual can be accounted sane on a paiv
Q 2
226 LEGAL KESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY.
ticular subject, it must appeal* that he regards it correctly, in all its-
relations to right and wrong. The slightest acquaintance with the
insane will convince any one of the truth of this position. In no school
of logic, in no assembly of the just, can we listen to closer and shrewder
argumentation, to warmer exhortations to duty, to more glowing
descriptions of the beauty of virtue, or more indignant denunciations
of evil-doing, than in the hospitals and asylums for the insane. And
yet many of these very people make no secret of entertaining notions
utterly subversive of all moral propriety ; and, perhaps, are only wait-
ing a favourable opportunity to execute some project of wild and cruel
violence. The purest minds cannot express greater horror and loathing
of various crimes than madmen often do, and from precisely the same
causes. Their abstract conceptions of crime, not being perverted by
the influence of disease, present its hideous outlines as strongly defined
as they ever were in the healthiest condition ; and the disapprobation
they express at the sight arises from sincere and honest convictions.
The particular criminal act, however, becomes divorced in their minds
from its relations to crime in the abstract; and, being regarded only
in connexion with some favourite object which it may help to obtain,
and which they see no reason to refrain from pursuing, is viewed, in
fact, as of a highly laudable and meritorious nature. Herein, then,
consists their insanity ; not in preferring vice to virtue, in applauding
crime and ridiculing justice, but in being unable to discern the essential
identity of nature between a particular crime and all other crimes,
whereby they are led to approve what in general terms they have
already condemned."
Mr. Stephen, although he argues in favour of this doctrine of
criminal responsibility, appears to consider that the question
might with safety be modified. As suggested by this gentleman,
the case would be thus put to the jury: ? "Was the prisoner
prevented by mental disease from appreciating the reasons for
which the law has forbidden the crime of which he is accused,
01* from applying them to his own case ? I would add to these
questions these words:?and was he able to exercise a healthy
volition in the matter??had his mental disease destroyed his
powers of free-will quoad the crime of which he stands accused ?
A paralytic may know that, under certain conditions of danger,
the only safety is in flight. He is conscious of the fact, but
his motor power is gone. It is so with many lunatics; they
know what is right, and bitterly lament their sad loss of voli-
tional power, as well as their incajiacity to act in obedience to
their notions ot what is right and just. This will be more
apparent when I address myself to the consideration of the subject
of Homicidal Insanity.
I proceed next in order to the question of Partial Insanity.
Lord Hale says :?
"There is a partial insanity and a total insanity of mind. The
LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY. 227
former is either in respect of things quoad hoc vel illud insanire; some
persons that have a competent use of reason in respect of some subjects
are yet under a particular dementia in respect of some particular dis-
courses, subjects, or applications; or else it is partial in respect of
degrees ; and this is the condition of very many, especially melancholy
persons, who for the most part discover their defect in excessive fears
and griefs, and yet are not wholly destitute of reason ; and this partial
insanity seems not to excuse them in the committing of any offence
for its matter capital; for, doubtless, most persons that are felons of
themselves, and others, are under a degree of partial insanity when
they commit these offences. It is very difficult to define the invisible
line that divides perfect and partial insanity; but it must rest upon
circumstances duly to be weighed and considered both by judge and
jury; lest on the one side there be a kind of inhumanity towards the
defects of human nature; or on the other side, too great an indulgence
given to great crimes."
And the same learned judge adds, " that the best measure is
this?such a person as is labouring under melancholy distempers
hath yet ordinarily as great understanding as ordinarily a child of
fourteen years hath, is such a person as may he guilty of treason
or felony ?"*
" The term partial insanity," says Collinson, " imports that a
person is insane on one or more particular subjects only, and
sane in other respects." Lord Lyndhurst, who takes a more
enlarged view of the subject of partial insanity, thus defines
it:?He says, " the mind is not unsound on one point only and
sound in all other respects, but this unsoundness manifests
itself principally with reference to some particular object or
person." But other authorities use the term in a restricted
sense, synonymously with that type of mental disease called
" monomania," or delusion upon one prominent topic or directed
to one particular person, the mind being sound on all other
subjects. Accepting this as the legal signification of the term,
I ask?Is there a condition of mind which can be correctly desig-
nated as partial insanity or monomania ?
Considering the matter metaphysically, I would observe, that
we cannot disentangle and separate the intellectual faculties as
we can the threads of a skein of silk, and say this faculty of the
mind operates by itself, and that faculty is independent of the other
powers of the intellect, and another state of the mind is isolated
from all other conditions of mental manifestation. This is con-
trary to the first and elementary principles of the science of mental
philosophy.
Sir William Hamilton remarks :?
" It should ever be remembered that the various mental faculties
* Hale's P.O. 30.
228 LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY.
are only possible in and through, each other; and our psychological
analyses do not suppose any real distinction of the operations which
Ave discriminate by different names. Thought and volition can no
more be exerted apart than the sides and angles of a square can exist
separately from each other."
Whatever classification of the faculties of the mind the meta-
physical philosopher may adopt, whether it be the general divi-
sion of the mind made by the ancients into the powers of the
understanding, and the powers of the will, these faculties never
were presumed to be so many distinct and separate entities,
capable of acting independently of each other; but they have
always been regarded as links of the same chain, elements of the
same intellectual system. The idea of disease being restricted
to one faculty of the mind, and uninfluencing other powers of
the intellect, is opposed to the metaphysical theory of the unity
of the consciousness. If I may quote Holy Scripture in illustra-
tion of this subject, I would refer to a portion of the 12tli chapter
of the 1st Book of Corinthians, in which, speaking of the indi-
visibility of the body, and unity of physical operation, this
great principle is lucidly enunciated:?"If the foot shall say,
Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body; is it there-
fore not of the body ? And if the ear shall say, Because I am
not the eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the
body ? If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing ?
If the whole were hearing, where were the smelling ? But now
hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as it
hath pleased him. And if they were all one member, where
zvere the body ? But now are they many members, yet but one
body. And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need
of thee ; nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you.
And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with
it; or one member be honoured, all the members rejoice
with it."
Apply this principle, to the operations of the mind, and in-
quire whether the memory can say to the attention, I have no
connexion with you; whether the reflective powers can say
to the judgment and reason, I am independent of your co-
operation ; whether the will can stand aloof from the imagi-
nation ; and, to speak more generally, whether the active
can exist apart from the passive powers of the mind ; whether
the moral faculties can exercise an independent sovereignty
and dominion without influencing and calling into active
operation the intellectual portion of man's complex organiza-
tion ?
Is there not a mysterious, inscrutable, and inexplicable one-
ness in the constitution of the human mind, defying all attempts
LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY. 229
at an accurate and minute classification and separation of its
powers ? If such a state of mutual dependence, action, and
union obtains between various states of mind (I will not use the
arbitrary terms " faculty" or " power") in. a condition of health,
a fortiori how impossible is it to disjoint, separate, and indi-
vidualize the mental faculties when under the influence of disease?
Can we draw the line of demarcation between a diseased and
healthy condition of the delicate structure of the vesicular neurine
of the brain ? Is it not obviously impossible for the most expe-
rienced anatomist to say, This is the territory which separates
the morbid from the healthy portion of the brain ? or for the
physician to assert such an extent of disorder of the mind is con-
sistent with safety and responsibility, but beyond the boundary,
danger and irresponsibility commence ?
When speaking of partial insanity, as an accepted legal
phase and type of mental derangement, Lord Brougham re-
marks :?
"We must keep always in view that which the inaccuracy of ordi-
nary language inclines us to forget, that the mind is one and indi-
visible ; that when we speak of its different powers or faculties?as
memory, imagination, consciousness?we speak metaphorically, liken-
ing the mind to the body, as if it had members or compartments;
whereas, in all accuracy of speech, we mean to speak of the mind
acting variously?that is, remembering, fancying, reflecting ; the same
mind, in all these operations, being the agent. We therefore cannot,
in any correctness of language, speak of general or partial insanity;
but we may, most accurately, speak of the mind exerting itself in con-
sciousness without cloud or imperfection, but being morbid when it
fancies : and so its owner may have a diseased imagination; or the
imagination may not be diseased, and yet the memory may be impaired,
and the owner be said to have lost his memory. In these cases, we
do not mean that the mind has one faculty?as consciousness?sound,
while another?as memory or imagination?is diseased ; but that the
mind is sound when reflecting on its own operations, and diseased when
exercising the combination termed imagining, or casting the retrospect
called recollection. This view of the subject, though apparently simple,
and almost too unquestionable to require, or even justify, a formal
statement, is of considerable importance when we come to examine
cases of what are called, incorrectly, partial insanity, which would be
better described by the phrase ' insanity' or ' unsoundness,' always
existing, though only occasionally manifest."
But, apait altogether from the metaphysical Objection to the
theory, let us for^ a moment consider whether such a form of
disease as partial insanity or monomania comes under the obser-
vation of the practical physician. There are, undoubtedly, forms
of insanity in which there is an unhealthy predominance and
exaltation given to particular mental impressions or delusions;
230 LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY.
that certain states of morbid thought and feeling stand out in
hold and prominent relief, giving, as it were, a character or
type to the mental disease; but I never yet saw a case of
alienation of mind in ivhicli the delusion or hallucination was
in reality confined to one or two ideas, those ideas exercising
no influence over the conduct of the person, and not implicating,
to a certain degree, the other faculties of the mind. It is
impossible to circumscribe the operation of morbid conditions
of thought, or to draw a line of demarcation between those
states of mind that are clearly under the influence of disease,
and those operations or faculties of the intellect that remain
apparently unaffected. A man believes himself to be our
Saviour, or Mahomet the prophet. Apparently the man's
mind is sound upon all other points; but within what limits
can we confine and restrain the influence of so serious a
delusion ?
A slight accession of bodily disease, a severe attack of indi-
gestion, congestion of the liver, or a torpid state of the bowels,
may make all the difference between security and safety in such
a, case. A person labouring under the dominion of one palpable,
insane delusion or hallucination (I am now using the term delu-
sion in its strictly medical acceptation), ought not to be treated
quoad the question of criminality as a sane and rational man.
But let me for a minute revert to the question as to the existence
of partial insanity, or monomania. Foville, a French physician
of great celebrity, who had for many years the medical charge of
the Cliarenton Lunatic Asylum near Paris, when speaking of
monomania, observes:?
" Monomania consists in a delirium, partial and circumscribed to a
small number of objects. Monomania, in its most simple condition,
is excessively rare : the number of patients who only rave on one sub-
ject is infinitely small compared to the number of those who are called
monomaniacs. Under this head are often confounded all those who
have some habitual dominant idea. I have only seen two cases which
rigorously merit the name, and these two even were affected from time
to time with more extended delirium."
He again remarks:?
" Let any one examine the hospitals of Paris, of Bicetre, of Cha-
renton, and he will see that, amongst the thousands of insane, there is
scarcely one true monomaniac, perhaps not one. Insanity attacks
principally, at one time the intellectual, at another the moral or
affective faculties; and, again, the sensations and movements. Each
of these may be more or less affected than the others; and so, when
the intellect, without being unaffected, is less deeply involved than the
other faculties, we fall into the error of considering it sound, and calling
these monomaniacs. Indeed, it seems to me as though the descriptions
LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY. 231
of monomania had been written upon the word, and not from nature ;
that is to say, that writers have described what might merit the title
of monomania, but of which they can find no instance in practice.'
Moreau, also a great authority in France, says:?
" It is impossible to admit that the intellectual faculties can be
modified in a partial manner. In the slightest as well as the most
severe forms of insanity, there is necessarily a complete metamorphosis
-?a radical and absolute transformation of all the mental powers of the
one. In other words, we are insane or we are not insane ; we cannot
be half deranged or three-quarters, full face or profile."
Baillarger, an eminent French psychological physician, adopts
the same view of the question, and maintains that the alleged
monomaniacal idea is more frequently 'predominant than exclusive.
If we look to Germany, we find the first psychological authority of
that country, Damerow, declaring that "lie never knew a case
of the disease of the mind called monomania, in which there was
not a fundamental, general psychical disorder."
When addressing himself to the subject of monomania, Mr.
Stephen remarks, that " monomaniacs are capable of acting quite
rationally upon a variety of subjects except those which they
connect with their delusions." Apparently, such is the fact. If
a person be under a delusion?an insane delusion?that lie is a
pauper, he having at the time large landed possessions, as well
as a considerable balance at his banker's; if that be liis halluci-
nation, how can it be safely predicated that all his thoughts and
feeling may not be materially tinctured and influenced by his
morbid state of mind ? He may be able to solve a problem in
mathematics?he may have the power of writing a consistent letter
on business to his solicitor?and on some subjects, involving an
exercise of the intellectual faculties, his mind may appear sound;
but on matters which are likely to call into play his passions,
feelings, and affections, or to tax severely the emotions, his
power of acting sanely and responsibly may he altogether de-
stroyed. I maintain that it is not right to place a man whose
mind is palpably deranged, even although to a partial extent
(adopting the legal term), in the same class with sane persons,
and expect liim, under circumstances of great irritation and pro-
vocation, to act as the law would require liim to act if he were
in possession of a sane mind, and a healthy control over his
passions.
A man was tried many years hack for murdering a stranger
wliom he accidentally met in a country lane, because he refused,
when asked, to give him twopence (that being the sum of money
he begged for, at a time when he was proved to be suffering
acutely from the pangs of hunger). This man was found guilty
232 LEGAL BESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY.
and executed. I was at tlie time much interested in his case, for
the evidence of his state of mental disorder (previously to the
commission of the murder) was, to my mind, strong and conclu-
sive. It occurred to me that his conduct was quite inconsistent
with the hypothesis of sanity?that no man in possession of his
reason would have been driven to so horrible an extremity by so
trifling a provocation. I, with others, ineffectually interceded
with the Secretary of State in his behalf, and endeavoured to save
him from the gallows.
As a principle, it may be laid down that a man in a sane state
of mind is in a condition to weigh the legal consequences of a
suggested criminal line of conduct; there is generally a healthy
correspondence between the offence and the action springing out
of it.
Before I proceed to the consideration of Homicidal Mono-
mania, and to those morbid states of alleged criminal irresponsi-
bility connected with what are termed blind and irresistible
impulses, I would premise that I have always taken exception to
these phrases: I think they are unfortunate and unhappy noso-
logical designations of admitted and accepted states of mental
disorder associated with a desire to destroy life.
The terms "homicidal monomania," "blind and irresistible
impulse," are, I admit, open to grave objections, and to serious
abuse. Of the existence of a type of insanity without delirium
or apparent delusion, suddenly manifesting itself, and impelling
its miserable victims to destroy those nearest and dearest to
them, there cannot be a question. There are other cases (and
such will be found in most lunatic asylums) in which the mind
of the patient appears to be absorbed with one horrible homicidal
idea, that being the predominant and characteristic symptom of
the mental alienation. A case is recorded in a French journal of
a man whose state of mind was made the subject of judicial in-
vestigation in France, who for twenty-six years was haunted by
mi intense desire to destroy human life. He freely confessed
that his mind had for this long period been absorbed in this one
idea.
The Report of the official authorities declared that this man
appeared in other respects of sound mind. I subjoin the official
account of this remarkable case :?
" I, the undersigned, William Calmeilles, health officer, residing in
the principal town of the Canton of Cazals (Lot), certify to all whom
it may concern, that, upon the requisition of the mayor of the com-
mune of Marminiat, I have this day been to the village of Brunet, in
the aforesaid commune of Marminiat, to decide upon the mental con-
dition of a person named John Glenadel, a husbandman, dwelling in
the said village of Brunet.
LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY. 230
" I found Glenadel sitting upon his bed, having a cord around his
neck, fastened by the other end to the head of the bed; his arras were
also tied together at the wrist with another cord. In giving my
Ueport, I do not believe that it can be better made than by recording
the conversation which took place between Glenadel and myself, in the
presence of his brother and sister-in-law.
" Question., Are you unwell ?
" Answer. I am very well; my health is excellent.
" Q. What is your name ?
" A. John Glenadel.
" Q. What is your age ?
" A. I am forty-three ; I was born in '96 ; see if this is not correct.
" Q. Is it by compulsion or by your own consent that you are
bound in this manner ?
" A. It is not Only by my consent, but I demanded that it should
be done.
" Q. Why is this ?
"A. To restrain me from committing a crime of which I have the
greatest horror, and which, in spite of myself, I am constantly impelled
to execute.
" Q. What is this crime ?
" A. I have one thought which constantly torments me, and which
I cannot conquer?that I must kill my sister-in-law; aud I should do
it were I not restrained.
" Q. How long have you had this idea ?
" A. About six or seven years.
" Q. Have you any cause of complaint against your sister-in-law ?
" A. Not the least, monsieur; it is only this one unfortunate idea
which troubles me, and I feel that I must put it in execution.
" Q. Have you ever thought of killing any one besides your sister-
in-law ?
" A. I at first thought of killing my mother; this thought seized
me when I was fifteen or sixteen years old, at the age of puberty, in
1812, as I well recollect. Since that time I have not passed one happy
hour; I have been the most miserable of men.
" Q. Did you conquer this unfortunate idea ?
"A. In 1822, I could no longer resist,I being at that time twenty-
five or six years of age ; and to remove this unfortunate inclination, I
joined the army in the capacity of a substitute. I was two years in
Spain with my regiment, and then returned to France, but this fixed
idea followed me everywhere ; more than once I was tempted to desert,
to go and kill my mother. In 1826 they gave me an unlimited fur-
lough, although it was unsolicited by me, and I returned to my father's
house, my fatal idea returning with me. I passed four years with my
mother, always having an almost irresistible inclination to kill her.
" Q. What did you do then ?
A. Ihen, monsieur, seeing that I should inevitably commit a
crime which terrified me and filled me with horror, I, in 1830, rejoined
the army, that I might not succumb to this temptation. I left for
the second time my father's house, but my fixed idea again followed
234 LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY.
me, and at last I almost decided to desert, that I might go and kill
my mother.
" Q. Did 3'ou have any cause of complaint against your mother P
" A. No, monsieur, I loved her very much; thus, before starting, I
said to myself, ' Shall I kill that mother who has exercised so much
care over me during my infancy, and who has loved me so well,
although I have entertained this fatal thought against her ? I will
not do it; but I must kill some one.' It was then that the thought
of killing my sister-in-law first occurred to me; I have a distinct
recollection of this, I being at that time in Dax, and it was in the year
1832. It was then announced to me that my sister-in-law was dead,
which was a mistake, it being another relative who had died. I then
accepted of the furlough they had offered me, which I should by no
means have done had I known that my sister-in-law was still living.
When I reached my home, and was informed that she was not dead, I
experienced such a sinking and depression of spirits that I became
quite sick, and my idea resumed its course.
" Q. What instrument do you choose with which to kill your sister-
in-law ?
" Here Glenadel was much affected; his eyes were bathed in tears ;
and looking towards his sister-in-law, he replied?' That instrument
which would inflict the least pain! But however that may be, the
time approaches, I perceive, when she must die, and this is as certain
as that God lives.'
" Q. Do you not dread to inflict so much misery and anguish upon
your brother and your little nephews ?
" A. The thought of this has troubled me somewhat, but I should
receive .the punishment due to my crime, and should neither see nor
know anything of their affliction; the world would rid itself of a
monster such as me, and I should cease to live. I should not expect
after this to see a single hour of happiness.
" It here occurred to me that M. Grandsault, of Salviat, my com-
panion and friend, who is at present in Paris, had told me, about a
year before, of a young man who, some years previously, had come,
accompanied by his mother, to consult him as to his own case, which
presented many features very similar to those exhibited by Glenadel.
As these cases are so very uncommon, I thought that, perhaps, this
person and Glenadel might prove to be the same. I therefore asked
him if it was he who had. consulted my friend, and he replied in the
affirmative.
" Q. What did M. Grandsault counsel you ?
" A. He gave me most valuable advice, and he also bled me.
" Q. Did you experience any benefit from this bleeding ?
" A. Not the least; my unfortunate idea pursued me with the same
force.
" Q. I am about to make a Report upon your mental condition, from
which will be decided whether you shall be placed in an hospital where
you may recover from your insanity.
" A. My recovery is impossible; but make your Report as quick as
possible?time presses. I can control myself but a little longer.
LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY. 235
" Q. It must be that your parents have instilled into your mind
correct moral principles, that they have set before you good examples,
and that you yourself have possessed a virtuous mind, to have resisted
so long a time this terrible temptation. Here Glenadel was again
much affected; he shed tears, and replied, 4 You are correct in this,
monsieur; but this resistance is more painful than death. I know that
I can resist but little longer, and I shall kill my sister-in-law unless I
am restrained, as sure as there is a God.'
"' Glenadel,' said I to him, 4 before leaving you, let me ask of you
one favour: resist still some days longer, and you shall not see your
sister-in-law for a long time, as we will so arrange matters that you
can leave here, since you so much desire it.'
" 4 Monsieur, I thank you, and I will make arrangement to comply
with your recommendation.'
441 left the house, and as I was about to mount my horse, Glenadel
called me back, and when I had approached near to him, he said to
me, 'Tell these gentlemen that I beseech them to put me in some
?i -Ml i.? ; c T
SISter-lIl-lUW WUUlu *JW. - --
these gentlemen that it is my own self who has said this to you ' T
assured him that I would do this; but as I saw that he was in a stato
of great excitement, I asked him if the cord which bound his arms was
strong enough, and if he did not think that by a strong effort he could
break it. He made an attempt, and then said, 41 fear that I mHit'
4 But if I should procure for you something that would confine vou'r
arms still more securely, would you accept of it?' 4 With tlia 1
monsieur.' 4 Then I will ask the commander of the gendarmes to Jvl
me that with which he is accustomed to confine the arms of r>ri?
and I will send it to you.' 4 You will confer upon me a great favour1'"'
41 purposed to make many visits to Glenadel, so as to entirelv
satisfy myself as to his mental condition; but after the lono- and p '
ful conversation which I held with him, after what my friend M
Grandsault had told me, after what has been said to me by the brotl ?
and sister-in-law of Glenadel, who are so much afflicted at tho en l 1Gl*
dition of their unfortunate brother, I became well convinced witl?^
farther observation, that John Glenadel was affected with tW f *
insanity called monomania, characterized in his case by an irroS?
inclination to murder?the monomania with which PinJ ? i
others, fortunately but a small number, were affected. ?me
Signed at Brunet, in the commune of Marminiat
"May 21, 1839." " Calmeilles, Health Officer.
Catherine Zeigler was tried at Vienna fnr i
bastard child. She confessed tlJ <!+ i n?Urder of her
nossiblv heln it ? shP WnC f . i! i ' sai(* s*le could wot
desire to commit the murd^ rjj ^?f^; she co^d the
fession, connected with her o-ood elm-'i i J? C?ni
,incC o i , good cliaiacter, induced the tribunal
1 seu^ence; and on the ground of insanity (which
236 LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY.
she did not herself plead), she was acquitted, and at length
released from prison. But she told the Court, that if they let
her escape, they would he responsible for the next murder she
committed, for that if ever she had a child again she would cer-
tainly kill it. And so, in fact, she did. About ten months after
her release from prison, she was delivered of a child, which she
soon murdered.
.Brought again to her trial, she repeated her old story, and
added that she became pregnant merely for the sake of having a
child to kill. She was executed for this second murder.
A female was admitted a few years hack into the Koyal Edin-
burgh Lunatic Asylum; she had no appreciable disorder of the
intellectual powers; she laboured under no delusions. She had
a simple abstract desire to kill, or rather, for it took a specific
form, to strangle. She made repeated attempts to effect her
purpose, attacking every person who came near her, even her
own relatives. It appeared to be a matter of indifference to her
whom she strangled, so that she succeeded in killing some one.
She recovered, under strict discipline, so much self-control as to
be permitted to work in the washing-house and laundry; but she
still continued to assert that " she must do itthat " she was
certain she would do it some day;" that "she could not help it;"
that " surely no one had ever suffered as she had done;" " was
not hers an awful case ?" And approaching any one, she would
gently bring her hand near their throat, and say, mildly and per-
suasively, "I would just like to do it." She frequently expressed a
wish that all the men and women in the world had only one
neck, that she might strangle it. Yet this female had a kind
and amiable disposition; was beloved by her fellow-patients; so
much so, that one of them insisted on sleeping with her, although
she herself declared that she was afraid she would not be able to
resist the impulse to get up during the night and strangle her.
She had been a very religious woman, exemplary in her conduct,
very fond of attending prayer meetings and of visiting the sick,
praying with them, and reading the Scriptures, or repeating to
them the sermons she had heard. It was her second attack of
insanity. During the former she had attempted suicide.
The disease was hereditary, and it may be believed that she
was strongly predisposed to morbid impulses of this character,
when it is stated that her sister and mother both committed
suicide. There could be no doubt as to the sincerity of her
morbid desires. She was brought to the institution under very
severe restraint, and the parties who brought her were under
great alarm upon the restraint being removed. After its removal,
she made repeated and very determined attacks upon the other
patients, the attendants, and the officers of the asylum, and was
LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY. 237
only brought to exercise sufficient self-control by a system of
rigid discipline.
This female was perfectly aware that her impulses were wrong,
and that if she had committed any act of violence under their
influence, she would have been exposed to punishment. She
deplored in piteous terms the horrible propensity.
A few years ago, a gentleman presented himself at a metro-
politan lunatic asylum, and begged that he might be received as
a patient. He stated that he had just left his solicitor, from
whom he, in fact, brought a letter of introduction confirming his
account of himself, and that it was necessary he should be placed
under some form of restraint, for he had an irresistible desire to
murder his wife or one of his children. He then added, that the
preceding day he was walking in his garden, when he saw his wife
and little girl approaching towards him. His eye at the same
moment caught the sight of a liatchet lying on the gravel-walk,
and he described that he had the greatest struggle within himself
to escape out of the garden before he seized it to strike, perhaps
fatally, one or other of them.
He loved his wife and child, he affirmed, dearly ; but the
homicidal idea haunted him continually, and he felt that he
could not trust himself alone in their presence. It should be
added, that the last night he slept at home, he did attempt in
the middle of the night to strangle his wife, and would have suc-
ceeded had not her cries in the scuffle brought in timely assis-
tance. In the midst of all this, during the explanation he gave
of his case, he expressed himself well and rationally. His intel-
lect appeared to be unclouded ; and it turned out that he was at
the same time in communication with his solicitor respecting
some proceedings in the Court of Chancery, upon which he gave
perfectly sane instructions. I will cite but one additional illus-
tration of this type of insanity. The lunatic in question mur-
dered his wife, and afterwards became a criminal inmate of the
State Lunatic Asylum of Massachusetts. He gave the following
account of his crime. On the morning of the murder the man
was sitting with his wife. He was in a state of excitement; and
in these circumstances the noise of the children always disturbed
him. In order to render all quiet, the children were sent into a
field to play or labour ; he and his wife sat by the fire?he on one
side, indulging in the gloomiest forebodings ; she at work on the
other side, doing all in her power to console and comfort him.
Aftei a while she arose, went to the cupboard and poured some
wine into a tumbler, brought it to him, and said, in the most
cheerful manner, Come, let us drink and forget our sorrow, and
remember our poverty no more." She tasted the wine, and handed
it to him, and he drank, and said, in reply, "I wish it might kill
238 LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY.
one," or, " I might die." She took her seat again hy the fire, and
went to her work; he arose soon after, without any particular
object or design, and walked into an adjoining room. In a
moment, the idea of Samson and the weaver's beam rushed
into his mind; he instantly seized a weapon which was before
him, stepped behind his wife, and gave her the fatal blow. The
man, during his confinement, often spoke of the amiable disposi-
tion of his wife; he declared that he had no fancied direction
from higher powers, and that the thought of killing her never
entered his mind until that impulse came upon him, and that it
was as sudden as possible, and wholly irresistible. He also spoke
of his having made many attempts to commit suicide.
When speaking of insane " irresistible impulses," Mr. Stephen
remarks:?
" If the law is to rest satisfied with proof not of an irresistible.
but merely of an unresisted impulse, it gives a sanction to all
sorts of crime."
In many conditions of disordered brain and mind, the patient
suffers acutely from these "resisted" impulses and morbid
mental suggestions. This is one of the most distressing types
of nervous and mind disorder coming within the range of the
physician's observation and treatment. In many cases, the
unhappy patient is fully and painfully conscious of his morbid
condition of thought; and it occasionally happens, that so acute
is the agony of mind consequent upon the struggle to conquer
these, suggestions, that relief is sought for in suicide. In this
stage of consciousness the patient is occasionally able to appre-
ciate that his sensations are perverted, his thoughts morbid, per-
ceptions false, and his impulses wrongly directed.
Dr. Rush refers to the case of a lady, who prayed fervently
that she might be relieved from the horror of her own morbid
thoughts by a complete loss of reason!
This terrible consciousness of the approach of insanity, and of
the actual existence of the malady, is one of the saddest features
in this mysterious disease. The fact has not escaped the won-
derful penetration of our great dramatic poet. When Gloster is
suffering from profound grief, consequent upon his recognition of
Lear's insanity, he exclaims, in the bitterness of his wild despair:?
" Tlie king is mad?how stiff is my vile sense,
That I stand up, and have ingenious feeling
Of my huge sorrows ! Better I ivere distract;
So should my thoughts he severed from my griefs,
And woes by wrong imaginations lose
The knowledge of themselves."
"Such a state as mine," writes a patient, "you are probably un-
acquainted with, notwithstanding all your experience. I am not con-
LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY. 239
scious of the suspension or decay of any of the powers of my mind. I
am as well able as ever I was to attend to my business; myfamily
suppose me in health, yet the horrors of a madhouse are staring me
in the face. I am a martyr to a species of persecution from within,
which is becoming intolerable. I am urged to say the most shocking
things?blasphemous and obscene words are ever on the tip of my
tongue. Hitherto, thank God! I have been enabled to resist; but I
often think I must yield at last, and then I shall be disgraced for ever,
and ruined. I solemnly assure you that I hear a voice which seems
to be within me prompting me to utter what I would turn from with
disgust if uttered by another. If I were not afraid that you would
smile, I should say there is no way of accounting for these extra-
ordinary articulate whisperings, but by supposing that an evil spirit
has obtained possession of me for the time; my state is so wretched,
that, compared with what I suffer, pain or sickness would appear but
trifling evils." *
All crime is alleged to spring from ail unresisted and uncon-
trolled impulse ; and a distinguished judge once declared from
the bench, when reference was made to the subject of morbid
irresistible impulses, that it was one of the objects of punish-
ment to teach men, viciously and criminally disposed, the duty
and necessity of restraining their wicked inclinations and im-
pulses. No one doubts the correctness of this principle. But
surely it is unphilosophic not to draw a right distinction between
a normal and healthy disposition to crime, and those occasionally
resisted and often unhappily irresistible tendencies to what the
law considers wicked, vicious, criminal, and punishable acts,
clearly connected with, and originating in, a 23a^l?loyical con-
dition of the material instrument of thought disordering the
mental operations. Was not this distinction entirely lost sight
of when Lord Hale committed himself to the dogma that " all
crime was partial insanity ?" and did not a non-recognition of
this great principle lead Dr. Haslam to declare that no mind was
sound except that of the Deity ? There are insane impulses, and
healthy impulses, to crime and vice; and I think 110 person
acquainted with the phenomena of diseased mind would confound
one condition with the other.
A person may, with the object of obtaining some great pecu-
niary compensation, set fire to his house; another man with
no possible chance or hope of advantage or gain, does the same
thing under the influence of an insane impulse. A mother
murders her child, to destroy all evidence of her moral delin-
quency , another mother sacrifices the life of her offspring, to
which she is tendeily attached, under the terrible dominion of
* "Essays on Partial Derangement of the Mind in Supposed Connection with
Religion, by the late John Cheyne, M.D., up 64-5
NO. X.?NEW SERIES. R
240 LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY.
a morbid desire to destroy.* A person in a drunken brawl
quarrels with his wife because she refuses to supply him with
intoxicating drink, and ends by destroying her life; another
man, he may be a devoted, affectionate, and loving husband,
without exhibiting any previous evidence of insanity, being
seized with an attack of homicidal frenzy, rushes upon his wife
and cuts her throat! A man may enter a shop, and purloin some
article of value; another person, moving in good society, and
of high and unimpeachable integrity and above want, may, in a
state of mental disorder, commit a similar offence, conscious at
the time of the certainty of detection, disgrace, ruin, and punish-
ment. One man practises his profession as a thief?it is his
vocation; the other person commits a motiveless crime under the
influence of a morbid, insane, and irresistible impulse. I readily
admit that such cases require to be most jealously scrutinised.
I do not, however, think there can be much practical difficulty
in diagnosing and discriminating judicially between the two
classes of cases.
To revert, however, to the subject of resisted insane impulses.
Patients often complain of being subject to this type of mental
disorder, and feel the necessity for restraint and medical treat-
ment. The suggestion to self-destruction and commission of
homicide, without any other evidence of insanity in the popular
acceptation of the term, is a common symptom of disorder of the
brain and nervous system. The patient, in describing his mental
state - to his physician, says that the suggestion is " cut your
throat,"?"poison?drown yourself,"?" cut your wife's throat,"
?"murder your child,"?"poison him." Persons in this state
of mind (notwithstanding the presence of great disturbance of the
functions of the brain, and disorder of the general health) are
able to resist, for a period, these insane suggestions and im-
pulses ; but if they should yield to them, and the suggestion be
an irresistible instead of a resisted one, what would Mr. Stephen's
opinion be of their legal responsibility in relation to any offence
they might commit ?
A lady of strong devotional feelings, subject to great nervous
disorder, could not repeat the Lord's Prayer without being com-
pelled from within (as she described it) to say, "Our Father,
which art in hell." She could not say " Heaven," although she
tried to do so. This poor lady (whose mind was strongly im-
bued with religious sentiments) suffered great agony of mind in
consequence of this horrible suggestion.
I was acquainted with a gentleman?a man of great accom-
plishments, of high order of intellect, of known literary reputa-
* An occasional occurrence in puerperal insanity.
LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY. 24]
tion, and of great personal worth?whose mind was for years
tortured with morbid suggestions to utter obscene and blasphe-
mous expressions. He eventually destroyed himself; and in a
letter which he wrote to me a few days before committing suicide,
and which did not reach me until after his death, he said his
life was embittered and made wretched by these terrible sugges-
tions ; but he thanked God that he had never once yielded to
them, and that, although he was a Christian in principle, he felt
he was not sinning against God by committing self-destruction,
with the object, of effectually destroying all chance of his giving
utterance to thoughts that might contaminate the minds and
morals of others ! This was a case of resisted suggestion, as far
as the thoughts were concerned.
At the Norwich Assizes, in the summer of 1805, Thomas
Callaby was tried for the murder of his grandchild. A witness
found the prisoner sitting at the side of his bed, one morning in
March, about four o'clock: he had dreadfully wounded his wife
in different parts of her body. The prisoner's daughter brought
down the child with its throat cut; the bloody knife was in the
room, and he was charged with, and confessed his crimes, but
said, " I do not care anything about it; my wife has heard me
say a short time before that I should certainly murder some one,
and I begged to be confined." It further appeared in evidence,
that he knew when his paroxysms were coming on; and on
these occasions he had been known to tie himself down to the
floor!
This affords a good illustration of a resisted, eventually be-
coming an irresistible impulse; but was not this wretched man
as insane when he tied himself down to the floor, and requested
his wife to place him in confinement, as when he yielded to the
impulse and cut the throat of his grandchild ?
Time will not admit of my considering the last division of my
subject?namely, those mixed cases of passion, crime, and insanity,
associated with a certain diseased temperament and hereditary
tendency to mental disease, which, to my mind, clearly justify
the merciful consideration of the Court, and some modification of
punishment. Take for illustration the case of Lord Ferrers.
The crime in this case is said to have been the result of deep-
seated revenge. But what was his proved state of inind ante-
cedent to the murder ? It was established at his trial that he
had long been the subject of unfounded suspicions of plots and
conspii acies, lavings, sudden attacks of fury, denunciations of
unprovoked levenge, frantic and insane gesticulations; that he
was in the habit of standing before a glass, spitting and shaking
his fist at his reflected image. Lunacy was hereditary in the
family, and affected several of his relations. A solicitor of repu-
r 2
242 LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY.
tation renounced his business on the full persuasion of his being
disordered in his brain. And long before the murder of liis
steward, his nearest relations had deliberated on the expediency
of taking out a commission of lunacy against him. Previously to
his separation from Lady Ferrers, his violence of disposition was
so conspicuous, that one of the peers declared from his sent in
the House of Lords that he looked upon him as a maniac, and
that if some effectual step ivas not taken to divest him of the
power of doing mischief, he did not doubt but that they should
have occasion to try him for murder. After he shot Mr. Johnson,
Lord Ferrers appeared to be conscious of his crime, and showed
symptoms of pity : but when the surgeon had dressed the wound,
the Earl declared to Mr. Johnson's daughter, as well as to the
surgeon, that he intended to kill him, and did not repent what
he had done, for Johnson was a villain who deserved his fate.
He then drank to intoxication, when his hatred became so ex-
cited, that he said " he would not alloiv the icounded man to be
removed to his own house; that he would keep him near himself
in order to plague the villain." He then retired to his room,
abused and insulted Mr. Johnson, and threatened to shoot him
through the head, and was with difficulty restrained from acts of
violence. Even at the moment of death, Lord Ferrers gave
evidence of a questionable state of mind. It is recorded that he
proceeded to Tyburn in his own carriage drawn by six horses,
dressed, gaily for the occasion in a light-coloured suit of clothes
embroidered tvith silver; and addressing himself to the sheriff,
who appeared struck at his singular costume, Lord Ferrers re-
marked, "You may perhaps think it strange to see me in this
dress; but I have my particular reasons for it." Although dis-
pleased at being hanged like a common felon, he behaved with
propriety and composure, and took an opportunity of declaring
he had no malice against Mr. Johnson, and that the murder was
committed in a perturbation of mind, occasioned by a variety of
crosses and vexations, but stoutly disclaimed being insane,
having had recourse to this plea solely to satisfy his friends.
Was not this a case of doubtful sanity, and one of modified
responsibility? And would not the claims of justice have been
satisfied if Lord Ferrers had been subjected to the severest
punishment the law could inflict short of actual death upon the
scaffold ?
Analogous cases are occasionally recognised in our courts of
law, and are acquitted of the capital offence, even when no
marked symptoms of mental aberration are proved to have
existed.
Mallandine was tried on the charge of attempting to murder
her son. She was an unmarried woman, twenty-eight years of
LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY. 243
age; the child was a "boy of six or seven. She was seen to
throw him into the Regent's Canal at Haggerstone; and she
would have plunged in herself, but a passenger came up and pre-
vented her. The boy was rescued, and she was detained. She
then proved to be in a state of wild excitement, brought on by
distress. Her counsel, Mr. Cooper, suggested to the jury that
the evidence disclosed such a state of mind as did not amount to
actual insanity, but prevented her from being aware of the effect
of what she was doing. On that argument, apparently, the jury
pronounced a verdict of acquittal.
Some years back, a man named Harrison was tried for murder
in Scotland, respecting whom the following facts were established:
?" He had a wish to join the sect of Quakers, and attended the
meetings of that persuasion for some months, where he paid no
attention to the worship, but muttered to himself, smelt his
Bible, and pricked himself with pins or needles until he lost a
considerable quantity of blood. On one occasion he demanded
instant admission to the society. He went more than once to
the meeting-house early in the morning, and was seen to kneel,,
and heard to invoke the Virgin Mary, while he wounded himself
over with both hands, and smeared the doors with his blood.
He habitually wounded his hands, wrists, and arms with needles
or pins. He was in the habit of sucking the blood from his own
wrists after every two or three mouthfuls of food." Many at-
tempts were made to convince the authorities that these were
not the manifestations of a perfectly healthy mind; but they
were disregarded, and the poor wretch underwent the penalty of
the law.
Much discussion arose at the time of Weston's acquittal for
the murder of Mr. Waugh, in Bedford-row. It was questioned
whether the verdict of Not Guilty " on the ground of his predis-
position to insanity" met the justice of the case. His life was,
however, saved. Some months after his trial, his insanity became
so well marked that the authorities of Newgate obtained an order
from the Secretary of State for his removal to Bethlehem, where
I saw and conversed with him in an unmistakable condition of
insanity.
When speaking of these modified cases of responsibility,
Alison remarks:?
"Cases frequently occur in the highest degree perplexing both to'
the court and jury, which can only be justly resolved by an application
of the principle and mode of proceeding above set forth. They are
those in which the accused was to a great degree to blame, but would
not probably have committed the fatal act but for some constitutional
or supervening derangement which rendered him not so far responsible
as those who, by enjoying their reason unclouded, had no defence
244f LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY.
whatever against atrocious actions. In such cases there is a mixture
of guilt and misfortune; for the former, he should be severely punished;
for the latter, the extreme penalty of the law should be remitted."
? Has sufficient allowance been made, in tlie legal consideration
of tlie question of crime committed under the influence of
delusion, or irresistible impulse, for a mind prostrated, enfeebled,
overpowered, and crushed by a vast and gloomy delusive image,
damming up the channels of thought, and destroying all freedom
of action ? V
" I had a species of doubt," says a recovered maniac, describing
what his feelings were during his attack; '"'but no one who has
not been deranged can understand how dreadfully true and real a
lunatic's insane imaginations appear to him?how slight are his
insane doubts."
I may be asked what principle I wTould propound for the
guidance of courts of law in these cases. I cannot but repeat
what I have already declared to be my conviction, that in every
criminal case where the question of responsibility arises in the
course of judicial inquiry, if it be possible to establish
ANY DEGREE OF POSITIVE INSANITY, IT SHOULD ALWAYS BE
VIEWED AS A VALID PLEA FOR A CONSIDERABLE MITIGATION
OF PUNISHMENT, AND AS PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE IN FAVOUR
OF THE PRISONER ; AND IN NO CASE WHERE INSANITY
CLEARLY EXISTS (WITHOUT REGARD TO ITS NATURE AND
AMOUNT) OUGHT THE EXTREME PENALTY OF THE LAW TO BE
INFLICTED. '
What, I may be asked, is my test of insanity ? I have none.
I know of no unerring, infallible, and safe rule or standard,
applicable to all cases. The only logical and philosophic mode
of procedure in doubtful cases of mental alienation, is to compare
the mind of the lunatic at the period of his suspected insanity
with its prior natural and healthy condition: in other words, to
consider the intellect in relation to itself, and to no artificial a
priori test. Each individual case must be viewed in its' own
relations. It is clear that such is the opinion of the judges, not-
withstanding they maintained as a test of responsibility a know-
ledge of right and wrong. Can any other conclusion be drawn
from the language used by the judges when propounding in the
House of Lords their view of insanity in connexion with crime ?
" The facts,' they say, " of each particular case must of neces-
sity present themselves with endless variety and ivitli every shade
of difference in each case; and as it is their duty to declare the
law upon each particular case, upon facts proved before them,
and after hearing arguments of counsel thereon, they deem it at
once impracticable, and at the same time dangerous to the admi-
nistration of justice, if it were practicable, to attempt to make
LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY. 24:5
/
minute applications of the principles involved in the answers
given by thern to the questions proposed. I his is a safe, judi-
cious, and philosophic mode of investigating these painful cases ;
and if strictly adhered to, the ends of justice would he secured,
and the requirements of science satisfied
In considering the question ot modified responsibility in con-
nexion with these cases of alleged insanity, we should never lose
sidit of the fact, that, even if a lunatic be fully exonerated and
acquitted in consequence of bis state of mind, he is doomed to
linger out the remainder of his miserable existence in the criminal
wards of a public lunatic asylum. .
To talk of a person escaping the extreme penalty of the law
on the plea of insanity, as one being subjected to no kind or
degree of punishment, is a perfect mockery of truth and perver-
sion of language. Suffer no punishment! He is exposed to
the severest pain and torture of body and mind that can be in-
flicted upon a human creature short of being publicly strangled
upon the gallows. If the fact be doubted, let a visit be paid to
that dreadful den at Bethlehem Hospital?
" Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace
And rest can never dwell, hope never come,
That comes to all"?
where the criminal portion of the establishment are confined like
wild beasts in an iron cage! ? . i
Much has been said of the deterring effects of capital punish-
ment I do not doubt its having some effect in preventing
crime; but I incline to the opinion, that, if the real condition
of those confined as criminal lunatics was well understood
(assuming the insane to be amenable to the fear of punish-
ment) it would act more potently as a deterring agent than
any apprehension they might feel at the prospect of a public
execution.
It was the opinion of Eeccaria that the impression made by
any punishment was in proportion to its duration, and not to
its intensity. " Our sensibility," he observes, " is more readily
and permanently affected by slight but reiterated attacks than by
a violent but transient affection. For this reason, the putting
nn offender to death forms a less effectual check to the com-
mission of crimes than the spectacle of a man kept in a
state of confinement, and employed in hard labour to make
some reparation, by his exertions, for the injury he has inflicted
011 society.'
In judicially estimating cases of crime connected with alleged
conditions of insanity, it is our duty always to bear in mind, that,
if an error be committed on the side of undue severity, it never
.can be remedied.
246' ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
No reparation can be made for so great an injury?for so
serious an act of injustice. If a criminal should be unjustly
acquitted on the plea of insanity (and I admit such cases have
occurred), a degree of injury is undoubtedly done to society, and
the confidence in the equitable administration of justice is, to
an extent, shaken. But can a judicial mistake like this for
one moment be compared with the serious and fatal error of
consigning an irresponsible creature to a cruel and ignominious
death ?
It is well observed by Bentham, that?
" The minimum of punishment is more clearly marked than its
maximum. "What is too little is more clearly observed than what is
too much. What is not sufficient is easily seen ; but it is not possible
so exactly to distinguish an excess. An approximation only can be
obtained. The irregularities in the force of temptations compel the
legislator to increase his punishments until they are not merely suffi-
cient to restrain the ordinary desires of men, but also the violence of
their desires when unusually excited. The greatest danger lies in an error
on the minimum side, because in this case the punishment is ineffica-
cious ; but this error is least likely to occur, a slight degree of atten-
tion sufficing for its escape ; and when it does exist, it is, at the same
time, clear and manifest, and easy to be remedied. An error on the
maximum side, on the contrary, is that to which legislators and men
in general are naturally inclined?antipathy, or a want of compassion
for individuals who are represented as dangerous and vile, pushes them
onward to an undue severity. It is on this side, therefore, that we
should take the most precautions, as on this side there has been shown
the greatest disposition to err."
