Dr E. Brown-Sequard, On the Physiology and Pathology of the Nervous System
============================================================================

(With an Illustration of an Epileptic Guinea-pig.)
The great interest which has been excited among the profession, in
London, by Dr E. Brown-Sequard's Lectures on the Ph}rsiology and
Pathology of the Nervous System, recently delivered, first at St.
Bartholomew's Hospital, and subsequently at the Royal College of
Surgeons, has only been commensurate with their importance.
Dr E. Brown-Sequard has been known for several years as a dis-
tinguished and very successful experimental physiologist; but he has
not, perhaps, been so well known and appreciated in this country as he
would have been, from the fact that his researches have been published
in a somewhat disconnected fashion in sundry American, French, and
English journals. Hence it has been difficult for many to obtain
access to the whole of his writings, and it has never been easy to
ascertain the full extent of his researches upon any particular subject.
The lectures which he has recently given in London have been
devoted to a summary of his principal researches on the nervous
system ; and the majority of the experiments by which he seeks to
prove the opinions he entertains were exhibited on the living animal
during the course of the lectures.
Apart from their subject, Dr Brown-Sequard's lectures wereof singular
interest as a psychological study. Although born in a British colony,
and now an American citizen, Dr Brown-Sequard is by maternity
half, and by predilection and language wholly, a Frenchman. Speak-
ing English somewhat imperfectly, it might be thought that he would
appear at some disadvantage before an English audience; but the
vigour of his address and the precision of his descriptions quickly
caused the listener to lose sight of any imperfections which might
arise from the want of a complete mastery of the English tongue.
Indeed, the mind of the lecturer seemed to be almost the more
attractively and clearly set forth from the very shortcomings of the
guise in which it was shown.
The steady, unfaltering observation,?the careful precautions against
error, either from the mind or from the senses,?the checks ever inter-
posed during research, not as stumbling-blocks, but as marks from
which to try-back (so to speak), and re-examine, and confirm the
truthfulness of the course already run,-?the unwearied perseverance,
and yet the quiet, soul-warming enthusiasm, which became apparent
ii DR. BROWN-SEQUARD ON THE PHYSIOLOGY AND
during the course of the lectures, formed a rare and most instructive
study and lesson.
The true character of Dr Brown-Sequard's researches on the
nervous system can only be fully appreciated by a reference to the
original memoirs in which they were made known. Many of these
memoirs cannot, however, be readily obtained ; but the projected pub-
lication of the lectures delivered at the Royal College of Surgeons
will probably soon place a detailed and connected account of these
researches within the reach of most persons.
In this article we propose to give a brief summary of the principal
results of Dr Brown-Sequard's more interesting and important
researches on the nervous system.
I. (a) It is generally believed by physiologists that the conductors
of sensitive impressions in the spinal cord decussate either in the
medulla oblongata alone, or in that ganglionic centre, the pons va-
rolii, the corpora quadrigemina, and the crura cerebri,?these structures
forming the so-called Isthmus of the Encephalon. Numerous experi-
ments performed by Dr Brown Sequard have shown that " the impres-
sions made on one side of the body are transmitted to the sensorium by
the opposite side of the spinal cordand that, consequently, the sen-
sitive fibres coming from the trunk and the limbs do not decussate in
the medulla oblongata, or the Isthmus of the Encephalon.
The following experiments seem to prove fully the crossed trans-
mission of sensations in the spinal cord. (1) If a lateral half (i.e.,
the posterior and the antero-lateral columns and the grey matter of
one side of the spinal cord) is divided transversely at the level of the
tenth costal vertebra, on a mammal, it is soon evident that the sensi-
bility is much diminished in the posterior limb opposite to the side of
the section. On the contrary, the sensibility, instead of being lost,
appears much increased in the posterior limb on the side where the
section has been made. (2) If, instead of one transversal section of
the spinal cord, two, three, or many more are made on the same lateral
half of that organ, the same results are obtained. (3) If, instead of
mere sections, a removal of a part of a lateral half of the spinal cord
is effected, the same results are still obtained. (4) If a longitudinal
section is made on the part of the spinal cord giving nerves to the
posterior extremity, so as to divide that part into two lateral halves,
then it is found that sensibility is completely lost in the two posterior
limbs, although voluntary movements take place in them. (5) If a
similar separation of two lateral halves of the spinal cord is made on
the whole part supplying nerves to the anterior limbs, then it is found
that sensibility is lost in both these limbs, and that it is only slightly
diminished in the posterior limbs. (6) If the same operation is done
PATHOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. Ill
as in the preceding experiment, and afterwards if a transversal division
is made on one of the lateral halves, in the place where it is separated
from the other, then it is found that the posterior limb on the side of
the transversal section remains sensible, and that the other posterior
limb loses its sensibility.
By these experiments the crossing of the sensitive nervous fibres in
the cord is very clearly shown. The last three experiments demon-
strate directly the crossing; and the transversal sections of a lateral
half of the cord prove that sensibility is much diminished in the side
of the body opposite to that of the section, consequently they prove
also that there is a crossing of a great part of the sensitive fibres.
Numerous cases of injury or disease of a lateral half of the spinal
cord in man are on record, in which, while palsy existed on the side of
the injury, there was also a greater or less degree of hyperesthesia on
the same side, and anesthesia existed on the opposite side. These
cases, which were previously regarded as being anomalous and inex-
plicable, are now fully explained by Dr Brown-Sequard's researches,
and they form most weighty evidence in favour of his conclusions.
Further, Dr Brown-Sequard argues that?
"If the crossing of the sensitive-nerve fibres does not take place in the
spinal cord, it must take place somewhere in the medulla oblongata and pons
varolii. If it takes place in the medulla oblongata and the pons, what must
we find in cases where an alteration exists only in one side of these nervous
centres ? There must evidently be a diminution of sensibility on both sides of
the body, because many fibres belonging to the two sides must necessarily be
altered or divided. Let us suppose, for instance, a tumour, as large as a
walnut, having altered or destroyed one of the sides of the pons varolii (there
are many such cases on record); and let us admit that it is the left side. Now,
in this side there are the sensitive fibres of the left side of the body, which
have not yet made their decussation, and which make it in the pons, or a little
forwards, between the corpora quadrigemina or crura cerebri. These fibres are
altered or divided, and, in consequence, the left side of the body must lose a
part of its sensibility. But the fibres coming from the right side of the body,
and which have made their crossing in the medulla oblongata, and also the
fibres from the right side which pass in the pons from the right to the left,
must be altered or divided, and, in consequence, the right side of the body
must lose a part of its sensibility; so that the two sides of the body, in this
hypothesis, must have a diminution of sensibility. A like reasoning might be
applied to what must take place when the disease exists in one side of the
medulla oblongata, admitting that the decussation of sensitive fibres takes
place mostly there; and the same thing might be said also for the parts
anterior to the pons varolii, if it were admitted that there takes place the
greatest part of the decussation of the sensitive-nerve fibres. Let us now see,
then, what are the facts. In almost all the cases where a disease has existed
on one side of the medulla oblongata, the pons, &c., there has been a loss or a
diminution of sensibility on the opposite side of the body, and no diminution of
sensibility on the same side. In cases where there has been an alteration on
both sides (in one of the above-named nervous centres), but greater in one than,
in the other, sensibility was lost in the side of the body opposite to the side of
a 2
iv DR. BROWN-SEQUARD ON THE PHYSIOLOGY AND
the nervous centre which was most altered, and only diminished on the side of
the body opposite to the side less altered in the nervous centre."
The increase of sensibility which occurs when a transversal section
of the spinal cord in an animal is made, in the posterior limb on the
side of the section, is a very interesting phenomenon. Its early deve-
lopment is due, in part, to absorption of oxygen from the atmosphere
by the exposed spinal cord; but the cause of the hyperesthesia, as de-
pendent upon the injury done to the spinal cord, is, according to Dr.
Brown-Sequard, paralysis of the vascular nerves. The palsied blood-
vessels dilate, more blood is admitted to them, nutrition becomes more
active, and, as a consequence, the vital properties, both of nerves and
muscles, are increased. The effects, indeed, upon the circulation and
nutrition of the parts below and upon the same side as a transversal
section of the cord, are similar in character to those observed after
section of the sympathetic nerve in the neck. It is worthy of remark,
that the hypersesthetic condition of the paralysed parts continues so
long as the animal lives, and the functions of the injured cord are not
restored.*
(b) The posterior columns of the spinal cord do not perform that
important part in the transmission of sensitive impressions to the
encephalon which some physiologists teach. Sensation is not destroyed
by division of the posterior columns, and their integrity does not
prevent loss of sensation. On the other hand, so long as a small por-
tion of the central grey matter of the cord remains intact, sensi-
tive impressions are transmitted to the encephalon; but complete
division of the central grey matter deprives all parts below the
section of all (save a very obscure) sensibility. Again, any injury of
the antero-lateral columns does not affect the transmission of sensitive
impressions in the cord. Hence it follows (as was partly surmised by
Dr Todd) that the central grey matter of the cord is the principal
conductor of sensitive impressions from the trunk and limbs to the
encephalon.
After, however, complete division of the central grey matter of the
cord, certain sensitive impressions are still transmitted, although very
obscurely, to the brain from the parts below the section; and Dr.
Brown-Sequard believes that the anterior columns contribute positively,
though but very little, to the transmission of sensitive impressions.
This property seems to be possessed by a thin layer forming the sur-
* " Experimental Researches applied to Physiology and Pathology." By E.
Brown-Sequard. New York. 1853. c. xx. This work consists of a series of
papers reprinted from the "Philadelphia Medical Examiner."?"Experimental
and Clinical Researches on the Physiology and Pathology of the Spinal Cord, and
some other parts of the Nervous Centres." 8vo. Richmond (U.S.). 1855.?"On
the Spinal Cord as a Leader for Sensibility and Voluntary Movements."?Proceed-
ings of the Royal Society," vol. viii. p. 591.
PATHOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. V
face of these columns in contact with the grey matter. The fibres of
this layer are totally deprived of sensibility.*
According to Dr Brown-Sequard, sensitive impressions are trans-
mitted to the encephalon in the following manner:?
" At their arrival in the spinal marrow, the sensitive impressions pass by the
posterior columns, the posterior grev horns, and probably by the lateral cords.
In these different parts of the spinal cord the sensitive impressions mount or
descend (it may be shown that they will pass either upwards or downwards in
the posterior columns), and after a short tract towards the encephalon or in
the opposite direction, they quit these parts to enter the grey central substance,
in which, or by which, they are finally transmitted to the enceplialon."f
(c) When the spinal cord is cut slowly across from behind forwards,
a gradual augmentation of sensibility is observed in all the parts
below the incision until a certain limit is attained (the centre of the
cord), beyond which limit, as the incision is advanced, sensibility
diminishes gradually until it is extinguished. The changes in degree
of sensibility occur simultaneously in all the parts below the
incision.
When the spinal cord is divided gradually from side to side, the
changes in degree of sensibility which follow in the parts belovv the
division also occur simultaneously, and in an equal degree, in all the
parts affected.
From these experiments it follows that the conductive elements of
sensitive impressions are not disposed in columns or layers, each of
which is connected with a definite portion of the skin, the muscles, &c.
(as has been supposed by some physiologists); for if this were the ar-
rangement, on a gradual section of the cord, a notable diminution of
sensibility would be observed in some parts of the skin, or in some
groups of muscles, &c., below the section, other parts of the skin and
other groups of muscles being unaffected.
It results from Dr Brown-Sequard's experiments, that every portion
of the recipient and conductive elements of any segment of the spinal
cord, takes a part in the reception and conduction of sensitive impres-
sions from every portion of the body with which it is connected. For
example, the different conductive elements proceeding from the surface
of the anterior and from the surface of the posterior parts of the body,
as well as the conductive elements of the intermediate parts, are dis-
tributed in all the conductive parts of the spinal cord, before and behind.
The conductive elements proceeding, also, from the external surface of
the thigh or arm, and from the internal surface of these members, as
* Tbe property of being sensitive and that of conveying sensitive impressions are
distinct one from the other; nerve-fibres employed to convey sensitive impressions
may be deprived of sensibility.
+ " Comptes Rendus des Stances et Mdmoires de la Socidt6 de Biologie," t. xii.
1854.?" Proceedings of the Royal Society," vol. viii. p. 591.
VI DR. BROWN-SEQUARD ON THE PHYSIOLOGY AND
well as from the intermediate parts, are distributed in all the conduc-
tive portions of the spinal marrow, transversely, in the lateral half of
the opposite site. On the other hand, if a very limited zone of skin he
imagined?a zone represented, it may be supposed, by a thousand con-
ductive elements in the spinal marrow?these one thousand elements
are disseminated in a lateral half of this nervous centre in such a
fashion that they are present everywhere?before, behind, in the
middle, near or far from the borders of the zone by which the trans-
mission of sensitive impressions is effected in this organ.
In short, the smallest portion of the conductive zone, in a lateral
half of the spinal cord, contains the conductive elements of sensitive
impressions proceeding from every point of the body on the opposite
side, placed below this little portion of the cord. Again, the impres-
sions proceeding from every portion of a lateral half of the body are
transmitted to the enceplialon by conductive elements distributed in
every portion of the conductive zone of the lateral half of the spinal
marrow on the opposite side.
These data explain how it happens that sensibility is so rarely lost
in cases of softening or of other alterations of the spinal cord, because
so long as a healthy portion of the conductive elements of the cord
remains, sensitive impressions will be transmitted from the parts of
the body which are situated below the lesion in the cord. These data
also explain why, in cases of hyperesthesia or of anaesthesia of different
degrees, dependent upon lesions of the spinal cord, the increase or
diminution of sensibility is found almost equally distributed every-
where in the parts which are situated below the seat of the lesion.
Anaesthesia or hyperesthesia which is limited to a small portion of
the extremities, or trunk, is dependent upon a lesion of the enceplialon,
or of a nerve, and not of the spinal cord.*
(d) In mammals, birds, and other animals, after a transverse section
of a lateral half of the spinal cord, voluntary motion is not entirely lost
in the parts situated on the same side below the sections. In these animals
there can be little doubt that a few motor fibres decussate in the spinal
cord. There is no evidence of the existence of such a decussation in
man. In him the voluntary motor fibres decussate in the medulla oblon-
gata. If the decussation took place in the pons varolii, as stated by
Valentin, Longet, and others, disease of the pons would cause symp-
toms different from those ordinarily observed in affections of that
portion of the nervous centres. For example, if one-half of the pons
varolii were diseased, and the decussation of voluntary motor fibres
* "Nouvelle Reolierches sur la Physiologie de la Moelle fipinifere," par Dr E.
Brown-Sequard.?"Journal de la Physiologie de l'Honime et des Animaux," public
sous la direction du Dr E. Brown-Sequard, No. 1, p. 139.
PATHOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. VII
took place in that organ, both sides of the body would be partially
paralysed. But such is not the case, for the paralysis which is occa-
sioned by disease of one-half of the pons varolii is confined to one side
of the body.
Dr Brown-S6quard considers that the voluntary motor nerve-fibres
are distributed in the spinal cord in the following manner:?
The anterior pyramids of the medulla oblongata contain most of
the voluntary motor nerve-fibres. In the cervical region of the spinal
cord, the voluntary motor nerve-fibres are mostly in the lateral
columns and the anterior grey cornua. In the dorsal and lumbar
regions of the spinal cord, these nerve-fibres are in the anterior columns
and in the grey matter.
There can be no doubt that the whole of the voluntary motor nerve-
fibres decussate in the medulla oblongata; but the whole of the fibres
of the anterior columns of the cord do not decussate there, some passing
on without decussation towards the encephalon. These fibres, Dr.
Brown-Sequard regards as being motor, but not voluntary motor, and
he believes that fibres of this character exist plentifully in the en-
cephalon. He derives his principal reason for this conclusion from
the pathological fact that convulsion may be caused on one side of the
body by the same encephalic lesion which has caused paralysis on the
opposite side.*
(<?) Dr Brown-Sequard's views on the crossed transmission of sen-
sitive impressions in the spinal cord throw great additional light upon
paralytic affections. If it be assumed that the sensitive nerve-fibres
of the trunk and limbs decussate in great part, if not wholly, in the
spinal cord, and not in the isthmus of the encephalon; and if it be
also assumed that the voluntary motor nerve-fibres decussate in the
medulla oblongata,?then it would follow that, according to the seat of
an alteration in the cerebro-spinal axis producing a paralysis, three
different kinds of paralysis may exist:?
" (1) The alteration being in any part of the encephalon except the inferior
portion of the medulla oblongata, the paralysis of voluntary motion and sensi-
bility will exist on the side of the body opposite to the side of the disease.
" (2) The alteration occupying an entire lateral half of the inferior portion of
the medulla oblongata at the level of the decussation of the pyramids, the
paralysis of voluntary movement exists on both sides of the body, but incom-
plete ; and the paralysis of sensibility exists only on one side, and it is that
opposite to the side of the disease.
" (3) The alteration occupying the entire thickness of a portion of a lateral
half of the spinal cord, the parts of the body situated behind it, at the same
side, are paralysed of voluntary movement, and the corresponding parts on the
other side are paralysed of sensibility."!
"^Experimental and Clinical Researches on the Physiology and Pathology of
the Spinal Cord."?" Proceedings of the Royal Society," vol. viii. p. 591.
T " Experimental and Clinical Researches on the Physiology and Pathology of
the Spinal Cord." ^
Vlll DR. BROWN-SEQUARD ON THE PHYSIOLOGY AND
(f) Paralysis of sensibility occasionally exists in different parts of
both sides of the body, produced by an alteration in only one side of
the spinal cord. Three different kinds of paralysis may be described
as produced by an alteration in a lateral half of the cord, and all cha-
racterized by the existence of paralysis of movement on one side of the
body, and a more or less extended paralysis of sensibility on the two
sides of the body. (1) If an alteration able to produce paralysis
exists in the whole thickness of a lateral half of the cord, in the entire
extent of the part from which come all the nerves going to one of the
upper limbs, there will be paralysis both of movement and sensibility
in that limb, and paralysis of movement in the trunk and the inferior
limbs on the same side of the body, and, besides, paralysis of sensibility
in the opposite side of the body (limbs and trunk). (2) If an altera-
tion able to produce paralysis exists in the whole thickness and length
of a lateral half of the cord which gives off all the nerves going to one
of the inferior limbs, there will be paralysis both of movement and of
sensibility in that limb, and only paralysis of sensibility in the oppo-
site limb. (3) If an altex-ation able to produce paralysis exists in
the whole thickness and in the whole length of a lateral half of the
cord, the symptoms will be a paralysis of movement in the side of the
body corresponding to the side altered in the cord, and a paralysis of
sensibility on the two sides of the body (neck, trunk, and the four
limbs) .*
(ff) Local paralysis of sensibility consequent upon an injury of the
back, and on the side of the injury, is probably due to undue stretching
of the roots of the posterior spinal nerves.
II. The medulla oblongata is usually regarded as the nervous centre
of the respiratory movements, and as being, of all portions of the
nervous system, that which is most essential to life. It would seem
probable, therefore, that the removal of such an organ, even in cold-
blooded animals, would be followed by speedy death. Such is not,
however, the result of the operation; and Dr Brown-Sequard ascer-
tained that batrachia would live, under favourable conditions, more
than four months after the loss of the medulla oblongata. During
all that time the animals operated on remained seemingly in good
health.
The duration of life after ablation of the medulla oblongata differs
in different species of animals; and it may be reckoned by months
for batrachia, by weeks for some reptilia, by days for other reptilia
and for fishes, by hours for hybernating mammals, and by minutes
(three to forty-six) for birds and non-hybernating mammals.
* "Experimental and Clinical Researches on the Physiology and Pathology of
the Spinal Cord."
PATHOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. IX
In animals deprived of the medulla oblongata, death is principally
caused by insufficiency of respiration.*
Flourens, from the results of certain experiments which he made,
arrived at the conclusion that the little Y-shaped collection of grey
matter which is situated at the neb of the calamus, in the fourth ven-
tricle, is the prime centre of the respiratory mechanism; and also, that
this seemingly insignificant spot is essential to the integrity of the
nervous system, and of life itself. Hence he called this little collection
of grey matter the " ncend vital." Dr Brown-Sequard has made a
series of experiments with direct reference to Flourens' opinions on
the "noeud vital" and the following interesting results have been
arrived at:?
(1) Death is not always an immediate result of ablation of the
" noeud vital." (2) When death occurs suddenly after this ablation,
it is due in part to the sudden stoppage of the movements of the
heart. (3) Irritation of the parts in the vicinity of the "noeud vital"
as well as ablation of that point, produces sometimes arrest or enfeeble-
ment of the movements of the heart. (4) After section of the
pneumogastric nerves, ablation of the " noeud vital" occasions a sudden
stoppage of the movements of the heart. (5) It is not in consequence of
the absence of the " noeud vital" that the respiratory movements become
sometimes arrested after ablation of that little organ, but rather in
consequence of an irritation of the medulla oblongata of the same
kind as follows galvanization of the pneumogastric nerves. (6) Irrita-
tion of the parts adjacent to the "noeud vital" sometimes causes
stoppage of the respiration, when the "noeud vital" is not injured.
(7) Respiration and circulation may continue with vigour and re-
gularity during a great number of days, after ablation of the " noeud
vital;" whence it results that the point is neither the centre of origin
of a pretended vital force, nor the prime motive centre of the respi-
ratory mechanism. (8) Voluntary movements and the functions of
the senses persist often after ablation of the " noeud vital." (9) The
" noeud vital" does not appear to be essential to life.
Dr Brown-Sequard has concluded, from his experiments upon the
medulla oblongata, that the nervous centre of the respiratory move-
ments is not limited to the parts in which modern physiologists have
almost unanimously fixed it.f
III. Dr CI. Bernard discovered the curious fact that, after section
of the sympathetic nerve in the neck, the face and the ear?particularly
the latter?on the same side as the section, became warmer and more
* " Experimental Researches applied to Physiology and Pathology," c. xvi.
"t" "Causes de Mort aprfes 1'Ablation du Noeud Vital." ? Brown-Sequard 3
"Journal de la Physiologie," No. 2.
X DR. BROWN-SEQUARD ON THE PHYSIOLOGY AND
sensitive than on the other side. Dr Brown-Sequard repeated Dr CI.
Bernard's experiments, and added several particulars to those which he
had discovered. Moreover, Dr Brown-Sequard ascertained that, after
section of a lateral half of the spinal cord in the dorsal region, phe-
nomena are observed in the posterior limb on the corresponding side,
similar in character to those observed on the side of the face after
section of the cervical sympathetic.
The following is a summary of the results of these important experi-
ments :?
Section of the Cervical Sympathetic:
its effects on the corresponding side of
the face. (CI. Bernard and Brown-
Sequard.)
1. Blood-vessels dilated (paralysed).
2. As a consequence, more blood.
3. Elevation of temperature.
4. Sensibility slightly increased.
5. Ditto, lasting longer there than
on the other side, when the animal is
chloroformized.
6. Sensibility lasting longer there
than on the other side during agony.
7. Many muscles contracted.
8. Absorption more rapid.
9. Increase of sweat and other se-
cretions.
10. Reflex movements last longer
than elsewhere after death.
11. After poisoning by strychnia the
first convulsions take place.
]2. A galvanic current too weak
to excite convulsions elsewhere may
act there.
13. The motor nerves, after death,
remain longer excitable there than on
the other side.
14. The muscles, after death, remain
longer contractile there than on the
other side.
15. The contractility of blood-ves-
sels is greater, and lasts longer.
16. The galvanic muscular current
(as ascertained with the rheoscopie
frog) is stronger, and lasts longer than
on the other side.
17. Cadaveric rigidity appears later
there than on the other side, and it
lasts longer.
18. It is easier to regenerate there
than on the other side the vital pro-
perties of nerves and muscles, by in-
Section of a lateral half of the Spinal
Cord in the Dorsal Region: its effects on
the posterior limb on the corresponding
side. (Brown-Sequard.)
1. The same effect.
2. The same effect.
3. The same effect.
4. Very much increased.
5. Lasting longer than anywhere
else during chloroformization.
6. Longer than anywhere else dur-
ing agony.
7. A state of slight contraction of
the muscles.
8. The same effect.
9. Increase of sweat.
10. The same effect.
11. The same effect.
12. The same effect.
13. The motor nerves, after death,
remain notably longer excitable there.
14. The muscles, after death, re-
main much longer contractile there.
15. The same effect.
16. The same effect (more marked).
17. Cadaveric rigidity appears no-
tably later there than elsewhere, and
lasts longer.
18. The same effect (more marked).
PATHOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. XI
jections of red blood a short time after
they have disappeared.
19. Putrefaction comes on later, and
seems to progress more slowly there
than on the other side.
19. The same effect (more marked).
The whole of these remarkable phenomena, according to Dr Brown-
Sequard, arise from paralysis of the vascular nerves, and consequent
dilatation of the blood-vessels. An increased quantity of blood finds
its way to, and is contained in, the dilated vessels, the temperature
becomes greater, nutrition is more active, and, as a consequence, the
vital properties of nerves, muscles, and blood-vessels are increased.
The side of the face opposite to that on which the sympathetic in
the neck has been divided, and the posterior limb of the side on which
the spinal cord is uninjured, in the experiments of which the foregoing
are the results, received less blood than usual, the temperature was
lessened, nutrition was less active, and the vital properties of both
nerves and muscles were diminished.*
IV. The rotatory movements which occur after injuries to certain
portions of the nervous centres have long interested physiologists.
Turning or rolling, to the one side or the other, may be occasioned by
an injury to any portion of the cerebro-spinal centres, except the cere-
bral hemispheres, the cerebellum, the corpora striata, the corpus callo-
sum, the spinal marrow, and the olfactive and optic nerves. Rolling
is ordinarily produced by injury of some parts, and turning by injury
of others ; but both kinds of movement may occur after injury of one
part of the enceplialon only. Dr Brown-Sequard believes that the
principal cause of these rotatory movements is the existence of a con-
vulsive contraction in some of the muscles on one side of the bod}''.
This convulsive contraction is found in every case of circulatory and
rotatory movement, and it is dependent upon the irritation produced
in the injured portion of the encephalon.f
V. Of all Dr Brown-Sequard's discoveries none has excited so much
interest, none is more suggestive than that in which he has shown that
certain injuries of the spinal cord, in different species of animals, are
followed, in a few weeks' time, by " epilepsy, or at least a disease re-
sembling epilepsy." This result is occasioned by the following kinds
of injury to the spinal cord: 1st. A complete transversal section of a
lateral half of this organ. 2nd. A transversal section of its two pos-
terior columns, of its posterior cornua of grey matter, and of a part
of the lateral columns. 3rd. A transversal section of either the pos-
terior columns or the lateral, or the anterior alone. 4th. A complete
* "Proceedings of the Royal Society," vol. viii. p. 594.
"Experimental Researches applied to Physiology and Pathology," c. v.
xii DR. BROWN-SEQUARD ON THE PHYSIOLOGY AND
transversal section of the whole organ. 5th. A simple puncture. Of
all these injuries, the first, the second and the fourth seem to have
more power to produce epilepsy than the others. The first particu-
larly, i.e., the section of a lateral half of the spinal cord, seems to
produce constantly this disease in animals that live longer than three
or four weeks after the operation. After a section of either the lateral,
the anterior, or the posterior columns alone, epilepsy rarely appears;
and it seems that in the cases where it has been produced, there has
been a deeper incision than usual, and that part of the grey matter
has been attained. In other experiments, few in number, section of
the central grey matter (the white being hardly injured) has been
followed by this convulsive disease. It has occasionally, but very
rarely, occurred after a single puncture of the cord. It is particularly
after injuries to the part of the spinal cord which extends from the
seventh or eighth dorsal vertebra to the third lumbar, that epilepsy
appears.
The affection usually begins during the third or fourth week after
the injury. At first the fit consists only in a spasm of the muscles of
the face and neck, either on one or the two sides, according to the
transversal extent of the injury. After a few days the fit becomes
more complete, and the convulsions extend to every portion of the
body which is not paralysed. The parts convulsed vary greatly
according to the seat of the injury.
The " convulsions may come on spontaneously or after certain exci-
tations. The most interesting fact concerning these fits is that it is
possible, and even very easy, to produce them by two modes of irrita-
tion. If we take two guinea-pigs, one not having been submitted to
any injury of the spinal cord, and the other having had this organ
injured, we find, in preventing them from breathing for two minutes,
convulsions come 011 in both; but if they are allowed to breathe again,
the first one recovers almost at once, while the second continues to
have violent convulsions for two or three minutes, and sometimes
more. There is another mode of giving fits to the animals which
have had an injury to the spinal cord. Pinching of the skin in certain
parts of the face and neck is always followed by a fit. If the injury
to the spinal cord consists only in a transversal section of a lateral
half, the side of the face and neck which, when irritated, may produce
the fit, is on the side of the injury; i.e., if the lesion is on the right
side of the cord, it is the right side of the face and neck which are
able to cause convulsions, and vice versa. If the two sides of the cord
have been injured, the two sides of the face and neck have the faculty
of producing fits, when they are irritated. In other portions of the
body but a portion of the face and neck has this faculty." The por-
PATHOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. X11L
tion of the face and neck having this power is contained within a
zone limited by the four following lines: one uniting the ear to the
eye; a second from the eye to the middle of the length of the inferior
maxillary bone; a third, which unites the inferior extremity of the
second line to the angle of the inferior jaw ; and a fourth, which forms
half a circle and goes from this angle to the ear, and the convexity of
which approaches the shoulder. The property which the portion of
skin included within the lines here described, possesses of occasioning
fits on being irritated cannot be ascribed to excessive sensibility,
because, when the injury exists only in one of the lateral halves of the
cord, the face and neck on the other side have not the power of pro-
ducing fits, whatever is the degree of irritation upon them; in the
same case, the posterior limbs on the side where the cord is injured, is
in a state of hyperesthesia, and nevertheless, the most violent irrita-
tions upon this limb do not produce fits ; and it is sometimes sufficient
to touch the face or the neck, or even to blow upon them, to produce
the fits.
Dr Brown-Sequard thinks that these fits ought to be considered as
epileptic.
"The following description," he writes, "of these convulsions will show
that, if they are not positively epileptic, they are at least epileptiform. When
the attack begins, the head is drawn first, and sometimes violently towards
the shoulder by the contraction of the muscles of the neck, 011 the side of the
irritation; the mouth is drawn open by the contraction of the muscles of the
neck which are inserted upon the lower jaw; and the muscles of the face and
eye (particularly the orbicularis) contract violently. All these contractions
usually occur simultaneously. Frequently at the same time, or very nearly so,
the animal suddenly cries with a peculiar hoarse voice, as if the passage of air
was not free through the vocal chords, spasmodically contracted. Then the
animal falls, sometimes on the irritated side, sometimes on the other, and then
all the muscles of the trunk and limbs that are not paralysed become the seat
of convulsions, alternately clonic and tonic. The head is alternately drawn upon
one or the other side. All the muscles of the neck, eyes, and tongue contract
alternately. In the limbs, when the convulsions are clonic, there are alternative
contractions in the flexor and extensor muscles. Respiration takes place irre-
gularly, on account of the convulsions of the respiratory muscles. Almost
always there is an expulsion of faecal matters, and often of urine. Sometimes
there is an erection of the penis, and even ejaculation of semen."
These fits differ in certain particulars from epilepsy in man. The
animals occasionally appear to retain their sensibility during the fits ;
no foam is found at the mouth; and the fits most commonly consist
of a series of convulsive attacks, in the intervals of which the animals
can rise and stand upon their feet. But these differences, Dr Brown-
Sequard thinks, ought not to prevent our considering the fits as true
epileptic fits. " Not only the convulsions resemble those of true
epilepsy, but the fits are not mere accidents; and they come by series
xiv DR. BROWN-SEQUARD ON THE PHYSIOLOGY AND
of two or three, once a-week, once a-day, or even ten or twenty times
a-day, and the disease lasts for years. Besides, we find, after long
and violent fits, that these animals are, for a time, in a state of drowsi-
ness, like men after epileptic convulsions. It seems rational to con-
clude, from this discussion, that if the convulsions of these animals are
not truly epileptic, they are at least epileptiform."
We have recently had frequent opportunities of witnessing these
epileptiform seizures in a guinea-pig, a lateral half of the spinal cord
of which, in the lower part of the dorsal region, had been completely
divided, transversely, by Dr Brown-Sequard, about four months ago.
The wound in the vertebral column is healed up, fresh osseous
matter having been deposited, and voluntary motion has been par-
tially regained in the leg which has been paralysed by the section of
the cord. The paralysed leg is highly hypersesthetic, while in the
opposite limb complete antesthesia exists (an interesting illustration
of the crossing of the sensitive nerve-fibres in the spinal cord). Slight
irritation upon the skin of the face and neck within the small space*
described by Dr Brown-Sequard, immediately excites a convulsive
attack. No better description of the fit can be given than that which
has been given by Dr Brown-Sequard, and which we have already
quoted. The great interest of the phenomena connected with these
convulsive attacks, has led us to conceive that a sketch of this pig, in a
state of repose, and also a sketch of the animal in one of the most
ordinary phases of a convulsive seizure, might prove interesting to
those of our readers who have not had an opportunity of witnessing
Dr Brown-Sequard's experiments. In the accompanying plate (see
Frontispiece') the first figure represents the guinea-pig in a quiescent
state, the paralysed right-hand leg being protruded in a half-helpless
fashion behind the animal: in the second figure the animal is portrayed
in a moment of violent convulsion, which had been excited by pinch-
ing the skin above the angle of the right inferior jaw.
From his experiments on animals, and from pathological facts ob-
served in man, Dr Brown-Sequard has concluded that?(1) There
cannot be any doubt that in animals certain injuries to the spinal cord
frequently produce an epileptiform affection, if not true epilepsy. (2)
That in man there are a great many cases which seem to prove that
alterations of the spinal cord may cause epilepsy.
The aura epileptica in man would seem to be somewhat analogous
to the sensory condition originating in the skin and face of animals
made epileptic by injury of the spinal cord. " In them, as well as in
* This portion of the skin in all epileptic guinea-pigs is much infected with lice,
some modification either of the surface or its secretion seemingly attracting these
parasites to this point.
PATHOLOGY OF THE NEKVOUS SYSTEM. XV
man (when there is a real aura), the trunks of the nerves seem not to
possess the faculty of producing fits, whereas their ramifications in the
skin, or in the muscles, have this power. In (epileptic) animals as
well as in man, if there is an interruption of nervous transmission
between the skin and the nervous centres, fits are no more seen, or at
least their number is very much diminished. Many cases of epilepsy
with an evident aura epileptica, are on record, in which there has been
either a diminution of the fits, or more frequently a complete cure,
after the interruption of nervous transmission between the starting
point of the aura and the nervous centres. In these cases, the follow-
ing various means have been employed with complete or partial
success, either against the aura epileptica or against its production:
1st, ligature of a limb or a finger; 2nd, sections of one or more nerves,
and amputation of a limb, or of other parts of the body ; 3rd, elonga-
tion of muscles which are the seat of the aura; 4th, cauterization, by
various means, of the part of the skin from which the aura originates."
From what occurs in animals after an injury to the spinal cord, and
from some cases observed in man, it is not improbable that the
existence of a particular spot capable of producing fits, when irritated,
is not uncommon in epileptic patients. The existence of this spot may
not be known to the patient, and it may be found only after a careful
search.
In epileptic animals the brain is not essential to epileptiform convul-
sions. After it has been taken away the fit may be produced almost
as easily as before the operation, by pinching the skin of the face and
neck. Epilepsy in these animals has its seat in either the pons varolii,
the medulla oblongata, or the spinal cord, or in these three parts
together.
Dr Brown-Sequard believes that epilepsy depends in great measure
on an increased reflex excitability of certain parts of the cerebro-spinal
axis. Many of his experiments, he thinks, " have shown that the reflex
faculty of the cerebro-spinal axis is composed, as the muscular contrac-
tility is, of two elementary vital properties, one of which he calls the
reflex excitability, and the other the reflex force. The cerebro-spinal
axis may have a great reflex force, and very little excitability. It may,
on the contrary, have an excessive reflex excitability with very little
reflex force. In almost all epileptics, if not in all, the reflex excita-
bility is increased, while the reflex force is rarely above, and often
below, its normal degree."
The sudden cessation of the functions of the brain in epilepsy, may
be explained by supposing that the branches of the sympathetic going
to the blood-vessels of the brain proper, suffer from some irritation.
As a consequence of this irritation, contraction occurs in these blood-
xvi DR. BROWN-SEQUARD ON THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
vessels, particularly in the small arteries. This contraction expelling
the blood, the brain proper loses at once its functions, just as it does
in complete syncope. The continuation of insensibility after the cessa-
tion of convulsions is due to, and in proportion to, the deficient
oxygenation of the blood supplied to the brain proper.
From a careful consideration of the phenomena observed in epileptic
animals and in the epilepsy of man, Dr Brown-Sequard lays down
the following propositions (among others) for the treatment of the
disease : (1) The first thing to be done in a case of epilepsy is to
find out if its origin is peripheric. The state of all the organs must
be inquired into as completely as possible. (2) If it be ascertained
that epilepsy is of peripheric origin, proper means must be employed to
separate the nervous centres from that origin, or to remove the cause
of the excitation entirely. Leaving aside what relates to the viscera,
the application of ligatures ought to be tried first. (3) If ligatures
fail, this is no reason for despairing of other means having the same
object. The nerve animating either the part of the skin from which
the aura originates, or the muscle or muscles which are first convulsed,
must be laid bare, and sulphuric ether thrown upon it. This might,
perhaps, be sufficient to cure the affection; if it is not, then the nerve
must be divided. (4) Sometimes blisters, setons, caustics, &c., in the
neighbourhood of a part which is the origin of an aura, may be suffi-
cient to cure, but these means have not the same efficacy as the appli-
cation of a red-hot iron. (5) The best means of treating epilepsy
seem to consist in the application of a series of moxas along the spine,
and particularly the nape of the neck. (G) The nutrition of the nervous
centres may be modified, and thereby epilepsy cured, principally by
the medicines which act on the blood-vessels, such as strychnia, but
particularly by those which determine contractions in these vessels,
such as atropia, ergot of rye, &c. (7) Hygienic means are as im-
portant as the treatment, and sleeplessness ought to be as much com-
batted as the disease itself.*
In the preceding article we have endeavoured to give in a small
compass a correct notion of the character and results of Dr Brown-
Sequard's more interesting and important researches on the Nervous
System ; and in order to do this more completely, we have avoided any
critical examination of his conclusions and opinions.
* "Researches on Epilepsy." (Republished from the "Boston Medical and
Surgical Journal.") Boston (U.S.). 1857.
