Notes on Some of the Asylums in France
=======================================

Art. V.?
?THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY,
AND FRANCE, &c.
BY J. T. AELIDGE, M.B., A.B. (LOND.)

The very excellent and interesting Notes, by Dr. Webster, on
many of the public asylums of France, especially those of its
northern half, have made the readers of the " Psychological
Journal" acquainted with the system of treatment and manage-
ment, and the principles of construction generally pursued in that
country; there remain, however, several asylums in its southern
and eastern parts hitherto undescribed, yet well worthy of exami-
nation and description.
The French law requires, as pointed out by Dr. Webster, in
his first contribution to this Journal (Vol. III. 1850, p. 530), each
department to provide an asylum for the reception and treatment
of its insane paupers; or to arrange, under the sanction of the
Minister of the Interior, with a public or private asylum in the
same or a neighbouring department for their reception; or, in
certain cases, to appropriate a separate division to them in civil
hospitals, provided there be sufficient accommodation for not less
than fifty patients. For further information on the French laws
affecting asylums and their administration, we would, to avoid
unnecessary repetition, refer the reader to Dr. Webster's Notes,
particularly to the page above quoted, and to Vol. V. p. 376.
The departmental authorities have availed themselves, in pro-
viding for their insane poor, of each of the three modes just now
cited. In several departments buildings specially constructed for
the reception and treatment of the insane have of late years been
constructed; in others, again, ancient religious houses and hos-
pices for the poor have been converted to the purpose; whilst in
others some portion of the general hospitals of their principal
towns affords the only provision for their lunatics. Besides
public departmental and strictly private asylums, there are others
scattered through France belonging to religious orders, and under
their direction?for instance, those at Lyons and Bourg, apper-
taining respectively to the Brethren of St. Jean de Dieu, and the
Sisters of St. Charles.
Of the several plans for administering to the wants of the
insane, that of placing them in the wards, or in a wing of a
general hospital, is the worst. It inevitably entails all the evils
of a bad site in the midst of a large town, a less pure air, a state
of more or less complete imprisonment, enclosure by walls and
598 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
buildings, the deprivation of all cheerful views, the contiguity of
noises, the want of space for exercise and outdoor employment,
defective constructional details, and the absence of that autocracy
and unity of management which can be attained only in an
independently built and organized asylum under one head.
This plan appears to have been almost universal in France;
the insane, so far as they were looked after at all, were brought
together mostly into the hospital or the hospice of the town, and
there stowed away in the highest, the lowest, or the most out-of-
the-way rooms, wards, or vaults, where their fellow-creatures
might be least offended by their sight -or sound. Some found
their abiding place in prisons, where, if possible, their state must
have been even more deplorable than that of their fellow-sufferers
in the hospitals. It is not, however, our intention to write the
history of the French asylums as they were. Esquirol, in the
second volume of his great work (" Des Maladies Mentales,"
1838), gives an able sketch of their condition at the time he
wrote, from which some conception may be formed of the mise-
rable condition of the insane in France, although considerable
ameliorations then had been already effected.
Although the system of confining lunatics in particular wards,
or in the wings or detached buildings of general hospitals, still
prevails in France, and, to the disgrace of those large and opulent
towns of Lyons and Montpelier, yet we are happy to add, that
its evils are everywhere recognised, and that asylums in the
country are proposed to be erected in the place of the ill-suited
town establishments. Unfortunately, the foreign wars in which
France has been engaged, the domestic troubles which have
overtaken her, the recent failure of one great source of her wealth
by the vine disease, her laws of property and inheritance, and her
large armies, have, whilst increasing the number of her dependent
citizens, also increased taxes, and thereby have put it out of the
power of the central and departmental authorities?at least in
many districts?to proceed in that career of reform in asylum
construction and management which Pinel and Esquirol origi-
nated, and Ferrus and so many other worthy followers have
promoted. Nevertheless, France can now point to not a few
most admirably-constructed asylums, from which our architects
might learn some useful lessons?one at least of no little impor-
tance?viz., that our stereotyped system of wards is not essential
in asylum building, but rather a serious error, which cannot be
too soon confessed and given up.
There is one feature, which, as common to almost every French
public asylum, deserves notice here, viz., that pauper and
paying patients are received into the same institution; i.e., to use
a common phrase, they are " mixed asylums." The paupers are
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 599
provided for by a general rate; tlie paying patients aie sub-
divided into classes, according to tlie sums paid for their
maintenance.
We will not at present extend these general remarks to greater
length, but proceed with our notes on the construction and
management, medical and moral, of those asylums which we had
the opportunity of visiting; premising only that the amount of
information to be given is varied by the circumstances of the
visit, the time permitted for it, the facility for inquiring into
details, the opportunity for collecting statistics, the character of
our conductor, who at times was the chief, at others the second
physician, and at others, again, only an " internestill, in all
cases, we would most willingly acknowledge the kindness and
courtesy everywhere received, and the readiness with which infor-
mation was imparted. And, first, of?
THE ASYLUM AT MARSEILLES.
For several ages (since 1600, a.d.) the insane and other sick
persons unsuited to the general hospitals of the city were placed
in a building by themselves; and, after many vicissitudes, were
collected in the Hospital of St. Lazare, previously a house for
lepers, situated in the northern suburb, on the road to Aix. In
this place, which Ferrus calls a disgrace to the city, they re-
mained until the new asylum, about to be described, was opened
for their reception, in 1835.
So Ion0- ago as 1823, the resolution was taken to build another
asylum; *and a premium having been offered for the best plan,
that of M. Pinchot, the architect of the department, was selected.
M. Esquirol was consulted respecting the plan, and inspected it
and the proposed site in 1824; but matters were not definitively
settled until 1830, when political events again interfered to pre-
vent the plan being carried out, and it was not before 1833 that
the construction was proceeded with. It was calculated to pro-
vide accommodation for 300 patients. In the course of the next
eighteen years, the accumulation of patients and the demands for
admission were so large, that a large addition to the building
became imperative, and, in January, 1851, a new wing was com-
menced, consisting of five divisions, and capable of holding 340
inmates; and many important modifications of the original struc-
ture were proceeded with. At the period of my visit, in 1854,
other alterations and additions were in progress, and little of the
original building designed by M. Pinchot, under the auspices of
Esquirol, remained, except the section appropriated to the resi-
dences and offices of the director and other officers.
The asylum is situated about a mile and a half out of
Marseilles, beyond the Plaine St. Michel, in the Avenue St.
600 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
Pierre. It is placed in a valley ; the surrounding hills are hold
and varied in outline, and the country has much heauty. It
serves for two departments?that of the Bouches-du-Rhone,
and that of the Yar?and, at the date of my visit, contained
above six hundred patients, all of them paupers; the intention,
however, was, so soon as accommodation could he provided, to
receive also pensioners.
It is built of stone, found abundantly in the neighbourhood,
and is everywhere of only two floors. Its principle of con-
struction is that very much pursued in France, which Esquirol
so ably advocated?viz., a group of buildings surrounding a
square court, constituting hollow squares, and furnished with
internal and external corridors. These hollow squares are ar-
ranged parallel on either side a central court, in the middle of
which are placed the kitchen, scullery, baths, boiler-room, &c.,
and closing it in front, the chapel and corridor leading from it
on each side; behind, this central court is open to the garden,
although some feet above it, owing to an artificial elevation of
the ground for the proper disposition of the several structures.
In advance of the chapel is a small court, surrounded on three
sides by the buildings appropriated to the officers, and having a
corridor running around it. There is also an open corridor
of communication, extending backwards from the official resi-
dences, the entire length of the wings forming the two sides
of the .central court; and from this again, on each side, a short
corridor communicates with the kitchen.
The general disposition of the accommodation is that of
sitting, eating, and work-rooms on the ground floor, and dormi-
tories above; in the divisions for the refractory, dirty, and epi-
leptic, this rule is departed from by the construction of sleeping-
rooms on the ground floor. No general system of lighting or of
warming and ventilating is in operation. For day use there are
a dining-room, an unfurnished room called a chauffoir, and a
work-room for each division except the refractory, which has
only a refectory or dining-room.
On entering, from the official residences, the corridor of com-
munication between the several sections of each half of the insti-
tution, the first room reached is the visiting-room, in which the
patients see their friends, who are allowed to visit once a week.
It is a moderate-sized, comfortable room, furnished with tables
and chairs, and its walls papered. Continuing along the cor-
ridor, we come to a door which opens in the centre of one of the
divisions by a small hall, from which a staircase ascends in front
to the first floor, whilst a door opens on one side into the work-
room, on the other into the day-room (cliavffoir). The dining-
room is placed at right angles to the rooms just named, and can
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 601
be entered at one corner from tlie corridor, or, at its centre, from
the enclosed court belonging to the division.
On the female side are two large work-rooms, furnished with
many small tables, around which the patients were grouped in
small parties, engaged in needlework and similar occupations.
The attendant sat at one end, with a table and desk before her
slightly elevated. The only attempt at ornamentation in these
rooms consisted of a crucifix, with some other religious emblems
and artificial flowers placed against the wall above the atten-
dant's chair. On the male side the patients were employed in
shoemaking, tailoring, and carpentry: the larger number in the
two first occupations.
The day-room, or chauffoir, of each division is intended espe-
cially for use when the weather is unfavourable to out-door exer-
cise. It derives its particular name from the presence of a stove
in its centre, and is, in all other respects, little suggestive of
comfort, and devoid of inducements to use it, inasmuch as, with
the exception of a few benches, it is a bare, unfurnished room,
saving what the religious fervour of some of the patrons of the
establishment may supply in the shape of some saintly portrait
and a crucifix. Except these chauffoirs, there is no room for
the assemblage of the inmates to partake in general amuse-
ments.
The refectory, or eating-room, is only used at meal time, and,
excepting the fixed tables and benches, is equally destitute of
furniture with the day-room. In the wards for the clean and
orderly, the dining-tables are made of a polished marble slab,
supported on iron legs fixed to the floor. In the other wards
they are of wood, but covered with figured oilcloth, and irremov-
able, which gives the advantage of a smooth, polished surface,
easily cleansed. The walls here, as in the rooms generally, are
plastered and coloured.
The windows on the ground floor all look inwards upon the
enclosed court. In construction they follow the usual French
fashion, and are of sufficient size, but everywhere barred with
upright iron bars. Externally, also, are strong Venetian shut-
ters (Persiennes), which seemed to be everywhere closed; indeed,
so far as I could judge, they were rarely opened. Happily this
practice deprived the inmates of no prospect, for the view of an
enclosed court is not exhilarating, and cannot in justice be called
a prospect. Moreover, any one acquainted with the sunny sky, the
heat, and bright light of the south, will see some good reason
for darkening the rooms which the dweller in our mirky, misty
atmosphere could not surmise. Yet, withal, this shutting out
of patients from external influences, and from the cheering face
of nature, is a disadvantage and an evil, whether arising from an
i
602 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
unnecessary closure of shutters, or from the inevitable conse-
quences of the faulty system of construction of enclosed courts.
The unpleasant appearance of bars and closed Persiennes was
somewhat relieved by curtains and their appendages on the inside,
furnished to the sitting-rooms down-stairs, and to some of the
dormitories above.
One side of the block of buildings occupied by the dirty and
epileptic patients?the ground floor?is devoted to dormitories, the
floors of which are tiled, and unfurnished with carpet. The beds
are placed along the entire length of the room, leaving a central
avenue, two or three inches lower than the rest of the floor, and
bordered on either side by a stone edging. Those of our readers
who have visited the Salpetriere, at Paris, will remember that a
similar arrangement prevails there in some wards. What its pur-
pose may be I cannot conceive, although its disadvantages are
sufficiently evident,?for it forcibly recalls the arrangement of a
stable-floor, and must frequently endanger a twisting of the ankle,
a false step, or,a stumble. The division for the refractory and
noisy is the most remote from the central offices: it contains
about twenty-four single rooms, placed between the open corridor
on one, and an enclosed corridor on the other side, around two
sides of a hollow square. On a third side was the common
eating and sitting-room. The enclosed court was assigned to the
patients for exercise; it was a bare, unpavedyard, without flower-
beds. The corridors were floored in this, as in the other divisions,
with asphalte. Each single room, or cell, was furnished with a
bed fixed to the floor, and, in one corner, for the wants of the
patient when confined in it, with a thick stone, hollowed out like
the seat of a water-closet, having a utensil within the enclosed
space beneath, which could not be reached except by a small door
opened from the corridor outside, under the charge of the atten-
dants. The cells were spacious and lofty, about 13 feet square;
their window was placed high up, in size about 2by 2 feet,
without frame and unglazed, but fitted with three upright iron
bars, and externally with a strong shutter having a spring-bolt
and a drop-bar, and shut or opened from the corridor.
The doors opened outwards against the wall, and besides a lock,
were likewise furnished with heavy bolts. An opening about 9
inches square, closed by a door, served for the purpose of inspec-
tion. As the doors were flush with the wall externally, there was
necessarily a recess within the room, between the door-jambs,
equal to the thickness of the stone wall, and being bounded by
acutely cut angles, threatened danger to the patient or at-
tendant in any possible struggle during ingress or egress, and
a means of doing serious mischief to a patient so inclined.
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 603
The walls of these rooms were whitewashed, and the floors
were of asphalte or stone. No padded room existed.
At the top of the stairs, leading from the ground floor, a dor-
mitory opens right and left, the attendants' rooms being inter-
posed. On the stair-landing were a stone sink, two taps for cold,
water, and a store-closet. Except those taps (robinets), no pro-
vision was made for ablution, whether in the dormitories or
about the sitting-rooms beneath. The side of the attendants'
room, abutting on the dormitory, was fitted with a small window
for supervision,?a provision, however, of no great utility or im-
portance where, as in this case, the apartment is used only at
night, unless, indeed, the attendants are made watchers, and re-
quired to keep awake during the night?an obligation not to be
imposed upon those who have borne the burden of the Kday. A
moment's practical consideration will remove any impression which
may be entertained theoretically of the advantages of inspection
windows overlooking dormitories. For, supposing a sufficient
light is burnt in the sleeping-room to make every movement
visible, we are dealing with sleeping and sleepy attendants covered
up in bed, deep in slumber from the day's fatigue, and indulging
it is to be hoped, in an oblivion of lunatics and lunacy. To ex-
pect such to be constantly peering through this window, or to be
aroused by any rustle or movement going forward, is to expect
something contrary to human nature, and to impose a degree of
responsibility where it cannot be undertaken. Again, it is usual
to glaze such windows?a practice which directly frustrates, in a
great degree, their object, by opposing the transmission of sound;
and the chance is, especially in the case of the nurses, that for
privacy sake, the window is screened by a blind, and the practicabi-
lity of overlooking the ward completely marred. On the other
hand, the existence of the window may be said, in the accepted
phraseology of the day, to have a moral influence upon the
patients, by favouring the notion of constant supervision of their
movements; a conceivable influence and unobjectionable, if only
it does not induce their guardians to attribute a positive utilitv
to the means of exerting it, so far as to place confidence in it to
the neglect of efficient measures.
However, to return from this digression, we are glad to sav
that at Marseilles this theoretical way of exercising nocturnal
espionage over the inmates of the dormitories was not solely
relied upon, but that a night-watch was provided, two attendants
being set apart m each department of the asylum for that pur-
pose?one being constantly on duty in the infirmary, whilst the
other perambulated the several dormitories, which are partially
illuminated by a small lamp in each.
NO. XII.?NEW SERIES. jj'jj
604 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
Except the beds and a night-commode, the dormitories had no
other furniture. Their floors were tiled, and the walls white-
washed. Tiled bed-room floors strike an English traveller as,
cold and comfortless in appearance; but the natives of South
France are accustomed to no other, and do not even look for the
strip of carpet by the bed-side, which the hotel proprietor,
pandering to the luxury of the English, is wont to supply.
The dormitories have windows on two sides, but those on one
side have been constructed nine feet from the floor, and only
about two feet six inches square. This faulty arrangement is,
however, to be abolished, and the windows enlarged to the same
dimensions as those in the opposite wall, which are in every
respect satisfactory, except in being protected (?) externally by
iron bars.
The bedsteads, placed against the opposite walls of the dor-
mitories, so as to leave a central space from one end of the room
to the other, are for the most part of iron : some wooden trough-
bedsteads or cribs remained, but were in course of progressive
removal. The bottom of the bedsteads was about two feet from
the floor; on this was placed a straw paillasse a foot thick, and
upon this, again, a flock bed ; consequently the patient was con-
siderably elevated above the ground. The further bedding con-
sisted of a pair of sheets, a woollen blanket or coverlet, and a
coloured cotton counterpane. In mischievous cases, or for extra
warmth, quilted coverlets were put into use. The bedsteads in
the epileptic dormitories were lower than those elsewhere; but in
all other respects the same. In the case of dirty patients the
flock bed was omitted, the patient sleeping on a bag of straw,
contained in a sort of iron box constructed in the bedstead, and
having beneath it an iron drawer to receive the urine which per-
colates through.
The infirmary for casual sick cases and paralytics was on the
first floor, and differed in no respect from one of the dormitories,
except that it had a few more beds in it,?viz., twenty or twenty-
four, and that some attempt was made at ornamentation. No
special form of bedstead or bed was in use to meet the exigencies
of particular cases. A useful adjunct to the infirmary was added,
in the shape of a small room opening directly from it, and
furnished with a stove to heat the ptisans and drinks for the sick,
and with other conveniences to provide for their varying neces-
sities.
In the infirmary alone, of all the sleeping apartments, was
there any plan for warming: this consisted in the economical use
of the heated air from the stove of the room (the cliauffoir)
below, which passed from an air-chamber surrounding the furnace,
through a wide flue, to the floor of the infirmary, and entered the
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 605
room through ft brass grating. This plan was said to succeed,
and to supply sufficient warmth. #
A bath-house (scillc clcs bains) was piovided for each half 01
the establishment, and consisted of a distinct builuing, having
three apartments, all lighted from above:?1. A waiting or
dressing-room; 2. A bath-room for clean patients; and 3. One
for the dirty. The baths, six in number, are arranged in a circle,
leaving a central space occupied by the mains, and the hot and
cold water-pipes proceeding from them, belonging to the several
baths. At this part the water, hot and cold, was turned on or
off The baths are of copper, tinned, encased in wood, and
severally furnished with a wooden lid, in two portions?one to
cover in the chest of the patient, wider than the other, and capa-
ble of being slid backwards and forwards, by means ot a sort of
o-rooved joint, along the top of the bath, but fixed in situ when
the other, the foot half, is put on. When in position, the lid is
secured by fastenings on the sides of the bath, and the patient
becomes a helpless prisoner, his head only appearing above the
lid through an aperture in it formed by cutting out a poition
sufficiently large to give room for the neck, but too small to draw
the head through. In fact, except that the position is horizontal,
and the hands and feet are not passed through holes, the patient
occupies as secure, and not a totally dissimilar position to a
culprit in those more elaborately-constructed stocks contrived by
our forefathers, in which not only the hands and feet were made
fast, but the neck also secured in their grip, leaving the helpless
head to dangle in its front.
These covers, or lids, are chiefly employed when the douche or
prolonged bath is employed: we should, however, rather see
them dispensed with in the former case, when violence or resis-
tance and excitement have to be allayed; for the act of placing a
violent patient in a warm bath is often difficult, and must be
more so where additional apparatus is to be applied. In short,
the whole plan, especially the forcible mechanical restraint, is
calculated to arouse irritation, and to produce an impression of
the exercise of undue severity. On the other hand, the admi-
nistration of a prolonged bath almost necessarily involves con-
finement of the body within an enclosed batli, in order to secure
its continuation for many hours. Each bath is perforated at the
bottom in three places?one for the entrance of hot, another for
that of cold water, and the third for a waste-pipe. This last is
furnished with a valve, opened by thrusting downwards against it
an iron rod, and consequently intended to be under the control
only of the attendant. The baths and the bath-rooms were well
kept.
The arrangement of several baths in one room, unless screens
R R 2
606 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
or partitions are interposed between them, is open to objections
on the score of delicacy; objections, by the way, of less weight
in France, where the circumstance of man and wife using together
the same bath is not uncommon. Some disadvantage, too, is
likely to result from the plan, by extending excitement to others
around, when an obstinate or refractory patient is to be placed in
a bath; and again, it must be an odd sight to see two or three
patients soaking in their prolonged warm baths for several hours
together,?and we cannot imagine the feeling of company, under
the circumstances, to conduce to the allaying of the excitement
or irritation the bath is intended to secure.
Compared with reference to the conveniences provided in the
asylums of our own country, where every want of the inmates is, as
far as possible, anticipated and liberally met, the Asylum of Mar-
seilles appears deficient; yet a rigorous comparison is scarcely just,
where the differences in the habits and feelings of the people, espe-
cially among the lower classes, are in many respects so marked, and
the wants and sentiments of the one people are scarcelyrecognised or
felt by the other. This remark applies to many adjuncts to clean-
liness and decency, and to feelings of moral propriety, considered
of primary necessity on this side, but almost ignored on the other
side of the Channel. For instance, the fact of several persons
bathing together in the same room, as just cited; the absence of
those conveniences for washing the hands and face?of towels,
basins and soap?always ready for use?everywhere found in the
lavatories of British asylums ; and the comparative deficiency, the
rudeness and uncleanliness, of water-closet accommodation. This
last in the Marseilles Asylum was particularly defective, as com-
pared with that provided for in our institutions. On the dor-
mitory floor there was no closet, but the wants of the inmates at
night were provided against, as before stated, by a " commode"
placed in each ward during the night, and removed by day. On
the ground floor a single closet was constructed, apparently in each
division, consisting of a perforated stone slab, very little elevated
above the floor, not intended to be sat upon, but to be used more
Francoruvi; unprovided with water to flush it, and placed
immediately over a cesspool. Such a construction, however
repugnant to English notions of decency and cleanliness, is after
the fashion of the country, and doubtless our English water-
closet would, for a long time at least, be unappreciated, and an
object of much abuse.
The exercising court for each division occupies the square area,
surrounded on three sides by the building, and open on the fourth
towards the general garden of the asylum. It is necessarilv
of very contracted size, insufficient for the recreation of the pa-
tients, wanting in cheerfulness, and affords only a limited prospect
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 607
in one direction. The very excellent scheme of a sunk fence was
adopted to separate the court from the external grounds; had
this been unthought of, the only usual place for the patients' ex-
ercise would have presented the appearance of an enclosed prison
court. Most of the courts were planted with shrubs and flowers,
which imparted as cheerful an appearance as could be given them.
The flower-beds were surrounded by a light rustic fence, not
offensive to the eye, but yet, we believe, unnecessary for the pre-
servation of the plants, and might be dispensed with advan-
tageously.
The kitchen occupies a central position, at the posterior part
of the large court interposed between the male and female sec-
tions of the institution, with each of which it is brought into
communication by a covered way, or corridor, entering it on either
side. The male and female attendants do not come into contact
with each other in the kitchen, but have the food distributed to
them through a serving-window placed alongside the doors, enter-
ing from the respective corridors. Internally the kitchen is
spacious, and of ample elevation. At its centre is the large cook-
ing apparatus, consisting of liot-plates, ovens, boilers, &c., sur-
rounding the central fire or furnace, whereby fuel is much econo-
mized, and the facilities of cooking wonderfully increased. Except
that this description of cooking apparatus renders roasting im-
practicable, it seems to combine, in every other respect, great
advantages; for it never annoys by its smoke and dust either in
the apartment or on the food; it obviates the glare and scorching
of the open kitchen-range; it presents a most extensive surface
for cooking over; it is very clean; and last, not least, it is much
more economical. This fashion of the cooking-stove is finding its
way gradually in this country, but it will take some years yet to
make it general; for the majority of our cooks are a prejudiced
and imperious race, and rule with a high hand in their own
domain of the kitchen,?and possibly, also, they may be en-
amoured of that fiery complexion so characteristic of the craft,
due, doubtless, very much to the glare of their open ranges.
Behind the kitchen is a boiler-room, whence hot water for
culinary purposes and for the baths is derived. This room
serves likewise as a scullery. Above it is the large water-tank of
the establishment.
The wash-house and laundry are two detached buildings on
one side the asylum. The arrangements of the wash-house fol-
lowed the usual French plan, by having a large central tank of
water, and on each side a narrow space, about three feet wide,
separated from the rest by a bar. The usual washing-boards,
upon which the clothes are rubbed and beaten, were fixed on the
outer side, but so low down that the patients had to kneel at
G08 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
their work. This is clearly a grave error, for it involves wetting
tlie clothes about the body and legs; and the position itself is
highly to be reprobated, the more so as inflicted upon patients.
The clothes underwent a preliminary process of boiling in some
large oval coppers, with raised metal covers, fixed against the
wall. A large drying-court adjoined the wash-house, and sufficed
without recourse to drying-closets and in-door stoves,?thanks to
the southern climate of Marseilles.
The linen and clothing stores occupied another building, and
consisted chiefly of one large room, surrounded by shelves, par-
titioned into small compartments, and screened from dust by
curtains. This apartment was in a state of beautiful order and
cleanliness.
The chapel is central, being placed in the rear of the officers'
quarters, and having a corridor of communication with each half
of the asylum. It is small, and not calculated to accommodate
more than fifty or sixty of each sex. The space occupied by
patients is set back on either side of the high altar, and cut off
from the central area by a latticed partition. Each recess has
a gallery, in which the female inmates have their place, whilst
the men occupy the ground-floor. Chairs are used to sit in, and
the whole building is fitted up and decorated in the style usual
in Koman Catholic countries.
The land belonging to the asylum is laid out as a flower and
kitchen-gai-den, and suffices to supply the institution with vege-
tables and fruit. It is kept in very good order by the labour of
the patients.
At the period of my visit there were about G40 patients in the
asylum, the two sexes being in nearly the same proportion.
Alterations and additions were still going forward on the male
side, which, when complete, would increase the total accommoda-
tion. They were after the designs of M. Aubanel, the chief
physician of the asylum, whose name is known in the profession
as joint author, with M. Thorre, of a work on the statistics of
insanity, based on the experience of the Bicetre, near Paris.
Besides M. Aubanel, there are an assistant-physician (M.
Sauze), two " internes," an apothecary, and a non-medical director.
This last-named officer is a sort of steward, and is charged with
the household details of the establishment, with the expenditure,
and with the direction of the works, &c. The " internes" hold
office for three years, and are under the direction of the physi-
cians, acting as dressers, clinical clerks, and generally as assis-
tants. The physicians visit at least twice a day, and are attended
by their "internes."
The attendants upon the female patients are of a religious
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 609
Order, the " Sisters Hospitallers," and are under the control of
a superior in the asylum, and the more remote but higher autho-
rity of the head of their order. Complaints against them are
reported to the superior, who has the power of removal. These
nurses are uniformly dressed in dark blue gowns, with broad,
white, plain collars, and those remarkably eccentric, magnified
caps which, by some vagary in his notions of millinery and
fashion, the reverend founder of the Order has imposed upon
them. The crucifix is an invariable appendage, along with its
string of beads, and the more useful scissors.
The male attendants are of no Order, wear no uniform, and are
dismissable by the chief physician.
The common dietary consists of three meals:?the first, at
seven a.m., of chocolate and bread; the second, at eleven a.m., of
soup and bread; and the third, at five p.m., of meat, vegetables,
and bread, with an allowance of wine and water. Extra allow-
ance is granted to those engaged in active work, and the sick are
fed according to their requirements, under the supervision and
control of the physicians.
Occupation is encouraged as much as practicable, and the
patients' labour produces everything required for the asylum, except
bread, which is procured from the town. Those patients engaged
in work are employed between five and six hours a day, a con-
siderable interval for rest and recreation being allowed in the
middle of the day. Throughout the workshops and workrooms
there was quiet and order, and much credit was due to the whole
management of the institution for the state the wards and the
inmates at large presented.
Unfortunately, I did not gather from the "interne," who most
courteously conducted me over the asylum, the amount of infor-
mation I could have wished respecting medical treatment. Pro-
longed baths are resorted to in cases of maniacal excitement, and
the douche especially, as a means of repression, or as a punish-
ment. Mechanical restraint is little employed, and only when
deemed absolutely necessary; rarely any other means except the
camisole is employed. Bed sores are rather common and severe?
a circumstance indicative of inefficient nursing, and partly ac-
counted for by the absence of water-cushions, or beds, to meet the
wants of the bed-ridden, feeble, and paralytic patients.
From the scanty statistical details of the Marseilles Asylum in
our possession, we find that, according to Raymond (as cited by
Esquirol), there existed 90 inmates in the old institution in
1709 ; lttl in 1811, of whom 70 were males, and 51 females;
and that between 1797 and 1818, 090 were admitted?viz., 345
men, and 351 women. In 1841 the number had augmented to
610 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
330 ; and according to official returns made in 1850, there were
444?200 male and 238 female patients. Lastly, in 1853, tlie
total reached was 040.
These figures show a very rapid increase in the number of insane,
or rather of those brought under treatment, particularly between
1841 and 1853. In the nine years been 1841 and 1850 the aug-
mentation was not on nearly so rapid a scale as that between the
latter date and 1853.
Upon a general review of the Marseilles Asylum, it must be
admitted to be in a very satisfactory state; the patients appear
well cared for, well nourished, and well clothed,?yet more, appa-
rently, might be done for them, by supplying them with increased
means for recreation and amusement, by allowing them liberty
beyond the walls, by adding to the internal comforts?the furni-
ture and fittings of their sitting-rooms?and generally by attention
to those little details which tend to divert, instruct, and solace
the mind under tlie unavoidable evils of seclusion from their
homes and from society at large.
Looking to the building itself, it may be remarked generally
that, whilst exhibiting many features of merit, it has those inhe-
rent disadvantages of its system of construction?that of enclosed
square courts, which certain conveniences it possesses for
management and classification cannot compensate. This is not,
however, the place to examine the relative advantages and dis-
advantages of this or any other system, our business being the
description of existing asylums, and not the consideration of the
principles of asylum construction.
THE ASYLUM AT MONTFELL1ER.
Montpellier, the capital of the department of the Herault, and
the seat of one of the three Universities of France, is particularly
famous for its medical school, founded in the thirteenth century.
From the period of its foundation until the present century, this
school exercised an immense influence on the theory and practice
of medicine; its professors and graduates were sought after
throughout Europe, and brought to it fame and prosperity,
whilst Paris was unknown except for the study of the scholastic
philosophy. However, during the past century, the medical
school of Paris has risen to eminence, whilst that of Montpellier
has progressively declined; and although the latter has produced
from time to time several eminent men, not a few of whom have
migrated to Paris to share in its rising greatness, yet it has ceased
to occupy a prominent position among the medical institutions
of Europe, and has taken the rank only of a provincial university,
almost entirely limited to the training of physicians for its own
and the adjoining departments.
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 611
Unluckily, too, it lias become jealous of its successful rival,
and loses no opportunity of detraction; rejects its medical doc-
trines, and ignores as far as practicable tlie talents of its pro-
fessors. At tlie same time, in its own small way, it loudly sounds
its own praises, glories in calling itself the school par excellence
of Hippocratic medicine; rigidly adheres to the hypothesis of
vitalism, and the old doctrine of fluxions, and appeals solely to
experience for its guide. On the other hand, it denounces as
useless, or otherwise lightly esteems, minute pathological research,
pathological chemistry, microscopic investigations, the applica-
tions of comparative anatomy and physiology, and was foremost
in decrying the numerical method of the illustrious Louis.
The reader will not be surprised that such a school should
decline; that one wilfully setting aside as useless all the appli-
ances furnished by modern science and progress for the more
complete investigation of medicine, and for placing it on a sure
basis, should cease to influence the medical doctrines of Europe.
The importance of Montpellier as a university town and an
important medical school, might naturally lead one to expect its
medical institutions, and among them its asylum for the insane,
to rank among the best in France. However, this is by no means
the case; for the benumbing influence of indifference to modern
progress has operated to the prejudice, and to the comparative
neglect, of the wants of the insane.
The existing asylum is deficient in almost all those conditions
which are now all but universally held essential to the well-being
and the treatment of lunatics, and presents numerous faults, both
in structural arrangements and internal management, which,
alas ! there appears little immediate prospect of seeing amended.
It is situated in the suburb of the city, very near to the Medical
School and to the Botanic Garden, and constitutes a section of
the Hospice for old paupers and venereal cases: it is likewise,
as in similarly associated asylums, under the same administration,
has the same general offices, the same chapel, kitchen, laundry,
dispensary for medicines, stores, &c., and receives provisions,
contracted for in the town, through the hands of the same
steward. Moreover, the connexion of the two is so intimate that
many of the dormitories for the insane are no other than wards of
the hospital.
As the asylum of Montpellier can in no respect be put forward
as a model, the description of its plan of construction need only
be brief. The oldest portion, specially constructed for the care
of the insane, was commenced, on the male side, in 1821, accord-
ing to Esquirol's model of a square court, surrounded by a row
of single rooms, or cells, of only one story, except at the angles,
where there is a first floor. In 1824, a similar division was pre-
612 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
pared for the females. These square courts are completely en-
closed, are entered by an open iron gate from one side, and sur-
rounded by a covered corridor, supported on clumsy, thick, square
stone columns. The floor of the corridor is, moreover, raised
about fifteen inches above the level of the open court, and is
covered with asphalte or paved with stone. The enclosed bare
court necessarily offers a very restricted and most prison-lilie
place for exercise. Each cell is about 12 feet square and 10 feet
high; it is entered directly from the corridor, and lighted by a
small window about 1|- feet by 2 feet, placed on one side the
door, unglazed, well barred, and defended by an external shutter
of wood, kept closed during the night, and at such other times as
thought fit. The floor is paved with stone, and the stone walls
whitewashed. The furniture consisted of a heavy thick wooden
crib, fastened to the floor; this was filled with straw to constitute
the bed of the inmate, who, if clean, had an upper and under
sheet, but if not so, only the former, and then lay in the loose
straw of his trough-bed. A coarse woollen coverlet and blanket
above completed the bedding furnished for ordinary use to the
patients in this, the refractory division. Each cell bears a
number, engraved on a small brass plate inserted in the wall
above the door.
The very objectionable construction of these sections being
recognised by the medical authorities, they are used for only the
worst of the refractory and noisy cases, as a constant residence,
and consequently are not commonly fully occupied. Still, I saw
two or three cases confined to their beds in these miserable rooms,
on account of bodily ailment.
The first addition, in 1823, to the section described, was that
of a range of one-storied buildings, containing a dining-room, a
cliauffoir, or room for exercise, furnished with a stove and a
dormitory. The dining-room is a long apartment, with a double
line of tables and benches, leaving between them a central avenue.
The tables are of wood, stained and polished, and both they and
the room at large were kept in very good order. The floor is
paved, as in all other rooms; the walls whitewashed and bare;
and the windows insufficient to thoroughly and cheerfully light
the apartment. The drinking vessels are of pewter; knives and
forks are allowed to all, save those considered particularly un-
trustworthy. All the patients are brought together at meals,
except those who are refractory, and require to be served in their
own rooms. Contiguous to the refectory is a small serving-room,
where the food is received from the kitchen preparatory to its dis-
tribution. The cliauffoir, intended as a day or exercising room,
particularly for the more troublesome and the dirty inmates, is a
long, dreary, bare room, with whitewashed walls, stone floor, and
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 613
a rude bench fixed against the wall. We conclude that its name
is derived from the existence of a stove near its centre?a useful
appendage, certainly, in cold weather, of which Montpellier has a
fair share, especially from the prevalence in winter and spring of
cold, hiting north-east winds, but rendered as objectionable as
possible in appearance by the construction around it of an iron
cage or guard, formed by stout angular iron bars, and of very
considerable height. The windows are placed along one side
only, and are securely barred with upright iron bars. Beside the
fixed bench, the only other article of furniture was one of an
unprecedented character in my experience. It was a stout,
wrought-iron arm-chair, fixed firmly to the floor, near the stove,
having its framework pierced here and there with round and
square-cut holes, for the passage of cords and straps to confine
the arms, legs, and waist of its occupant. The appearance of
such a contrivance of itself indicated that, in the conception
of its inventor and patron, strength and mechanical force were
primary principles in the management of the insane. Although
we were most pleased to learn that this chair had not been put in
requisition for some few years, yet the pleasure would have been
greatly enhanced had we heard of its expulsion altogether from
the asylum, and of it transference to some museum of barbarisms
of the dark ages. If unused and thought unnecessary, why was
it retained ? To this query we got no answer; it was there, and
it seemed a trial to part with so ancient, well-tried, and energetic
an appurtenance of the establishment. Perhaps it was held up
in terrorem before the refractory; a utilitarian purpose much to
be deplored.
A third section of the block of building in question is a large
dormitory, having a row of beds on either side, whitewashed
walls, and a stone floor. The windows are of sufficient size, of
the French casement model, and barred with upright iron bars;
at night the room is partially lighted by a single gas-jet. This
dormitory is principally occupied by epileptic and dirty patients
who are somewhat refractory; hence their beds and bedsteads, or
cribs, resemble those provided for similar cases in the single
rooms, and are equally unsatisfactory.
Besides the cliauffoir and refectory rooms named, there is
yet another attached to this division, viz., a small sitting-room,
which lias some pretensions to commonplace comforts and fur-
niture. Those entitled to the benefit of this apartment were of
the class of pensioners, and not the indigent. Here smoking was
allowed, and amusement with cards and dominoes indulged in.
At another part of the asylum precincts, on the male side, was
a one-storied outbuilding, containing a day-room for younger
inmates, devoid of everything which an Englishman understands
614 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
i
as comfort?small, bare, except of whitewash, ancl its only fittings
a table and bench. Connected with it was a very small, confined,
dull, damp, unpaved court, surrounded by other buildings, as
little fitted as the day-room for its purposes, but otherwise cal-
culated to engender despair, or to plunge into dementia its un-
happy prisoners.
At this asylum there is a separate division for criminal cases?
detenus?consisting of a few single rooms, a chauffoir or sitting-
room, and a small general court. Two of the cells were of recent
construction, and regarded as models. Each had a small window
alongside the door, entering from the common court in front, and
behind, in its back wall, a perforated motal plate, and another
door opening outwards into a miniature court belonging ex-
clusively to the cell. One great object of the back door was
stated to be to secure a thorough draught and complete ven-
tilation?an advantage, however, to be gained only when the cell
is not occupied, or the patient is in the little back court. The [
window is closely barred, and further protected and darkened by
a shutter outside. The ceiling is vaulted; the walls of stone,
whitewashed; and the floor of asphaite, well laid. Each cell
appeared from 12 to 13 feet by 10 feet in area, and 11 feet high.
The idea of these new single rooms, each with its own little
court, was undoubtedly derived from Auxerre, where it may be
seen carried out much more completely. The common court in
front of the row of cells was small, and nearly as unfit and
wretched as that of the lads' quarter. In each cell the bedstead
was fixed against the wall on one side.
Other apartments on the ground floor are, on the male side?
the shops for carpenters, tailors, and shoemakers, and straw-
plaiting, hut they call for no special description; the only remark
to be made being that the inmates were pretty well occupied, and
the work carried on quietly and regularly. On the female side was
a large, nearly square, well-kept work-room, in which it was grati-
fying to find some seventy patients, almost all engaged in needle-
work, spinning, &c. Another pleasing feature in this room was
the presence of some singing-birds hung in cages against the
wall, in addition to the not unusual appendages, the crucifix and
the Madonna. As if to neutralize any pleasurable effects that
access to this the most comfortable room the patients possessed
might possibly induce, the windows were barred in the usual
fashion, and the stove surrounded by a cage 5 feet high, formed
of stout iron bars, crossed diagonally, and painted of a brown
colour. Surely the authorities of the asylum would be sorely
puzzled to show cause for such supererogatory barring of common
sitting-rooms on the ground-floor, where the occupants are con-
stantly under the eye of one or more attendants, and their escape
t
:r THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 615
(by the windows nearly impracticable. But the conservative
principle of the medical school seems to haunt the asylum, and
to stand in the way both of alterations and of innovations. This
work-room served also, until the completion of the new wing, as
/I* the female dining-room. Its furniture consisted of some fixed
tables, chairs, and fixed benches ; it was well lighted by the
windows, and when required could be moderately illuminated by
two gas-burners.
Passing from the one-storied buildings of the asylum proper,
we come to those portions of the hospice occupied by the insane,
consisting of several wards used as dormitories, and one on each
side?male and female?as the infirmary. This last-named apart-
ment is on the first floor, and holds twenty beds. It is heated
by a stove, about 4 feet high, placed in the centre, unprotected
on the female side by a guard, although at parts its case had
almost reached a red heat. The barred windows, furnished with
outside persiennes, were tightly closed, and although it was
winter, the room was disagreeably warm, and what was worse, the
air was impregnated with the fetid vapours from the sick and
foul patients; for infirm patients, whatever their habits, are
brought together in the same ward. Respecting the room itself
there is little to desire. Like the dormitories contained in the
hospice, it was a fairly-proportioned room, of good elevation, with
tiled floor, and, like them, was lighted at night by a gas jet. The
bedsteads and bedding varied according to the character of the
cases, some of which were paralytic, others epileptic and infirm,
and others, again, labouring under some bodily disease of more
or less severity, accompanied in a few with such mental excite-
ment as was deemed sufficient to justify restraint by the camisole,
or by fastening to a chair, where lying in bed was not enforced!
The bedding for patients of dirty habits, and for epileptics, has
been already noticed; for the clean there are a flock-bed, an
upper and under sheet, a blanket, and a brown woollen rug or
coverlet, in the infirmary; but in the ordinary dormitories this
last was only of figured blue linen or cotton. The condition of
the bedding was not everywhere satisfactory; in the infirmary
some of the coarse woollen coverlets were ragged and patched,
and the sheeting given to foul patients was exceedingly coarse
and brown.
No bedsteads were constructed to meet the particular require-
ments of the paralytic, epileptic, and unclean inmates. Once,
indeed, a something was tiied for the epileptics?viz., the legs
were nearly entirely sawn off from the common cribs, whereby
the bed-bottom was brought down close upon the floor; the con-
sequence was, the remedy was worse than the disease?dust,
damp, and in some cases the urine, accumulated beneath, en-
616 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
gendering dirt and bad smells, and the ill-conceived contrivance
had to be given up. Now the epileptics, if dirty, sleep in a deep
crib, of the ordinary make, among loose straw, into which they
sink and become secure against falling out during a fit; if, on
the other hand, they are clean, they are afforded the indulgence of
an under-sheet to lay upon the straw, or, in rarer instances, have
a less thick bed and paillasse than those supplied to cases un-
complicated with that fearful malady.
For those lost to notions of cleanliness and decency, nothing
special was attempted: the patient had to repose in a heap of
loose straw filling up the trough of his bed; whilst the disgust-
ing practice prevailed of letting the urine run through the bottom
of the bedstead on to the stone or tile floor beneath, where it
would frequently remain until evaporation had diffused it through
the air.
The dormitories for the generality of the inmates were in good
order and sweet, and contained from twenty to twenty-five beds
each, arranged on either side, not more than from eighteen inches
to two feet apart, and leaving a passage up and down the middle
of the room. They had the usual gas-lamp, but were not warmed.
Unlike the provision made for refractory and dirty cases, the bed-
steads were of iron, and the bedding was made up of a paillasse,
a flock bed, a pair of sheets, a blanket or two, and a blue linen
coverlet. At the foot of each bedstead was a chair. As remarked
in our notice of the asylums of northern Italy, the custom of the
people is to lie high at night; so it is in this part of France, for
we find that the top of the bed, by reason chiefly of the thickness
of paillasse and bed, is from three %feet to three and a half feet
above the ground.
All the patients, with the exception of the very troublesome
and noisy, sleep in dormitories, where they are under the surveil-
lance of one or two attendants who sleep in the same apartment
with them, as well as of the night attendant who perambulates
the several parts of the building. In the infirmary there is always
an attendant on duty night and day. Night commodes are pro-
vided in the dormitories, but no water-closets. Before going to
bed, patients needing such care are attended to, and are besides
got up in the course of the night; a proceeding which has been
found to answer in many instances, although the number of dirty
patients at Montpellier still is considerable.
The type of water-closet is "homological" with that seen at
the Marseilles Asylum, yet the actual condition of things is
worse. Lavatories, soap and towels, are, as usual in continental
public institutions, wanting; indeed, at Montpellier, not even a
vessel of water with robinet was anywhere seen. For personal
i
t
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 617
cleanliness, therefore, tlie only opportunity is to he found in the
occasional use of the warm baths. >
The bath-house, according to custom, is a detached building;
one for each department. It is ill-built and defective; the floor
of stone, badly laid, uneven, and consequently always wet. The
baths themselves are massive stone constructions, and furnished
with heavy wooden lids, securely fitted upon them when required
bv strong iron fastenings. The supply of water, hot aud cold, is
bv two taps placed above the foot*of the baths; the waste pipe
leading from the bottom. The baths are placed m a row along-
side the wall, and between four and five feet above them is a
horizontal water pipe, from which a short leather tube is sus-
pended above the head of each bath to administer a douche. By
this arrangement every douche-jet lias equal force, and that
variety which many physicians think desirable is unattainable.
As before intimated, the general offices are common to the
asylum and the hospice, and do not afford occupation to the
^aOn the male side there are four airing courts: of these we have
noticed three; the remaining one is also small, although superior
bv beiu<* not only planted with trees, which are indeed seen in
two of the others, but laid out as a small flower-garden. The
vicinity, however, of some houses, renders a high wall necessary
around" 'it. But besides the courts, there is a good-sized garden,
which "ives employment to several patients in the cultivation of
vegetables and flowers. On the female side are three courts and
a small garden for their use. The refractory court is bare, but
the others are planted with trees, flowers, and shrubs. The
flower-beds are protected by a slight railing, painted green;
which however unnecessary, has the merit of not being offensive
to the eve. By the arrangement of the several parts of the asylum,
the garden is nowhere visible except from some of the upper
dormitories, and hence one great advantage of an open space
about an asylum is lost?viz., the prospect of something more
than the self-same court hour by hour, or day by day.
To refer now to the principles of management and treatment.
The asylum, as a mere section of the hospice, is under the same
government. This consists of a board or commission, constituted
of the chief government officials and some few gentlemen of the
department. These are charged with the supervision of the mode
in which the institution is managed, have entire control over its
funds and over every item of expenditure (which must receive their
approval), and they appoint officers and servants. Their ruling
principle is economy, cheapness, and the ?curtailment of the ex-
penditure. To this board is no doubt principally chargeable the
618 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
existing unsatisfactory and discreditable state of the asylum; for
in all instances where to avoid expense is the primary rule of
management, improvements are not to he looked for. What has
been, and sufficed, may still he and suffice,?appears to he the
Chinese maxim hy which the authorities of the Montpellier ?*>
Asylum are guided, and the maxim is equally fruitful of mis-
chief and inefficiency as with the " Celestials."
The local representative of the Board exists in the person of the
Director, appointed by it, and armed with the chief authority in
the entire establishment, both hospice and asylum ; subordinate
to the Director is the Physician of the Asylum, an office at pre-
sent held by M. Cavalier; he has under him an interne, who
retains his appointment for three years. The physician is re-
quired to visit the patients twice every day; the first and prin-
cipal visit is made between eight and nine in the morning; the
second, usually directed to cases requiring particular attention,
and of brief duration, in the afternoon. The duties of the visiting-
physician are by no means formal, for they include the direction *- *
both of the moral and medical treatment, and are, as we personally
witnessed, very thoroughly performed by the present officer. In
his morning visit he goes throughout the building, receives re-
ports of all the occurrences in it since his last visit, prescribes
medically for all patients requiring it, directs, and in the case of
douche, often superintends the administration of the baths, regu-
lates the classification and employments, orders extra diet where
required, and revises the general dietary every week. He is not
precluded from private practice, and the appointment is tenable
with a chair in the university.
M. Cavalier has occupied the post of physician between four
and five years ; and prior to that period was the " interne." His
experience, therefore, has necessarily been considerable in the
treatment of insanity, and we can testify to the zeal he displays
in it, and to his kind and conciliating manner to patients, espe-
cially to the melancholic. He is a stanch believer in the effi-
cacy of medical treatment when resorted to sufficiently early in
the disease, and on this account devotes much time and* pains to
the investigation of bodily disorder and to its therapeutical treat-
ment. It is nevertheless to be regretted that M. Cavalier has
not had opportunities of examining the construction and manage-
ment of asylums where modern innovations have found favour,
and supplanted the ancient belief in the necessity of coercion, of
bars, of high-walled courts, and of those many other deprivations
of the consolations and comforts of life. To do him justice, how-
ever, we must mention that he is not insensible to many of the
deficiencies and grave faults of the asylum he superintends, and
is most desirous to see reforms affected; but the economical (?)
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 6 J 9
tendencies of the committee form an apparently insuperable impe-
diment to the realization of his wishes. The "interne" who
was in residence during my stay at Montpellier, was M. Campaha,
a Spaniard hy birth, but educated at Montpellier to whom I
must make acknowledgment for the civility and attention re-
ceived at his hands. Since that time I am glad to hear be is in
charge of the asylum at Avignon. The "interne" has furnished
rooms, board, light and firing, and receives a small gratuity. He
lias to carry out, or see carried out, the directions of the physi-
cian, keeps the registers, and is responsible for the good working
of the asylum in the physician's absence.
The attendants do not belong to a religious order. In pro-
portion to the number of patients they are nearly as one to
twelve. Both male and female attendants are clothed uniformly.
The men wear a blue jacket, brown trousers, and a felt cap ; the
women were neatly dressed, and did not rejoice in those marvel-
lous caps, the exclusive and quaint appendages of the heads of
those under religious vows, particularly the Sisters of Mercy of
St. Vincent de Paul.
The patients admitted into the asylum are of three classes?
viz., pensioners, paupers, and criminal lunatics (detenus). In
1854, their total number was 375?to wit, 2G0 males and 115
females. Among these, 10 men and 3 women were accounted
paralytic; epilepsy was equally prevalent in the two sexes, but
was not a common complication.
A uniform dress was provided for the patients. The women
were in general neat and clean in appearance ; but the men were
many of them slovenly dressed, with their clothes ragged and
in disorder. As might be expected, this happened chiefly among
the refractory, for no specially contrived dresses were provided to
meet the requirements of such, or of any other class of patients
presenting particular symptoms.
The ordinary diet-table provides four meals a day. The
patients rise at six o'clock, and at seven have a slice of bread
with coffee, and an apple or some other fruit; at eleven, soup
with vegetables ; at four in the afternoon, a dinner of soup, bread,
and vegetables, on three days in the week with meat; and, lastly,
at six, they receive a portion of bread. Wine diluted with water
is allowed at their two chief meals ; latterly the quantity has been
much lessened, owing to wine (even in this wine-growing district)
having advanced to four times its customary price. Of the vege-
table food taken, peas (of two sorts), liarricot beans, and rice cooked
in several ways, form the staple. The food is inspected by the phy-
sician or interne, and may be rejected by them if thought unfit.
Employment is as much as possible promoted. About one-
half of the male patients are occupied in the garden and grounds
NO. XII.?NEW SERIES. S S
620 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GEKMANY, AND FRANCE A
V
of the institution, and in the workshops. The tailors' workshop
was the best filled : in all the shops the greatest decorum and
quiet were observed. A party of men is selected and entrusted
to go out into the town and its vicinity to bring back requisites
for the asylum use. Those are not chosen who belong to the
city, and are acquainted with it and with persons living in it. On
one day I saw a band of thirty, carrying hand-barrows, and pro-
ceeding in a sort of loose military order, under charge of three
attendants; for none are ever allowed to be out by themselves.
One attendant preceded them, whilst the other two brought up the
rear. Moreover, about thirty male patients leave the asylum
daily to work at some little distance in the country, at quarrying
stone for building, in cutting timber, preparing wood, &c.
Of the women, two-thirds are employed in needlework, in
house-cleaning, straw-plaiting, and the like female occupations.
A very complete record is kept of the occupations of the
patients, showing the nature of the employment, the length of
time engaged in it, the manner in which it lias been undertaken, , ,
whether with alacrity or unwillingly, and other similar par-
ticulars.
Little is done in this asylum to provide recreation or amuse-
ment for the inmates. Excepting dominoes and cards in one
section, I did not see any other pastime. Books and papers, if
allowed, are extremely scarce, and not provided by the institution;
the reunion of patients at concerts, dances, lectures, and the
like, has not been contemplated, and out-door amusements are
out of the question from want of space.
Novelists are fond of representing the peasantry of South
France as given to revelry and perpetual gambollings to the ?
sound of the pipe; and this might be true of them in the olden
time under their good king Rene, but it is purely mythical of the
present generation, which is sufficiently dull, heavy, and igno-
rant. .They retain their ancient language, the Provencal or
Langue d'Oc, and are many of them unacquainted with French.
It would be well were the schoolmaster abroad in this portion of
France; indeed, it would be a happy thing could he penetrate
into the Asylum of Montpellier, and diffuse a better knowledge of
the moral treatment of the insane, illustrated by the practice in
other parts of Europe.
There is no chapel for the exclusive use of the asylum. The
patients attend once every Sunday at the chapel belonging to the
liospice; and they are visited by a priest from time to time, or
when his ministrations are called for to the dying: his visits
being under the control of the physician.
. The patients are allowed to see their friends, under the sanction
of the physician, twice a week, and have a room set apart for the
i
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE 621
purpose. An attendant is always present during the visit, and
is expected to render an account to the medical officer of the
behaviour of the patient, of the conversation, of inquiries and
complaints made, in short, of all that has passed.
To come, now, to details touching the medical treatment.
Restraint is largely used, notwithstanding the principle pro-
fessed is to employ it only where absolutely required; but, as
usual, the sanction of its employment affords a loophole for its
frequent use; the indolent or the unmerciful, and the attendant
without forethought and readiness, or measures of expediency,
will discover sufficient reason for its adoption, and be ever ready
to justify it even where its application must be reported to the
superintending physician. At Montpellier the ordinary means
of coercion is by the camisole, and occasionally by belts and straps
to confine the limbs or the trunk. The rule with homicidal
criminal patients seems to be to keep them constantly confined:
one such male always wore a camisole when not shut in his room,
was regarded with fear, and was no doubt led, by his treatment,
to believe himself a very formidable character, and to endeavour
to prove his ferocity when he got a chance of doing so.
On the occasion of one visit to the female side of the house, I
noticed seven women wearing the camisole in the refractory ward,
and one in the work-room; another was held in a clumsy wooden
arm-chair by a piece of stout tape loosely tied around her waist,
which could indeed serve as a means of restraint only to her morbid
apprehension. In the infirmary a few were restrained by cami-
soles, and some others confined to chairs constructed to allow the
escape of the excretions from their persons; a beastly con-
trivance, too common, we are sorry to say, in French asylums.
I was assured that none were fastened in bed at night, except
under very extraordinary circumstances.
The douche is exclusively employed as a punishment, and as
such is in pretty frequent requisition. It is not used as a thera-
peutical agent, but only for those who are refractory and violent, or
who refuse to work or to take food. With the last object in view
it was represented as very successful, and that forcible ali-
mentation by the oesophageal tube had not been resorted to for
three years, although refusal of food had been a circumstance of
j no uncommon occurrence. The duration of the douche is regu-
lated by the physical condition of the patient; and its applica-
tion is always made under the superintendence of the physician,
or of his assistant, the interne. It is sometimes repeated in the
course of the same day. The vertical fall of the stream is, how-
ever, as before stated, not more than four feet, and its shock,
therefore, is not very great.
Prolonged baths are frequently used in acute mania to allay
?i- s s 2
?22 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
excitement and to induce sleep. They are unsuited to weak
patients, and tlieir effects require to be diligently watched. Ac-
cording to the severity of the case and the strength of the pa-
tient, they are continued for ten, twelve, and even for twenty-live
hours. Food and medicine are administered during the bath,
and in some instances a thread of cold water is allowed to trickle
over the shaven head.
The selection of medicinal agents is regulated entirely by the
physical symptoms of the patients, and no general mode of treat-
ment is pursued. Opium and morphia are very seldom given, for
there is a hypothetical objection to them prevalent in this part of
France, as well as in Italy?viz., that they cause a revulsion to the
head, and accelerate the onset of dementia. In lieu of opiates,
therefore, conium and hyoscyamus, along with their active prin-
ciples and preparations, are employed.
The question of the relative advantages of dormitories and
single rooms has been much discussed in this country, and strong
opinions expressed; the majority, we think, against dormitories,
except for a comparatively small class of patients. We shall see,
in the course of our examination of foreign asylums, the use of
dormitories for almost all, in some places indeed for all, patients.
Here at Montpellier, some twenty-four cells were provided in each
division?male and female; all the other sleeping accommodation
was in dormitories. But, in fact, this proportion of single to
associated sleeping-rooms did not exist, for all the cells were not
occupied, and had not the demand for admission been so great
that room in dormitories could not be given more largely, still
fewer single rooms would have been used.
M. Cavalier's opinion was decidedly in favour of dormitories
for the whole population, with very few exceptions ; and as the
result of his experience, he stated that it is rare that one patient
disturbs another; that, on the other hand, he has found those
who were restless and noisy by themselves in single rooms,
become quiet when placed in a dormitory. Even epileptics do
well in dormitories?a class of patients which many who reco-
gnise the utility of common sleeping-rooms over single ones, have
a strong feeling against their association together at night. M.
Cavalier has never known an accident or ill consequence occur in
the epileptic dormitories, even where an access of furor has over-
taken one of the inmates. In such instances, indeed, sjjeedy
attention is required; and this is ensured by the presence of
attendants in the apartment, which is always secured. Moreover,
the physician mentioned would have no dormitory to contain less
than twenty beds, and approves of the association of even larger
numbers.
Upon a review of the preceding account, we may observe that
>-
the ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. G23
tlie asylum at Montpellier is to be condemned on account of its
site, its too limited area for exercise and employment, its con-
0 fined, high-walled, and enclosed courts, its most faulty construc-
tion, its connexion in general administration with the adjoining
hospice, its deficiency in almost everything to solace its un-
fortunate inhabitants, its management by a non-resident officer,
and in the paramount control exercised by non-medical men. We
need not sum up the remarks on the internal management, medical
and moral; yet we are desirous to testify to the attention given
to the former, and should, on the other hand, be glad to awaken
an increased interest in the moral and physical state of the asylum
occupants. The women's side of the house was better kept than
that of the men; but everywhere the dormitories were clean, and
orderly, and sweet, with the exception of the infirmaries. The
presence of a few birds and domestic animals about the day-
rooms ; of pictures, flowers, and ornaments in general; would
^ much enliven the abode of the poor lunatics. Moreover, the
construction of some decent water-closets, of lavatories, or of
some means to promote personal cleanliness, the provision of a
few articles of furniture, the introduction of periodicals and books,
and of other means of amusement, would render the present most
ill-adapted building a somewhat less objectionable residence for
the insane than in its present state it is.
An attempt to adapt the present structure to its purpose would
be fruitless, and a waste of money. This fact is so obvious, that
| the authorities of the asylum have determined to erect a new one;
yet, it will be read with astonishment, their intention is to retain
the same site, so little knowledge have they of what is requisite
to the well-being and recovery of the insane. The new edifice
?was already in progress when we stayed at Montpellier, and a new
wing, in rear of the existing asylum, was considerably advanced.
I This was a two-storied structure, of stone, and certainly an im-
provement upon the old building. As it was designed to relieve
the present asylum, which could no longer meet the wants of the
department, its accommodation was particularly planned to supply
existing deficiencies, whilst it should at the same time har-
imonize as a section of the projected new buildings. On the
male side, therefore, it would furnish a billiard or amusement
room; and an infirmary specially for dirty cases, on the ground
floor, and above, additional dormitories. On the female side, the
similar extension of the asylum would supply an infirmary and
work-room on the ground floor, and dormitories above. The pre-
cautions for the safe custody of the inmates are unluckily to be
repeated, and the windows to be guarded by iron bars; with this
improvement, however?that the external bars are to correspond
<324 THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE.
in figure and position with those of the casements, so that they
may be nnperceived when the latter are closed.
The retention of the same site for the projected new asylum,
entails the perpetuation of many of the worst evils of the present
establishment, and cannot he too strongly deprecated by all who
are interested in the welfare of the insane. The site is objection-
able by its proximity to the town, and its immediate vicinity with
a low suburb; by its limited area, which will never admit of
sufficiently extensive airing courts and ground for employment,
and by its involving the continuance of the prejudicial connexion
between the hospice and asylum.
Some excuse may be found for the faulty position of the
Venetian asylums, since for these no other and better can be
found except on the distant mainland, a removal which would
cause not only great immediate cost, but always occasion diffi-
culty and much expense in the carriage of patients. But here at
Montpellier, the authorities have on every side numerous most
eligible positions for the erection of an asylum, with all the
advantages of greater healthfulness, of ample ground for culti-
vation, and of hue and cheerful prospects, in short, of all those
external conditions calculated to divert, to alleviate, and to heal
the disordered mind.
It would have added interest and value to this history of the
Montpellier Asylum could we have appended the statistics for
some years past; these, however, were not obtainable, not being
published, but buried among the departmental archives. The only
details in our possession belong to the four years from 1829 to
1832 inclusive, and are given in an excellent record of the
clinique of M. Kech, a former physician of the asylum, to whom
Esquirol attributes the high merit of having " overthrown the
fatal prejudices against the insane in a country where some re-
garded them as outcasts from God, others as the peculiar
favourites of heaven, and where all agreed in believing them
incurable."
According to the statistics referred to, there were resident in
the asylum at the commencement of 1829, 57 men and 50 women,
in all, 107; admitted in the four years between 1829 and 18-32
inclusive, 89 males and 52 females, together, 141. During those
four years there died 27 men and 19 women, or 4G in all; were
discharged cured, 23 men and 19 women, together, 42; and un-
cured, 13 men and 0 women, in all, 19. The proportion of deaths
in the two sexes, taken in relation with their relative number, is
1 to 13 among the men, and 1 to 15 among the women. The
ratio of cures, calculated upon the admissions, was about 30 per-
cent. ; and during the four years in question, was greater among
THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 625
the females than the males. Considered with reference to the
form of the malady, there were of the 107 existing at the begin-
ning of 1829, suffering from?
Mania 24
Monomania 13
Dementia -..49
Idiocy 8
Intermittent mania 2
Epileptics 11
107
Of 151 admissions, there were suffering from?
Mania . ,v   ? . . 40
Monomania 36
Dementia 45
Idiocy 12
Intermittent mania 8
Mania with delirium I
Epileptics     9
There died from?
Mania
Monomania
Dementia
Idiocy
Epilepsy
The assigned causes of death were?
Cerebral affections . . .
Diarrhoea
Phthisis ...
Slow fever
Contagious fever ....
Pneumonia
Pleurisy
151
Among the cured were?
Mania 23
Monomania ]i']_
Dementia  ?
42
G
4
24
1
11
46
21
9
9
4
1
1
1
46
626 THE PRESENT STATE OF LUNACY
In 1835, tlie population, as Esquirol records, had reached to
158?viz., 75 men and 08 women. In 1825, it was only 75, hut
in the course of the three following years there were 100 admis-
sions.
The most complete statistics of an institution are liable to en-
gender fallacies, and^ in the opinion of some, can he made to
prove anything; hut whatever the defects of statistics may he
when sufficiently extended, those few which we have heen ahle to
obtain of the Montpellier Asylum are certainly insufficient to
draw any general inferences from, which have value enough to
make them worth a place in this paper.
