Charlotte Bronte?A Psychological Study
=======================================


" Kauin herrscht noch ein Zweifel dariiber, dass der Geist niclit so, wie wir ilin irn
gebildeten Mensclien der Betrachtung unterwerfen Konnen, als etwas Fertiges
Ausgebildetes bei der Geburt des Menschen mit in die Erscheinung tritt;
dass vielmehr nur die Moglichkeit der Entwickelung bis zur hochsten Voll-
kommenheit dem Menschen innewohnt; dass der gebildete Menschengeist somit
ein Product sei der Erziehung, wie solche bewirkt wird durch. den innewohn-
enden eigenen Bildungstrieb, durch die umgebende Natur, durch die
gebildete Vernunft, d. h. durch die absiclitliche, von schon gebildeten Men-
schen ausgehende Erziehung, wie endlich durch die Schicksale und den Lenker
und Leiter derselben."
The die does not create tlie metal, but it makes the current coin,
and defines the value that must he attached to it in the world,
and the influence that it will exert upon it. So circumstances do
296 CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
not make character, but mould it and modify its developments;
giving it, not its more or less vigorous vitality, but determining
in great measure tlie direction in which this force shall he mani-
fested. The ivy will find its way to the light through the stone
wall, hut its course will be longer or shorter, according to the
tortuosities which it has to encounter in its passage.
The mode in which the concrete mind is developed and mani-
fested to the world is influenced, or rather determined, by ante-
cedents, which may be summed up under one head,?that of
Hereditary Influence: and surrounding circumstances; which
include the physical medium into which it is forced?i.e., the
nature of the climate, the soil, and the scenery; and the moral
medium, including the period, the social, political, and intel-
lectual condition of the community of which it is to be a member,
the class of developed mind with which it comes in habitual or
casual contact passively; and the active influence exerted by
such minds upon it in the process of education and instruction
which it undergoes. To these must be added, as not the least
operative, that combination of physical and moral agencies which
depends upon the state of poverty or wealth amid which it
flourishes or languishes. All these are of potent energy; for
there is probably no event occurring between the moment of con-
ception and that of the final dissolution of the body, which is
without some defined dynamic influence upon mental develop-
ment, whether such event be of a purely corporeal or a spiritual
nature. What is the primary condition of mind, we have no
means of ascertaining. Is mind in its essence strictly the same,
and dependent for the varieties of its manifestation entirely upon
organization and external influences ? Are there original diffe-
rences in mental faculties and capacities previous to any influences
from within or without ? Such questions we cannot decide.
There are those who would answer the first question in the
affirmative; who consider that the immaterial essence is the same
in all men; that there is originally an inherent capacity in all for
the development of the highest grades of intellectual eminence ;
that this capacity is the birthright and possession of every viable
child; and that the differences observed between the widely-
separated orders of intelligence depend upon causes partly affect-
ing the organization, such as hereditary influences, food, climate,
certain diseases, &c., and partly directly operative upon the intel-
lect, as through varied moral and intellectual training.
From the very nature of the question, no solution is possible,
save through the subtleties of metaphysical speculation ; for we
know nothing of spiritual essences except through their mani-
festations ; and these manifestations are solely through the
medium of organization. Practically, then, our investigations
CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 297
must necessarily be limited to the observation of the conditions
and capabilities of the organism in relation to mental develop-
ment.
By far the most powerful and remarkable of the formative
influences in the production of character and individuality is
hereditary tendency. Not more striking is the feature-likeness
between parent and child, than is the resemblance, in a great
many instances, between their respective psychical manifestations.
We see genius or stupidity propagated generation after genera-
tion, as we see the colour of the hair or the form of any particular
feature. And not only these general characteristics, but we
observe an inheritance of particular dispositions and tendencies,
and even, in not a few instances, of acquired habits. This latter
is particularly illustrated in some animals, when the results of
artificial culture have become in some degree hereditary. The
descendants of dogs trained to particular purposes are much more
easily educated than others of similar breed, that have not had
trained parents. It is most important to observe, also, that vice
and tendency to particular forms of crime are hereditary also;
and this not only when the vice has been (so to speak) congenital,
but when it has been acquired and become habitual. Thus, the
confirmed drunkard is likely to have drunken children; and every
form of sensuality is liable to be reproduced in the succeeding
generation. But even in this very brief and imperfect sketch of
the influence of ancestry, we must not omit to mention the
development of remarkable ability which is sometimes observed,
not as a direct inheritance, but as one of the concomitants of the
expiring energies of a degenerate or degenerating race?a phe-
nomenon to which we lately alluded as the " phosphorescence of
decay."
The physical medium is, without doubt, of great importance
in the formation of character, although it is only when we
observe its influence in what may be called extreme cases that
we can fully recognise its force. In the districts where cretinism
and idiocy are endemic, low forms of mental development are
propagated from generation to generation, until the reproductive
force is lost; yet if one of these children?one link of this melan-
choly chain?be taken from birth, and removed to a healthy dis-
trict, the entail of constitutional vice will be broken; and not
only the physical condition will ascend one degree or more
towards its normal state, but the faculties of the mind will be
improved to a point far above that of its ancestry. We cannot
doubt that, within the limits of healthy formation, the same in-
fluences are operative in the production of modified organisms,
and distinctly sealed minds, though in a degree less marked and
obvious; for not more contrasted are the characters of the sleepy,
298 CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
imaginative Asiatic, and the liardy, practical, adventurous inha-
bitant of our northern latitudes, than are those of our wild moor-
land districts as compared with those of smoky and crowded
cities.
The moral medium is, perhaps, of still greater direct impor-
tance in the formation of mind than the physical; and its effects
are so obvious as to require but little illustration. The early
tone of thought, the fundamental ideas, the habitual bent of the
mind, will necessarily be derived from early associations, and
will have the stamp and impress of the society in which the first
years are passed. And these will never be lost; however after
circumstances may be changed, these, the first and most potent
impressions will remain, consciously or unconsciously, to tinge
the whole future life and character. For instance, the super-
stition which may mingle with the earliest teachings of a child,
may be neutralized by reason in after-days, but the tendency
will never be lost.
The period of a country's history and development, and the
political aspects of the times, exert a most powerful determining
influence upon individual character. This branch of the subject
is much too extensive to treat casually; we shall, therefore,
merely enumerate it amongst the most potent of causes, referring
for illustration to all the great critical times, in our own country
especially, where the crises of history are attended by the appear-
ance of names that of themselves would make or mark epochs.
The Elizabethan age, when England was passing (so to speak)
from ancient to modern civilization, will furnish a good example
of our meaning.
The influence of education, as ordinarily conducted, is more
exerted upon the contents of the mind than upon its formation ;
yet, according as it is good or bad, the good or evil qualities of
the mind will be drawn out and put in exercise; and it will in some
measure determine how far the individual shall be associated with
his fellow-creatures by the bonds of good-will and sympathy, or
become reserved, repellent, isolated, and suspicious. Even this,
however, is limited in its operation ; for, to an acutely perceptive
mind, the defects of a system may be so apparent as to produce
a directly opposite result to that which might be expected from
the data; and the character may, by means of great internal
energy, be formed rather upon what is wanting in the course of
education, than what is present?may, in fact, become the com-
plement or supplement of the system.
But little that is certain and definite can be predicated of the
influence which poverty exerts upon mental development. It
seems to depend chiefly upon the type of mind, whether it acts
as a stimulant, or an utter bar to mental exertion and improvement.
CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 299
There are, however, two secondary results which must necessarily
accrue?it must, to a great extent, limit and control the 'prac-
tical expansion of sympathy, and the benevolent emotions gene-
rally ; . and it must at the same time limit the experience and
knowledge of the varied forms and conditions of life, by prevent-
ing any extended intercourse with the world at large, either
through travel or free access to all societies. Hence the know-
ledge of character will be founded upon contracted data; and,
however deep and acute may be the insight, the range will be
comparatively small.
Such are the circumstances which influence and mould the
private life of all, and the public character of the great majority.
It is most especially in relation to authorship that we are at
present interested in tracing the precise results. Some few there
are of a genius so exalted that its emanations exhibit few or no
traces of its antecedents. In the plays of our immortal dra-
matist, we search in vain for any trace of the strolling actor, the
deer-stealer, the vagabond, the husband of Ann Hathaway, the
man of property, or the country gentleman and magistrate. In
the gorgeous scenery of the " Paradise Lost," we have no indica-
tion of the bard ; there is no blindness, no fierce contest of party
wrath, no ingratitude, no home misery; there is none of the fiery
sectary?none of the anarchy of the age. There are others of
temperament so indifferent as almost to separate the intellect
from the outer life ; yet when we hear Goethe's unmoved " Oh !"
on being told that the Allies had entered Paris, and see Sir
Thomas Brown quietly writing his treatise on popular fallacies
in the midst of the crash of a disorganizing state, we feel that this
is abnormal?that it is not humanity. In Dante, in Petrarch, in
Ariosto,?in Voltaire, Byron, Shelley,?in a crowd of others whose
names rank amongst the greatest and noblest of writers, whatever
may be the theme, we can trace the man. In the " Purgatorio,"
we "find constant allusions to the political errors of the day; in the
" Paradiso," the same ; so in the others we hear the wailings of
the wounded spirit, the ravings of madness, the soft accents of
love, the boiling wrath of political or social disappointment, the
covert scorn of infidelity, the sneer of universal scepticism, the
aspirations after Utopian forms of society; and we know then
that the man has spoken as well as the poet.
In general, these glimpses of personality and individuality arc
at most but thinly scattered, or form but a small proportion of the
entire works of the author. It is rare to meet with the whole mind
in the work; still more rare to be able to trace the entire deve-
lopment of the mind to natural causes?i. c., to antecedents and
circumstances which would naturally be expected to produce such
a result in ordinary course. Such . is, however, the case in
300 CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
Charlotte Bronte, the formation of whose mind and character we
propose to investigate in the following pages. Her most charac-
teristic work, "Jane Eyre," contains a psychical transcript of
herself, though the canvas is stretched on a framework of dif-
ferent form to the original; and each point and trait of this cha-
racter can easily, and without straining, he seen to be due to
influences identical with, or analogous to, those to which we have
briefly alluded above.
The outlines of her uneventful life are well known through
Mrs. Gaskell's graphic pen: the early, almost complete or-
phanage?the weary, unsocial childhood?the still more weary
youth?the hopeless years of fruitless waiting and longing?the
patient, trustful perseverance, and almost dogged energy?the
brief period of fame, with its few delights, and its many cares and
bitternesses?the wearing, wasting toil?the few short months of
happiness?the early death?all combine to form a picture of
dead, grey tone, with some points of unfathomable blackness, and
but few of redeeming colour?a life in which, surely, the last
event would be looked forward to as the brightest.
Without at present sketching the biography further, we propose
to examine the nature of the antecedents and events which influ-
enced the formation of Miss Bronte's character; and then to
review what that character was in itself, as represented by Mrs.
Gaskell, and as set forth in "Jane Eyreand as we have given
the first importance to hereditary influence, we shall first inquire
what were the elements probably thence derived.
Erom her gentle, pious, Cornish mother, Miss Bronte inherited
a refined, thoughtful, true womanly nature, and probably a deli-
cate, fragile frame;?from her strong-willed, determined, Celtic
father, other qualities which dominated over these.
Mr. Bronte was (or rather is, for the parent stem has survived
all its branches) a native of Ireland, and came of a large family,
remarkable for physical strength and beauty. He gave early
tokens of great talent, combined with extraordinary force of will
and general energy of character, as evinced by his separating
himself from the hereditary agricultural pursuits, and devoting
himself to an intellectual life. He opened a public school at
sixteen years of age; afterwards became a private tutor; and, at
the age of twenty-five, entered himself at Cambridge, and ulti-
mately took holy orders.
He waiS a diligent pastor, but otherwise reserved in his inter-
course with his people.^ He took an active and decided part in
the machinery riots, in the early part of this century, in the
manufacturing districts of Yorkshire; resisting popular clamour
when unreasonable, but supporting the working men with all the
energy of his nature when he thought them wronged. Mrs.
CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 301
Gaskell describes liim as of " strong, passionate Irish nature,
generally compressed down with resolute stoicism?hut it was
there, notwithstanding all his philosophic calm and dignity of
demeanour; though he did not speak when he was annoyed or
displeased." The method which he adopted of working off super-
fluous excitement gives a little insight into some mental relations,
which need not he more particularly specified when speaking of a
living character. When annoyed seriously, he would fire pistols
off in rapid succession out of the window, and so gradually calm
down. He had other eccentricities of a still more suggestive
nature, which must have had a marked effect upon the character
of his family. He had imbibed the spirit of Rousseau and Day
on education, and wished to make his children hardy, and indif-
ferent to eating and dress. He allowed them no animal food
during childhood; and on one occasion, when they had been
walking over the moors, and their dry shoes and boots had been
put before the fire ready for them, he burned them, lest they
should become effeminate or vain. On another occasion he
burned the hearth-rug, for reasons not given by the biographer;
and cut a silk dress of Mrs. Bronte's in pieces, because he did
not like it. He associated but little with his children, partly
from choice, partly from other circumstances not necessary to
detail; so that after their mother's death they were almost
completely orphans. Mrs. Gaskell sums up his character as
follows:?
" His opinions might be often both wild and erroneous, his prin-
ciples of action eccentric and strange, his views of life partial and
almost misanthropical; but not one opinion that he held could be stirred
or modified by any worldly motive. He acted up to his principles of
action; and if any touch of misanthropy mingled with his view of
mankind in general, his conduct to the individuals who came in per-
sonal contact with him did not agree with such view. It is true that
he had strong and vehement prejudices, and was obstinate in main-
taining them, and that he was not dramatic enough in his perceptions
to see how miserable others might be in a life that was all-sufficient to
him; but I do not pretend to be able to harmonize points of cha-
racter, and account for them, and bring them all into one consistent
and intelligible whole. The family with whom I have now to do shot
their roots down deeper than I can penetrate. I cannot measure
them, much less is it for me to judge them. I have named these in-
stances of eccentricity in the father, because I hold them to be neces-
sary for a right understanding of the life of his daughter."
Referring to the well-known proverbial close alliances of great
wit, we cannot doubt whence Charlotte Bronte's genius was
derived. It is not difficult also to see, in the father's fiery, im-
petuous character, the source of the strong, indomitable will, the
302 CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
untiring energy, the deep, fervent imagination, and the reserve
and isolation which characterized his daughter Charlotte.
Of Maria Branwell, afterwards Mrs. Bronte, hut little is
known. Mrs. Gaskell says that, " without having anything of
her daughter's rare talents, Mrs. Bronte must have been, I should
think, that unusual character, a well-balanced and consistent
Avoman." Her surviving relatives speak of her as " meek and
retiring, while possessing more than ordinary talents, which she
inherited from her father; and her piety was genuine and un-
obtrusive." Those of her letters that remain, abound with tender
womanly sentiment and grace. Her children seem to have in-
herited some portion of her admirable mental qualities, but all of
that delicacy of constitution which removed her so early from
their head.
This singularly assorted yet affectionate pair had six children,
the very remarkable development of whose characters throws a
strong reflected explanatory light upon that of the parents.
They are described as grave and silent beyond their years; so
quiet, that it would almost seem there were no children in the
house. " Maria (only seven years old !) would shut herself up in
the children's study with a newspaper, and be able to tell one
everything when she came out," including debates in parliament,
&c. &c. The four eldest sisters, in their very early life, produced
the impression upon those who knew them, of " wild, strong
hearts and powerful minds, hidden under an enforced propriety
and regularity of demeanour and expression."
A dreary household and a dreary childhood must this have
been. The mother was a constant invalid, and could take 110
active supervision of the children; not very anxious to see them
either, " perhaps because the sight of them, knowing how soon
they were to be left motherless, would have agitated her too
much." Their father was much engaged, and " besides, he was
not naturally fond of children, and felt their frequent appearance
on the scene as a drag both on his wife s strength, and as an
interruption to the comfort of the household." They had no
young companions, and it does not appear that they had any
" children s books; but their eagei minds ' browsed undisturbed
among the wholesome pasturage of English literature.'" And so
from childhood they had their own society, their father's books,
and the glorious wild moors which in after-days they loved so
much, for their sole companions. Ah, those moors! When,
grim death visited the two eldest, it was only amid their wild
scenery that they could hear his message; when far away from
home, it was the wild sweep of the autumnal wind that sung in
the ears of the wandering girls, and lulled them to sleep and
dreams of their cheerless home, gilded into a fairy-palace of
CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 303
dreamland; it was only amid those moors that poor Emily Bronte
could live?only on them that she could die; it was only there,
where their first uncliilled draughts of young life were drunk in,
that they could again breathe it out, and yield it up to its great
Author.
Maria Bronte, the eldest of these children, seems to have
inherited a remarkable share of the best and finest qualities of
both father and mother. Long before she died, at the age of
eleven, " her father used to say that he could converse with her
on any of the leading topics of the day, with as much freedom
and pleasure as with any grown-up person." Mrs. Gaskell
states that Helen Burns in "Jane Eyre" was a most faithful
transcript of Maria's character, and that the conversations and
incidents were such as actually did occur. We can scarcely
imagine such sentiments as the following emanating from a mere
child ; but we quote them as indicating, if not her actual state of
mind, yet the appreciation which Charlotte held of her sister's
teaching and mode of thought at that time:?
" Life appears to me too short to be spent in nursing animosities or
registering wrongs. We are and must be, one and all, burdened with
faults in this world; but the time will come when, I trust, we shall
put them off in putting off our corruptible bodies; when debasement
and sin will fall from us with this cumbrous frame of flesh, and only
the spark of the spirit remain,?the impalpable principle of life and
thought, pure as when it left the Creator to inspire the creature :
Avhence it came it will return,?perhaps again to be communicated to
some being higher than man?perhaps to pass through gradations of
glory, from the pale human soul to brighter, to the seraph! Surely
it will never, on the contrary, be suffered to degenerate from man to
fiend ? No ; I cannot believe that; I hold another creed, which 110
one ever taught me, and which I seldom mention, but in which I de-
light, and to which I cling, for it extends hope to all; it makes eter-
nity a rest?a mighty home, not a terror and an abyss. Besides, with
this creed, I can so clearly distinguish between the criminal and his
crime; I can so sincerely forgive the first, whilst I abhor the last;
with this creed revenge never worries my heart, degradation never
too deeply disgusts me, injustice never crushes me too low: I live in
calm, loolcing to the end."
We must give one further illustration of the characters of these
children: for, as they were each others' sole associates, the mind
of each is of importance as influencing all the rest. Mr. Bronte,,
apparently in one of his more social and domestic moods, wished'
to inquire into the talents and ideas of the children; and that,
they might, as he thought, speak more freely, he put a mask on
the face of the one questioned. " I told them," says he, " to
stand and speak boldly from under cover of the mask. I began-
with the youngest (Anne, afterwards Acton Bell, about four-
NO. X.?NEW SERIES. X
304 CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
years old), and asked what a child like her most wanted; she
answered, ' Age and experience.' I asked the next (Emily, after-
wards Ellis Bell) what I had best do with her brother Branwell,
who was sometimes a naughty boy; she answered, 'Reason with
him; and when he won't listen to reason, whip him.' I asked
Branwell what was the best way of knowing the difference
between the intellects of man and woman; he answered, ' By
considering the difference between them as to their bodies.' I
then asked Charlotte what was the best book in the world ; she
answered, ' The Bible.' And what was the next best; she
answered, 4 The Book of Nature.' I then asked the next what
was the best mode of education for a woman; she answered,
' That which would make her rule her house well.' Lastly, I
asked the eldest (Maria, about ten) what was the best mode of
spending time; she answered, ' By laying it out in preparation
for a happy eternity.' I may not have given precisely their
words, but I have nearly done so, as they made a deep and
lasting impression on my memory. The substance, however,
was exactly what I have stated."
Maria and Elizabeth Bronte died young,?aged eleven and
ten,?and were buried at Haworth, near their well-beloved moors.
Branwell lived to cast the shadow of a dark lurid cloud over
almost the whole of his sister's life, by intemperance and all its
concomitant vices. His wild, reckless, determined nature was
shown to the. very last?he insisted on dying standing up.
Charlotte, Emily, and Anne were the Currer, Ellis, and Acton
Bell that for a while formed the mystery of part of the literary
world. Emily was of a strange, wild, fierce temper, permitting
no sympathy, asking and accepting no aid. The portrait of
" Shirley" is intended by Miss Bronte to represent what Emily
might have been under favouring circumstances. The incident
there related of the bite of the dog, and the cauterizing the
wound with a red-hot iron, actually occurred to Emily. In her
illness her sister thus writes of her: " Stronger than a man,
simpler than a child, her nature stood alone. The awful point
was, that, while full of ruth for others, on herself she had no
pity; the spirit was inexorable to the flesh; from the trembling
hand, the unnerved limbs, the fading eyes, the same service was
exacted as they had rendered in health. To stand by and witness
this, and not dare to remonstrate, was a pain no words can
render. Dying of consumption, she would have no advice, no
assistance, no sympathy. She refused to see a physician, or to
take the remedies prescribed on her friends' descriptions. Only
two hours before her death did she consent to see a medical
attendant, and then it was too late.
Such a parentage?such family associations?are fully sufficient
CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 305
to account for the characteristic peculiarities of Charlotte Bronte;
hut there are still many other elements to notice, which combined
to form this remarkable character. The impression made upon
strangers by the aspect of the country and the house in which
the Brontes resided is vividly shown in a letter from which the
following is extracted :?
" The country got wilder and wilder as we approached Haworth;
for the last four miles we were ascending a huge moor, at the very top
of which lies the dreary, black-looking village of Haworth. The vil-
lage street itself is one of the steepest hills I have ever seen, and the
stones are so horribly jolting that I should have got out and walked
if possible; but having once begun the ascent, to stop was out of the
question The clergyman's house was at the top of the church-
yard,?so through that we went,?a dreary, dreary place, literally
paved with rain-blackened tombstones, and all on the slope; for at
Haworth there is on the highest height a higher still, and Mr. Bronte's
house stands considerably above the church. There was the house
before us, a small oblong stone house, with not a tree to screen it from
the cutting wind; but how we were to get at it from the churchyard
we could not see! There was an old man in the churchyard, brooding
like a ghoul over the graves, with a sort of grim hilarity on his face.
.... Presently we found ourselves in the little bare parlour Joy
can never have entered that house since it was first built; and yet,
perhaps, when that old man married, and took home his bride, and
children's voices and feet were heard about the house, even that deso-
late crowded graveyard and biting blast could not quench cheerful-
ness and hope. Now, there is something touching in the sight of that
little creature entombed in such a place, and moving about, herself like
a spirit, especially when you think that the slight still frame encloses
a force of strong fiery life, which nothing has been able to freeze or
extinguish."
A true wild, dreary moorland home was this Haworth, cut
off from anything like easy communion with the surrounding
district. A neighbour's visit was truly a journey; and so the
village was almost isolated from the world, and the Brontes were
almost isolated from the village. Here Miss Bronte, with com-
paratively short intervals of absence, passed the whole of her life;
and little as was her intercourse with the people, it could not fail
to have some influence upon her; and we shall now examine
what this was likely to be.
" For a right understanding," says the biographer, " of the life
of my dear friend Charlotte Bronte, it appears to me more
necessary in her case than in most others that the reader should
he made acquainted with the peculiar forms of population and
society amidst which her earliest years were passed, and from
which both her sisters' and her own first impressions of human
life must have been received," Mrs. Gaskell describes the York-
x 2
306 CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
shiremen as endued with strong sagacity and a dogged power of
?will, which produce an air of self-sufficiency and independence
" rather apt to repel a stranger." He rarely requires assistance,
and rarely tenders it; hence he over-estimates his own powers.
" The practical qualities of a man are held in great respect; but the
want of faith in strangers, and untried modes of action, extends itself
even to the manner in which the virtues are regarded; and if they
produce no immediate and tangible result, they are rather put aside as
unfit for this busy, striving world, especially if they are more of a
passive than an active character. The affections are strong, and their
foundations lie deep; but they are not?such affections seldom are?
wide-spreading, nor do they show themselves on the surface. Indeed
there is little display of the amenities of life among this wild, rough
population. Their accost is curt; their accent and tone of speech,
blunt and harsh. Something of this may probably be attributed to
the freedom of mountain air and of isolated hill-side life; something be
derived from their rough Norse ancestry. They have a quick percep-
tion of character, and a keen sense of humour; their feelings are not
easily roused, but their duration is lasting. Hence there is much
close friendship and faithful service; and for a correct exemplification
of the form in which the latter frequently appears, I need only refer
the reader of' Wuthering Heights' to the character of Joseph. These
men are shrewd and faithful; persevering in following out a good pur-
pose, fell in tracking an evil one. They are a powerful race both in
mind and body, both for good and for evil."
Mrs. Gaskell gives many amusing and graphic illustrations of
the rough energies and determined wills of these Haworth people,
as well as occasionally of their brutalized nature, until we can
see the origin of many of Miss Bronte's apparently most gro-
tesque scenes and characters. We can see whence were derived
the elements for the construction of such characters as the elder
Crimsworth, Hunsdon, Yorke, Helstone, and Rochester; and
also, from her limited intercourse with such men, how it was that
her dramatis personce became rather melodramatic than true
natural men. For her imagination, when directed towards cha-
racter and unchecked by experience, had a strong leaning to the
melodrame. In her criticism this is strongly marked by her con-
sidering Walter Scott's " Varney" as one of the most powerful of
his creations.
Many of the fierce riotous scenes described in "Shirley" are
but graphic sketches of actual occurrences during Miss Bronte's
childhood and youth; and we can testify that the savage brutality
of the lower working classes is not at all overdrawn. We must
add further, by way of completing the view of the moral medium
amid which she was brought up, that ignorance and superstition,
not to be exceeded by'those of any heathen land, not only did
prevail in some of these remote "districts of Yorkshire during-
CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 307
Miss Bronte's youth, but do so still. We have ourselves met
with children of advanced age who had never heard of a God,
who had no idea what prayer meant, and were as thoroughly
heathen as any New Zealander. In many parts, almost every
door has a liorse-shoe nailed to it, to keep out witches; and we
have not unfrequently heard obstinate diseases attributed to the
patient's having been " ill-wished" by some suspicious-looking
old woman, who had undoubtedly been observed entering or
leaving the house in some irregular manner, through keyhole or
chimney. Notwithstanding all this, and much more that might
be said on the same theme, Yorkshire is not all as represented by
the Brontes : all the manufacturers are not Crimsworths?all the
farms are not Wuthering Heights?all the gentlemen are not
Rochesters?nor all the plebs Cherokees or Blackfoots. On the
nature of the characters depicted by these three sisters Bronte, a
recent writer in the " National Review" thus speaks:?
" How far the temperament, common under varied aspects to the
three sisters, was due to the circumstances of their life, or how far to
peculiarities of nature and race, it is impossible to determine. They
seem curious offspring of the eccentric, strong-willed Irish father, and
the simple, mild Cornish mother. It is as if the churchyard air they
breathed, and the strong cold breezes from the moor, had entered into
their very nature and made them what they were. Yet they were
clearly not children of the soil; the glowing embers that lay but half
smothered at the bottom of the character of at least two of them, had
in it more of the Southern and Celtic element than of the Northman's
opener, clearer fire. Half England now has formed an idea of York-
shire on what these sisters have written: yet we doubt if they ever
understood the North-country character. They studied its exceptional
aspects, and familiarity with its external traits enabled them to give
life-like costume to their pictures; but their narrow and secluded
natures had neither the range nor the opportunity to grasp the broader
characteristics of the people amongst whom they lived, and the North-
country has received considerable injustice at their hands The
close shadow of the Brontes' churchyard home, the bitter winds, and
the wild, dark aspect of their moors, have left the mark of their in-
fluence upon the writings as well as the characters of the sisters. They
want softness, variety, beauty; they are too often dark, hopeless, dis-
comfortable: on the other hand, they are vigorous and fresh, and bear
welcome traces of Nature s close companionship with the minds from
which they sprang. A personal impress is strongly marked on them.
It is curious that though the writers all had strong imaginations, not
?one ot them had the power to get rid for a moment of her own indivi-
duality. It permeates with its subtle presence every page they write.
They were not engaging persons, and they felt that they were not?
felt it acutely, and made others unduly sensible of it. Nor did they
care to see others in their more agreeable and engaging aspects. They
had been brought into close contact with the darker shades of character,
308 CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
and they studied them and reproduced them; too often they used
light to give a greater depth to shadow, rather than shadow to set off
light."
How Charlotte Bronte individually was affected by the varied in-
fluences to which we have alluded, will be best developed by a
brief survey of her educational career, and her character during
that time.
At a very early age she was sent to the establishment at
Cowan Bridge, where events occurred which cast a deep gloom
over her future life. Without entering into any of those details
which have recently given origin to so much controversy, it is
sufficient to know that the bad food and unhealthy situation of
the place seemed to undermine the probably already delicate con-
stitutions of the two elder sisters, Maria and Elizabeth: they
did not die there, but were removed home, and died during the
same year. And thus Charlotte, at the age of nine, was left the
eldest of a motherless and almost fatherless family. She con-
tinued at the school a little longer, but was soon removed, as it
aj)peared likely to injure her health. Whilst at school, she was
considered a " bright, clever child but Mrs. Gaskell considers
that the early part of the year 1825, just before the death of her
sisters, was the last time in her life that the epithet " bright"
could justly be applied to her. The active cares of life
seemed to begin then; and with few intervals of relief, they con-
tinued thickening around her, enveloping her like a gloomy, impe-
netrable pall, till the time when she was left alone to her work,
to wait, perhaps, with some impatience for the end. Now followed
an interval of five years at home, in which Charlotte's tastes,
tendencies, and character must have undergone great develop-
ment. The children led a solitary, isolated life, in which there
was much time for thought; they were thrown very much upon
their own resources; their aunt, Miss Branwell, taught them
what she could, and their father related to them public news
which to him was interesting, and "from the opinions of his
strong and independent mind they could gather much food for
thoughtbut all this could not exhaust the requirements of
young, ardent, active minds. To this, in all probability, may be
attributed the bias towards authorship which possessed their
whole subsequent lives; for, even whilst such mere children,
they adopted, almost from the necessity of their nature, the
habit of inventing and writing tales, dramas, poems, &c., of
which the principal subjects were the political and military cele-
brities of the day, especially the Duke of Wellington. These
were sometimes combined into magazines, of which there was an
editor, who received communications, criticisms, and letters upon
the current topics of the time, and responded with due editorial
CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 309
gravity. Some of these productions are very remarkable for
children. Another element, the results of which may be traced
in all Miss Bronte's maturer writings, was furnished by Tabby,
an elderly woman from the village, who came to reside with them
as a sort of half servant, half gouvemante. Tabby was a relic of
olden times?had lived in Haworth in the days of the packliorses
and bells. " What is more, she had known the ' bottom,' or
valley, in those primitive days when the fairies frequented the
margin of the 'beck' on moonlight nights, and had known folk
who had seen them. ' It wur the factories as had driven 'em
away." No doubt she had many a tale to tell of bygone days of the
country-side : old ways of living, and former inhabitants ; decayed
gentry who had melted away, and whose places knew them no
more; family tragedies, and dark superstitious dooms; and, in
telling these things without the least consciousness that there
might be anything requiring to be softened down, would give at
full length the bare and simple details." And so, at this plastic
age, Charlotte's vivid imagination would become tinged uncon-
sciously with that shade of superstition which every now and
then would gleam forth amidst her strong, practical common
sense ; and her mind would become stored with old legends and
incidents, in which, in after-days, she would make her ideal cha-
racters actors. If we are not mistaken, even the grotesque inci-
dent connected with Mr. Rochester's insane wife was but a repro-
duction of a currently reported tale in that neighbourhood, with
very slight modifications.
What a strange, irregular sort of culture these minds were under-
going, may be inferred, partly, from a list of painters which
Charlotte, then only thirteen, made out, as those whose works
she wished to see?including " Guido Reni, Julio Romano,
Titian, Raphael, Michael Angelo, Correggio, Annibal Carracci,
Leonardo da Yinci, Era Bartolomeo, Carlo Cignani, Vandyke,
Rubens, and Bartolomeo Ramerglii;" and this when she had
probably never seen a painting worthy of the name.
When about fifteen, in 1831, she is described personally as
" very small in figure, with soft, thick brown hair, and peculiar
eyes, of which I find it very difficult to give a description, as she
appeared to me in her later life." (" Jane Eyre" describes her
own as green eyes.) The usual expression was of quiet, listening
intelligence, but now and then, on some just occasion for
vivid interest or wholesome indignation, a light would shine out
as if some spiritual lamp had been kindled which glowed behind
those expressive orbs As for the rest of her features, they
were plain, large, and ill-set Her hands and feet were
the smallest I ever saw "I can well imagine that the
grave, serious composure which, when I knew her, gave her face
310 CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
the dignity of an old Venetian portrait, was no acquisition of
later years, but dated from that early age when she found herself
in the position of an elder sister to motherless children."
In January of this year she again went to school, where she re-
mained nearly two years. She appeared at first as a timid, reserved,
awkward, shortsighted girl?very deficient, indeed, in the ordinary
branches of education, but confounding her companions, fre-
quently and unconsciously, by her strange acquaintance with out-
of-the-way matters that they knew nothing of. During this time,
however, these defects of education were corrected, and some of
the more amiable qualities of her mind evolved. When she
left Roe Head, in 1832, she had "won the affectionate regard
both of her teacher and her schoolfellows, and formed there
the two fast friendships, which lasted her whole life long," with
the "Mary" and the "E." of the memoir. Her correspondence
with the latter forms a considerable portion of the work. Mrs.
Gaskell observes:?
"In looking over the earlier portion of this correspondence, I am
struck afresh by the absence of hope, which formed such a strong cha-
racteristic of Charlotte. ... In after-life, I was painfully impressed with
the fact that she never dared to allow herself to look forward with
hope; that she had no confidence in the future; and I thought, when
I heard of the sorrowful years she had passed through, that it had been
this pressure of grief which had crushed all buoyancy of expectation
out of her. But it appears from the letters, that it must have been,
so to speak, constitutional; or perhaps the deep pang of losing her
two elder sisters combined with a permanent state of bodily weakness
in producing her hopelessness. If her trust in God had been less
strong, she would have given way to unbounded anxiety at man}1" a
period of her life. As it was, we shall see, she made a great and suc-
cessful effort to leave her 'times in His hands.' "
After remaining some time at home instructing her sisters,
Charlotte returned to Roe Head as a teacher. Here her life was
not unhappy until her health began to fail. At this time a sort
of crisis occurred in her constitution, either physical or mental?
for in such a tangled chain it is not possible to say which was the
first link. " She told me (says ' Mary') " that one evening she
had sat in the dressing-room until it was quite dark, and then,
observing it all at once, had taken sudden fright." A similar
terror is alluded to in the earlier pages of " Jane Eyre."
"From that time her imaginations became gloomy or frightful; she
could not help it, nor help thinking. She could not forget the gloom?
could not sleep at night, nor attend in the day. She told me that one
night, sitting alone, about this time, she heard a voice repeat these
lines:?
1 Come, thou high and holy feeling,
Shine o'er mountain, flit o'er wave,
Gleam like light o'er dome and sheeling'?
CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 311
and eight or ten more lines which I forget. She insisted that she had
not made them?that she had heard a voice repeat them. . . . Whether
the lines were recollected or invented, the tale proves such liahits of
sedentary, monotonous solitude of thought, as would have shaken a
feebler mind."
To the psychologist all these symptoms are familiar, and sug-
gestive of a state of mind, the relations of which are not difficult
to predicate. It is not at all improbable that Miss Bronte was
subject occasionally to hallucinations of both eye and ear. Com-
menting, at a later period of her life, upon lier habits of sitting
up for hours after the family had retired, and when she was left
alone by the death of her sisters, Mrs. Gaskell says:?
" No one on earth can even imagine what those hours were to her.
All the grim superstitions of the North had been implanted in her
during her childhood by the servants, who believed in them. They
recurred to her now,?with no shrinking from the spirits of the dead,
but with such an intense longing once more to stand face to face with
the souls of her sisters, as no one but she could have felt. It seemed
as if the very strength of her yearning should have compelled them to
appear. On windy nights, cries, sobs, and wailings seemed to go round
the house, as of the dearly-beloved striving to force their way to her.
Some one conversing with her once objected, in my presence, to that
part of'Jane Eyre' in which she hears Rochester's voice crying out
to her in a great crisis of her life, he being many, many miles distant
at the time. I do not know what incident was in Miss Bronte's recol-
lection when she replied, in a low voice, drawing in her breath, ' But
it is a true thing; it really happened.' "
After this period, from time to time we hear of failing health,
with the most fearful depression of spirits. " Mere bodily pain,
however acute, she could always put aside ; but too often ill-
health assailed her in a part far more to be dreaded. Her de-
pression of spirits, when she was not well, was pitiful in its
extremity. She was aware that it was constitutional, and could
reason about it; but no reasoning prevented her suffering mental
agony, while the bodily cause remained in force."
In 1850 she herself says :?
" I don't know what heaviness of spirit has beset me of late, made
my faculties dull, made rest weariness, and occupation burdensome.
Now and then the silence of the house, the solitude of the room, has
pressed on me w ith a weight I found it difficult to bear, and recollec-
tion has not failed to be as alert, poignant, and obtrusive as other
feelings were languid."
Some time afterwards, there is a long annual period of this sort
of affliction. To a friend she writes :?
" Sometimes the strain falls on the mental, sometimes on the physi-
cal part of me; I am ill with neuralgic headache, or I am ground down
312 CHARLOTTE BRONTfi?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
to the dust with deep dejection of spirits. That weary time has, I
think and trust, got over for this year. It was the anniversary of my
poor brother's death, and of my sisters' failing health: I need say no
more."
Yet amid all this she was working on, sometimes attempting
the life of a private governess, sometimes in a school, with the
physical and mental results that might be anticipated. But cir-
cumstances seemed to make it imperative that the girls should do
something to relieve their father from their support, particularly
as at this time he was threatened with blindness. A scheme was
devised for opening a school, as a preparation for which, Char-
lotte and Emily entered for a while a pensionnat at Brussels.
Of their life at this time, a sufficiently accurate idea may be
gathered from " Villette" and " The Professor." The scenes and
mode of tuition described in these works seem to be almost his-
torical?all save the actual personal incidents. It was here that,
under the philosophic tuition and guidance of M. Heger, Miss
Bronte's powerful thinking faculties were, for the first time, sys-
tematically drawn out and cultivated. It is not impossible that
here also, for the first time, she learnt the potency of other and
yet untried emotional elements of her nature; but of this we
know nothing, save by perhaps falsely interpreted inferences?so
that nothing can be founded on the supposition. On her final
return home from Brussels, in January, 1844, it appears that the
project of a school was given up temporarily, on account of Mr.
Bronte's increasing blindness, and his daughter's conviction that
she must not leave him. Shortly after this, she writes to a
friend :?" I do not know whether you feel as I do, but there are
times now when it appears to me as if all my ideas and feelings,
except a few friendships and affections, are changed from what
they used to be; something in me which used to be enthusiasm,
is tamed down and broken. I have fewer illusions : what I wish
for now is active exertion?a stake in life. Haworth seems such
a lonely, quiet spot, buried away from the world. I no longer
regard myself as young?indeed, I shall soon be twenty-eight;
and it seems to me as if I ought to be working and braving the
rough realities of the world, as other people do. It is, however,
my duty to restrain this feeling at present, and I will endeavour
to do so." Poor soul! lier discipline was harder than any work
?a weary waiting and watching for opportunities that came not
?standing well-nigh alone, the earth as iron and the heavens as
brass?youth passed without happiness?age creeping on without
hope?a weary lot indeed.
In 1815, a volume of poems were published by " Currer, Ellis,
and Acton Bell." They attracted but little attention?that little
not very favourable : another disappointment. Charlotte quietly
CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 313
submits to it:?" The book was printed : it is scarcely known ;
and all of it that merits to he known are the poems of Ellis Bell.
The fixed conviction I held, and hold, of the worth of these
poems, has not indeed received the confirmation of much favour-
able criticism ; but I must retain it notwithstanding." Then
each of the sisters wrote a tale?" The Professor," "Wutliering
Heights," and " Agnes Grey." After many unsuccessful attempts,
the two latter found a publisher; but Charlotte's tale was always
rejected. " Currer Bell's book," she writes, " found acceptance
nowhere, nor any acknowledgment of merit, so that something
like the chill of despair began to invade his heart." But, nn-
daunted by this, the brave woman began "Jane Eyre," the work
which has placed her in the first rank of female novelists. It
was published on October 16th, 1847. And now her fame was
made?the worst struggle was over; but clouds gather thick
and fast around the domestic life of the author, one by one in
rapid succession, the wild, reckless brother, the dearly-loved
sister Emily, and the youngest and gentlest?the most like the
mother?Anne, passed away, leaving the subdued, broken-spirited
Charlotte to labour on alone, and await her own time, uncheered
by her constant companions in weal or woe. By the 28th of May,
1849, she is alone :?
" My life (she writes) is what I expected it to be. Sometimes when
I wake in the morning, and know that Solitude, Remembrance, and
Longing are to be almost my sole companions all day through?that
at night I shall go to bed with them?that they will long keep me
sleepless?that next morning I shall wake to them again?sometimes
I have a heavy heart of it. But crushed I am not, yet; nor robbed of
elasticity, nor of hope, nor quite of endeavour. 1 have some strength
to fight the battle of life. I am aware, and can acknowledge, I have
many comforts, many mercies. Still I can get on. But I do hope
and pray that never may you, or any one I love, be placed as I am.
To sit in a lonely room?the clock ticking loud through a still house
?and have open before the mind's eye the record of the last year, with
its shocks, sufferings, and losses, is a trial."
Mrs. Gaskell gives many features in detail, but no complete
portrait of the character formed by this life of patient, unbroken
endurance. If we examine her correspondence and writings gene-
rally, we find unmistakeable marks of an ardent, fiery tempera-
ment, constantly repressed of an imagination vivid, scintillating,
wTild, and eerie, working upon limited material and experience?
of a disposition warm and affectionate, abounding with all manner
of human sympathy, that could never find a vent or fit sphere for
expansion of a piety deep, sincere, and practical, yet eminently
undemonstrative and retiring, shunning all question or observa-
tion?of a habit of mind reserved, timid, and observant?of an
314 CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
entire noble nature, enthusiastic and aspiring, quelled and worn
down with unremitting care and suffering. But for the possible
expansions of such a nature, we must look further than her con-
fined, isolated, suffering life. We must see her as she represents
herself acting and feeling in imaginary conjunctures ; and we need
not fear taking her own testimony, for she was not one to flatter
even self, and under the guise of a fictitious name. For this
purpose we must glance over the prominent points of "Jane
Eyre," in which she appears to have given a daguerreotype of
herself;* the veritable thoughts and feelings of her life being
hung on imaginary incidents. Jane is first known as a little
plain, shy orphan girl of ten years old, neglected and ill-treated
by an aunt, "bullied and punished" by her son, scorned and
repelled by her daughters; constantly looking for something or
some one to love, but in vain ; utterly unattractive in appearance
and manners. At last, in response to more than usually cruel
treatment, the ardent impetuous nature flames out, and over-
whelms the hard ruthless aunt with fear and astonishment. She
is sent to school at the establishment of Lowood (Cowan
.Bridge), for clergymen's daughters, where for eight years she
remains utterly cast off by her relatives?six years as a pupil,
and two as a teacher; indicating, as is observed afterwards, a
great tenacity of life, considering the treatment which is there
described. Unjustly accused of faults not her own, she is at first
morose and rebellious in temper; but the pressure of constant
discipline, and some little casual kindness, at last reduce her to
an ordinary tolerably-conducted school-girl. At the end of eight
years this isolated life becomes unendurable, and she advertises
for a situation as governess, determined to see more of her fellow-
creatures than a girls'-school can exhibit. Mrs. Fairfax, the
housekeeper of a country gentleman, Mr. Rochester, answers her
advertisement, and engages her to take charge of a ward of her
master's. The first meeting between Jane and Mr. Rochester
is arranged in a dark lane, where his horse falls?an accident
which he afterwards lays to the charge of " her people," as ho
calls the fairies. Now this Mr. Rochester is evidently a pet
invention of Miss Bronte's, and is intended to represent a fine,
noble, generous English country gentleman, with a decided lean-
ing towards unconventionalities. In nothing scarcely is Miss
Bronte's contracted intercourse with society more manifest than
in her elaborate delineations of character; her sketches are good,
* At the time of the first appearance of "Jane Eyre," during its first burst of
popularity, a relative of the writer was asked by a friend if she had ever seen any
one like Jane ; to which she replied, that many years before she had seen one, and
only one person who accurately resembled the character; that was a Miss Bronte.
She had seen her but once, but the resemblance was too vivid to be mistaken even
at that distance of time.
CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY. 315
but her finished portraits are chiefly caricatures. This same Mr.
Rochester is, we are sorry to say, nothing more nor less than a
selfish, coarse, not far from brutal sensualist?a melodramatic
hero, with some of the reflected refinement of the beholder upon
him. He has on the third story of Thornfield a mad wife, de-
scribed as several degrees worse than a satyr, and more savage
than a hyena; but of this no one knows anything, and lie would
willingly have had Jane for his second wife. In their first social
interview, he inquires with a domineering abruptness into her
previous life and qualifications, which he criticises with no sparing
hand; but Jane always likes to be "bullied." He examines her
water-colour drawings, which meet with more favour than her
other performances. Three of these he selects to analyse; and
they give so vivid a view of Miss Bronte's style of imagination,
that we quote the description :?
" The first represented clouds low and livid, rolling over a swollen
sea; all the distance was in eclipse; so, too, was the foreground, or
rather the nearest billows, for there was no land. One gleam of light
lifted into relief a half-submerged mast, on which sat a cormorant,
dark and large, with wings flecked with foam; its beak held a gold
bracelet, set with gems. Sinking below the bird and mast, a drowned
corpse glanced through the green water; a fair arm was the only limb
clearly visible, whence the bracelet had been washed or torn.
" The second picture contained for foreground oidy the dim peak
of a hill, with grass and some leaves slanting as if by a breeze. Be-
yond and above spread an expanse of sky, dark blue, as at twilight;
rising into the sky was a woman's shape to the bust, portrayed in
tints as dusk as I could combine. The dim forehead was crowned with
a star; the lineaments below were seen as through the suffusion of
vapour; the eyes shone dark and wild; the hair streamed shadowy,
like a beamless cloud torn by storm or by electric travail. On the
neck lay a pale reflection like moonlight; the same faint lustre touched
the train of thin clouds from which rose and bowed this vision of the
Evening Star.
" The third showed the pinnacle of an iceberg piercing a polar
winter sky; a muster of northern lights reared their dim lances, close
serried along the horizon. Throwing these into distance, rose, in the
foreground, a head?a colossal head, inclined towards the iceberg, and
resting against it. Two thin hands, joined under the forehead, and
supporting it, drew up before the lower features a sable veil; a brow
quite bloodless, white as bone, and an eye hollow and fixed, blank of
meaning but for the glassiness of despair, alone were visible. Above
the temples, amidst wieathed turban folds of black drapery, va(r u e in
its character and consistency as cloud, gleamed a ring of white flame,
gemmed with sparkles of a more lurid tinge. This pale crescent was
' The likeness of a Kingly Crown;' what it diademed was 'the shape
which shape had none.' "
Nothing ever impressed us more strongly than this with the
316 CHABLOTTE BRONTfi?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY.
conception of Miss Bronte's thoughtful and lonely habits of mind,
nor of her wonderful power of word-painting. In the next inter-
view of Jane with her master, as she loves to call him, they come
to personalities:?
"' You examine me, Miss Eyre : do you think me handsome ?'
" The answer somehow slipped from my tongue before I was aware
* No, sir.'
" ' Criticize me: does my forehead not please you ?'
" He lifted up the sable waves of hair which lay horizontally over
his brow, and showed a solid enough mass of intellectual organs, but
an abrupt deficiency where the suave sign of benevolence should have
risen. ' Now, ma'am, am I a fool ?'
"' Far from it, sir. You would, perhaps, think me rude if I in-
quu-ed in return whether you are a philanthropist ?' "
The conversations between these two singular characters are
piquant enough. Jane's answers, however, remind us much
more strongly of what occurs to a naturally shy person after-
wards as what might have been said, than of the sort of repartee
that was likely actually to pass between two such interlocutors.
The story we cannot follow step by step. Jane loves Mr.
Rochester, and he loves her with frantic passion. Mr. Rochester
is Jane without her principle, and supplemented by a strong,
coarse, vigorous nature, moral and physical?hence their cohe-
rence. He relates early in their acquaintance, with wonderful
candour, the story of his early sensualities, to which she listens
with equanimity, and ultimately undertakes the task of his
guardian angel, by promising to marry him. Before all the mis-
fortunes of her life, she has been warned by dreams of carrying
about a helpless child; and for some time before the wedding-
day this vision haunts her. On the morning of the day, in the
church itself, the secret of the former (or present) mad wife is
revealed, and the ceremony, of course, is stopped.
The succeeding scenes are painted with a power which few
writers cau equal, scarce any excel; but Jane's unbending prin-
ciple triumphs over all the passion and sophistry of her lover,
and she escapes. For days she undergoes the most sickening
privations, but finds a home and friends at last, with whom she
lives a year. At a crisis of her history she hears Mr. Rochester's
voice calling, " Jane, Jane, Jane," though he is a hundred miles
distant: she answers, " I am coming?Avait for meand it
appears ultimately that he also heard the answer. The next day
she sets off for Thomfield, which she finds burnt down. The
wife was burnt with it, and Mr. Rochester was maimed and
blinded ftt the time. He is absent, but she follows him, and
they are married ; his sight partly returns, and for ten years their
happiness is perfect.
PHYSIO LOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY. 317
" I have now been married ten years. I know what it is to live
entirely for and with what I love best on earth. I hold myself su-
premely blest beyond what language can express; because I am my
husband's life as fully as he is mine. No woman was ever nearer to
her mate than I am ; never more absolutely bone of his bone, and flesh
of his flesh. I know no weariness of my Edward's society ; he knows
none of mine ; any more than we each do of the pulsation of the heart
that beats in our separate bosoms?consequently we are ever together.
To be together is for us to be at once as free as in solitude, as gay as
in company. All my confidence is bestowed on him, all his confidence
is devoted to me ; we are precisely suited in character?perfect concord
is the result."
Alas! that one who so well could paint what life might be,
should have so little experience of it. When her youth was
passed, Miss Bronte married;?whether with that perfect, ex-
pansive, all-comprehensive love of which her original nature was
capable or not, we have no right to inquire. She was liappy.
"We her loving friends, standing outside, caught occasional
glimpses of brightness, and pleasant, peaceful murmurs of sound,
telling of the gladness within; and we looked at each other, ancl
said, ' After a hard and long struggle?after many cares and
many bitter sorrows?she is tasting happiness now!' Those who
saw her, saw an outward change in her look, telling of inward
things. And we thought, and we hoped, and we prophesied in
our great love and reverence. . . . But God's ways are not as our
ways!"
In a few short months she went to join those sisters whom she
had loved so well. On March 31st, 1855, she rested at last, after
a weary warfare of thirty-nine years. Requiescat.
