On Civilization
=================

THE JOURNAL
OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND
MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
APRIL 1, 1858.
Art. I.?

Whether the human race he one or many as regards its origin,
will probably remain for ever a contested point amongst those
who depend entirely upon secular history and science for the
solution of the question ; and although we hold that the unity of
race is the theory in every aspect most accordant with true phi-
losophy, yet it must be confessed that the diversity of condition
and development, both physically and intellectually, which is
exposed to the investigator at almost every step, would appear
almost sufficient to. warrant the opinion, that such various habits,
manners, customs, and modes of life and thought, could not be
the normal characteristics of one species. The Esquimaux,
muffled up to the eyes, gorged with many pounds of blubber?
the naked inhabitant of Van Diemen's Land, starving on a few
oysters or a precarious fish?the New Hollander, rejoicing over
his worm which he has just extracted from a piece of rotten wood,
or luxuriating over his savoury mess of fern-leaves and pounded
ants?the African, broiling his ebony limbs in the burning sun?
the Troglodyte, skulking his life away like any other wild beast
in his cavethese, the extremes of humanity, present almost as
strong contrasts amongst themselves as eaoh does to the polished
European. This latter, wanting any of the necessaries or luxuries
of life, orders it to be " sent in"?the poor Australian " goes out"
for it. Let us follow him, fortunate man that he is if he has no
friend who has " gone out" before him, in the intention of making
his dinner of him. We shall most probably have a weary walk :
mile after mile is passed, and no sign of animal life?such, at
least, as might be accessible or available for food. His native
* "History of Civilization in England." By Henry Thomas Buckle. Vol, T.
London. 1857. fa
NO. X.?NEW SERIES.
176 ON CIVILIZATION.
land affords bo eatable fruits. He gains the sea-shore, but the
sea is now tempestuous, and his expected fish-meal is not to be
had; and he probably relieves his .gnawing hanger by eating
some grubs found in a species of dwarf gum-tree. He may have
tracked some bee to its nest, but that is fifty, sixty, or eighty feet
up a smooth, branchless tree : hunger is a strong stimulus, and
with his rude hatchet he notches the tree with steps, grasping
the trunk with his left arm, and so painfully and slowly attains
his object. And so his day passes in the search (often un-
availing) for food. When night comes, he does not go home, for
he has no home to go to ; but he puts up a piece of bark or some
branches of a tree, to shelter him from the wind; sometimes
kindles a fire; and falls asleep, to awake again and resume his
weary quest for food. He has 110 trouble with dress, so that
there is nothing to delay his march in search of breakfast. Some
day he will be found starved to death on the coast, after an un-
usually scarce season. He believed in a Ivoyan and a Potoyan
?a good and an evil spirit; but he had but few hopes or fears
connected with either.
This is a sad spectacle of degraded humanity, but there are
depths still lower, or at least more revolting, than this. Dr.
Pickering, speaking of passing through one of the villages in his
visit to the Feejee Islands, says?"The male inhabitants were
absent at the time, engaged, it was said, in cooking a man?a
statement which, although it was not doubted, we did not feel
particularly desirous of verifying." The same learned writer
adds :?" In other parts of the globe, instances of cannibalism
have occurred, sometimes from extreme necessity, or as a deed of
savage ferocity; and we read of tribes who practise it as a cere-
mony, religious rite, 01* even as a manifestation of affection.*
At the Feejee Islands the custom rests 011 different grounds. It
is here interwoven in the elements of society ; it forms in no
slight degree a pursuit; and it is even regarded in the light of a
refinement. Instances are of daily occurrence; and the prepara-
tion of human flesh calls into requisition a variety of culinary
processes, and is almost a distinct art."
* The Battas of Sumatra are, in comparison with some tribes, a polished people;
they have a currency, a regular system of laws and government, and a literature ;
yet they eat their parents, "and that not so much to gratify their appetite as to
perform a pious ceremony. Thus, when a man becomes infirm and weary of the
world, he is said to invite his own children to eat him, in a season when salt and
limes are cheapest. He then ascends a tree, round which his friends and offspring
assemble, and, as they shake the tree, join in a funeral dirge, the import of which
is, 'The season is come, the fruit is ripe, and it must descend.' The victim de-
scends, and those who are nearest and dearest to him deprive him of life, and
devour his remains in a solemn banquet."?Moore's Papers on the Indian Archi-
pelago.
ON CIVILIZATION. 177
In order fully to appreciate the conditions under which uncivi-
lized humanity is found to exist, we must glance at one or two
other tribes, wherein we shall see depicted what some philoso-
phers have considered as " original man." Amongst the " Wild
People" of Ceram, society can scarcely he said to exist: each
family is at perpetual war with all around. They have no houses
nor huts, but live and sleep in trees, the branches of which they
twine so as to form some defence from their fellows. In the
Malay Peninsula there is a forest tribe, called by writers the
" Original People." They live in the deepest recesses of the
forest; they never come to the villages, for fear of meeting some
one. They neither sow nor plant, but live on fruits and what
animals they can take. Their language is understood by no one.
They have no king nor chief, but a Puyung, to whom they appeal
in disputes. They have no religion whatever, nor any idea of a
Supreme Being. When one dies, they bury the head and eat the
body.
Dalton thus describes the "Wild People of Borneo?
"Further towards the north are to be found men living absolutely
m a state of nature, who neither cultivate the ground nor live in huts;
who neither eat rice nor salt; and who do not associate with each
other, but rove about the woods like wild beasts. The sexes meet in
the jungle, or the man carries away a woman from some campong.
When the children are old enough to shift for themselves, they usually
separate, neither one afterwards thinking of the other. At night they
sleep under some large tree, the branches of which hang low. On
these they fasten the children in a kind of swing. Around the tree
they make a fire, to keep off the wild beasts and snakes. . . . These
poor creatures are looked on and treated by the Dayaks as wild beasts.
Hunting parties go out, and amuse themselves by shooting at the
children in the trees, the same as monkeys, from which they are not
easily distinguished."
The men are all killed, some of the women kept alive, and the
children are kept to paddle the canoes, having one foot cut off to
prevent escape. It appears that the children cannot be tamed
sufficiently to be entrusted with their liberty. " Selgie told me,"
continues the same narrator, " he never recollected an instance
where they did not escape to the jungle the first opportunity,
notwithstanding many of them had been kindly treated for years."
Such is humanity in one of its aspects.
But it is not alone geographically and ethnically that men
widely differ from each other. Marked as are the differences
between our populations of Western Europe and the people just
described, they are perhaps not more so than are the differences
between our present condition and that of our earliest times. It
N 2
178 ON CIVILIZATION.
is probable that the early history of some of our most refined
European States would, if it could be traced, afford scenes as
degraded and revolting as those above noticed. To go no further
than our own country : if contemporary annals may be trusted, our
condition was not very refined. It seems that our ancestors, or,
at all events, the inhabitants of our country about 1900 years
ago, were but half-naked savages, painted or stained so as to give
them a terrible appearance in war, living chiefly on milk and
flesh, scarcely acquainted with agriculture, and their only clothing
made of skins. That their manners and customs were of the
most barbarous nature, may be inferred from the following passage
from " Caesar's Commentaries?" Uxores habent deni duo-
denique inter se communes, et maxime fratres cum fratribus, et
parentes cum liberis. Sed si qui sunt ex his nati, eorum ha-
bentur liberi, a quibus primum virgines qusequoe ductoe sunt."
The religion of the Island was a superstition of the most frightful
character?a Polytheism, each divinity of which was most appro-
priately propitiated by human sacrifice. In short, we have but
to look at the barbarous nations of distant lands in the present
times, to find a tolerably accurate rescript of whatwre were before
the Roman invasion.*
This is a consideration full of hope and promise, and one which
leads all those who have faith in the high destinies of the human
race to inquire earnestly what is the change which has come over
our land during these two thousand years ? what is the essential
difference between us and those who are so like what we were ?
and what is lacking to these ?
The answer to these questions is ready on every tongue, and is
comprised in one word,?Civilization ; and very few, having
given that answer, will have any doubts as to the completeness
with which the problem has been solved. Yet until the meaning
of the word has been defined, and its full comprehensiveness
indicated, we shall be very far. from having arrived at any practical
understanding of the subject.
Before entering upon this investigation, some preliminary in-
quiry is requisite. We have just seen what man is in his lowest
state of development, and the question naturally arises, " Is this
state an original one, or is it a fall from some higher condition ?"
To exhaust the question completely, we should add the third
* There is still a third aspect in which the relations of refined and barbarous life
might be viewed?viz., in respect of the fact of the existence, even in the most
civilized societies, of large masses of men in an utterly uncivilized condition?de-
generate, demoralized beings, of intellects as undeveloped, of morals as low, of
passions, vices, and crimes as violent and degrading as any to be found in heathen
lands. These constitute the dangerous classes, the rock-ahead of all legisla-
tion, the insoluble problem of all society. The subject has been partly discussed in
our pages before, and will receive further attention, and, we hope, elucidation,
hereafter. We therefore omit all but the most passing consideration of it here.
ON CIVILIZATION. 179
possibility, as to its being an advance from some still lower
phase. But inasmuch as some of the races to whom we have
filluded seem to differ from the monkeys in little else save in
some unintelligible rudiments of articulate speech, and the casual
accomplishment of kindling a fire, Ave may leave this view out of
the calculation. The subject, from its nature, admits of no
demonstration philosophically; yet the spectacle consequent upon
such a hypothesis is too grotesque to be accepted as a proba-
bility.
" We must fancy man feeling his way at once to the lowest ele-
ments of civilization, and the most elementary conceptions of religion.
And as savages make no rapid progress (some philosophers say they
cannot, and all history shows they do not,) without instruction from
ivithout, and as by the supposition* primeval man could not have any,
it is hard to say how many ages he crawled before he walked, lived on
berries and acorns before his first incipient attempts at cookery, yelled
his uncouth gibberish before he made (if he could ever make) the re-
fined discovery of an articulate language, and lighted on his first deity
ln the shape of a bright pebble or an old fish-bone, and was in rap-
tures at the discovery ! Or, rather, it is hard to say how the poor
wretch ever survived the experiment of any such introduction to the
world at all. Some philosophers have defined man as a laughing
animal. I am afraid that, on this theory, it was some ages before he
found anything to laugh at. It must have been very long before his
'differentia' appeared."
Rejecting, then, the consideration of any possible lower grade
of humanity than those described, two theories present them-
selves, one or other of which must necessarily account for bar-
barous man. The first is, that he is the unmodified type of man as
originally created ; " natural progress" not yet having accom-
plished any part of its mission. The second involves the view
that he is fallen from a higher original condition, through the
agency of some means internal or external to himself. Even on
the supposition of the diversity of man's origin, this must still be
an exhaustive division, inasmuch as within historic times nations
have progressed from a condition of barbarism like that de-
scribed, to one of very high civilization; and therefore the
developmental condition of these in their earliest times is as
much the subject of inquiry, as that of those who still remain in
barbarity. Direct evidence of the earliest condition of the human
race must, from the nature of the case, either be wanting, or be
obtained from a revealed source?that is, from an external revela-
tion. The legends which each nation possesses as to its origin
ai'e invariably simply fabulous. Therefore to determine man s
"V iz., that of " natural progress," which is one of the dogmas of Mr. Buckle's
fP ? ^'le reason for the quotation, which is from the '' Defence of the Eciipso
?i t aith, p. 57, will be apparent in the course of the essay.
180 ON CIVILIZATION.
primitive state, we liave "but two methods?reason and analogy,
on the one hand; and a reference to those documents which claim
to he historical, contained in the earlier chapters of the hook of
Genesis, on the other. These, rejected by some, and considered
by others to he of limited application, are clearly all the direct
evidence accessible to us.
What, then, does analogy teach us ? Reasoning backwards
from the present condition of all civilized countries, we find at
each step a slight, though definite, advance towards the con-
dition of savage life, until we arrive at some such condition as
that of our own country two thousand years ago. At such a
point, authentic records are in general wanting, and our mode
of arriving at a knowledge of the previous state, is by theo-
retically continuing the retrogression from all the arts of
civilized life,?a process which will undoubtedly sooner or later
bring us to a perfectly wild state. Were this legitimate, we
could have no doubt whatever as to man's primeval condition;
but besides appearing almost like an assumption of the very
question at issue, we are met by two important considerations
which seem to cast some discredit on the results, and therefore
upon the method.
The first is, that however far we pursue our researches back-
wards, so long as authentic history is our guide, we find evidences
of civilization somewhere?in some nation or people. This of
itself would, of course, prove nothing more than that this nation
had worked out its own progress earlier than its neighbours ; but
the second is of more importance. We may safely assert that
the history of every civilization of which the history can be
traced, is connected with that of its intimate communion with
some other more highly civilized people, either in trade, com-
merce, or war; and that we have no authentic records of a true
civilization originating amongst and being completed by one
people, unassisted by any other. If analogy, then, be good for
anything in such an investigation as the present, it would lead
us to infer that the first forms of civilization were not sponta-
neously originated amongst a people as barbarous as the " original
people" of Borneo. We should, then, naturally conclude that
somewhere or other a higher type of humanity had always
existed; and, as a logical consequence, that the earliest type was
higher, and that these men, supposed to he "in a state of nature,"
were really fallen from a state of nature through some moral or
physical agency, or both combined. Let us hypothetically
attach even no more weight to the documents alluded to than as
a theory to account for the present condition of the human race;
even then we shall find it much more universally applicable than
ON CIVILIZATION".
any other yet propounded. Let us suppose that there is one
family, consisting of several members, possessing some know-
ledge of useful arts, skilled to some extent in agriculture, and
habituated to a pastoral life. Their descendants multiply, and
become too numerous for the land in which they dwell; portions
of them migrate in different directions, and become modified as
to the constitution of their society in accordance with the climate,
soil, and natural products of the place where they finally fix them-
selves. Some establish themselves upon fertile localities, which
repay cultivation, and found permanent colonies where their
former civilization will to some extent flourish ; some adopt a
nomadic pastoral life, in which the arts to which they were
formerly addicted will become useless, and the remembrance of
them gradually disappear. Others, again, will be thrown where
the products of the earth are insufficient for their support, and
will become hunters; and, in the constant arduous struggle for
existence, will still more rapidly lose sight of the laws of civilized
life. Lastly, some will be thrown, not from choice, but by acci-
dent, where the energies of the whole man will be required to eke
out even the most precarious existence from the scanty supply
both of vegetable and animal productions; and it is easy to see
how the downward course of these will soon bring them almost
to a level with the brutes. Add to these natural causes the in-
fluence of the excesses, the vices, the passions, the general evil
tendencies inherent to a warped moral nature, and we need be at
no loss to understand the present degraded phases which huma-
nity so frequently assumes. Such is the theory which we should
adopt to account for the varieties of barbarism and civilization.
Nor is this merely a speculative and unimportant question. If
the original condition of man be that of utter barbarism and
degradation, then the methods by which his elevation from that
condition is to be expected must remain merely empirical; nay,
even the very possibility of such elevation must remain in each
case a matter of doubt until success be achieved. Not so if it be
clearly established that such conditions are only the natural
results of the operation of degrading moral and physical agencies
upon a subject originally capable of higher things. Then, and
only then, can we hope that a correct system of moral and
physical hygiene will be efficacious in restoring him to his former
condition, and capacitating him for further progress. Then, also,
should we see a clear indication of the true method of reorga-
nizing and regenerating the barbarous and demoralized tribes or
masses which mingle with and corrupt our most civilized com-
munities, and which laugh our present methods to scorn.
As we have seen, the lowest forms of humanity are those
182 ON CIVILIZATION.
where, for his subsistence, man is dependent upon the scanty
produce of the chase, fishing, or the natural uncultivated pro-
duce of the earth. The first step in his upward course towards
civilization is taken when he takes to a pastoral life. Still, with-
out settled habitation, migrating frequently in search of fresh
pastures, he endures much privation, and in his life there are but
few elements of progress; yet it is one step in advance. The
next is a more important one?that of adopting a fixed home, and
agricultural pursuits. Iience arise the elements of a social state;
for here must flourish to some degree a practice of the arts ; there
must be a variety of interests, sometimes clashing; a liability to
invasion from the nomadic tribes of the surrounding districts,
and, in consequence of this, the necessity will be felt for some
sort of social combination, marked by more or less law and
order; likewise, the society will inevitably divide itself into the go-
vernors and the governed. The transition from this to the feudal
system is speedy and natural; thence to absolute monarchy;
and after that to the highest state of civilization, that " in which
security of person and property is firmly established by a just
and complete administration of good laws, where public opinion
has the greatest influence, and where more happiness is found in
the community."*
Such are the external phenomena or the landmarks of advancing
Civilization ; but we are yet as far as ever from having ascer-
tained the essential nature of the change, and the agencies which
are in operation in its production. The difficulty of giving a
scientific and comprehensive definition of the term is acknow-
ledged to be great; perhaps for this reason the writer of the very
learned work placed at the head of this essay avoids the attempt,
and contents himself with reasoning upon some understood
common acceptation of its meaning. This is to some extent
convenient, as it permits the actual fact to be viewed in a vague
or arbitrary sense, so as to accommodate it to the theories
brought forward to account for it, rather than to mould these
strictly in accordance with some accurate formula of the fact.
Let us grant, for convenience, that a strictly accurate scientific
definition of Civilization is impracticable, and attempt to analyse
the meaning of the term in its general and ordinary acceptation.
The etymology of the word will help us but in a very small
degree. It gives us the idea of the perfecting of civil and social
life, the life of society, the relations of men to each other. But
evidently this does not exhaust the question. We will follow
M. Guizot in his analysis of what Civilization is not.
* Mackinnon's "Hist, of Civilization," vol. i. p. 22.
ON CIVILIZATION. 183
1. A people whose external life is happy, with well-admi-
nistered forms of justice, may fulfil the above conditions; but
their intellectual and moral existence is in a state of torpor.
This is not civilization. "We are not without instances of this
state of things. There has been a great number of small aristo-
cratic republics, in which the people have been thus treated like
flocks vof sheep, well kept and materially happy, but without
moral and intellectual activity. Is this civilization ? Is this a
people civilizing itself?"?Guizot.
2. The material existence may be lower than in the last case,
but still tolerable; the intellectual and moral wants are to some
extent supplied; they are meted out to each individual?no one
is permitted to seek for himself. " Immobility is the characteristic
of their moral life." The instances of this condition are found
amongst the populations of Asia, the Hindoos especially. This
is not civilization.
8. "I change" (says M. Guizot) "altogether the nature of
the hypothesis : here is a people among whom is a great display
of individual liberties, but where disorder and inequalities are
excessive; it is the empire of force and of chance; every man,
if he is not strong, is oppressed, suffers, and perishes; violence
is the predominant feature of the social state." Europe has
passed through this condition, but it is not civilization.
4. Liberty and equality do not constitute civilization, for such
are the elements of savage life.
From these illustrations of what civilization is not, we may
arrive at some idea of what it is. The essential idea seems to
be progress and development, moral and intellectual culture,
extending and perfecting the social relations : " on the one hand,
an increasing production of strength and happiness to society;
on the other, a more equable distribution, amongst individuals,
of the strength and happiness produced."
But this is not all that is comprised in this word Civilization.
In this view, man is considered but as an element of a social
community; but he is something more than that; he has his
inner life, his faculties, his sentiments, his ideas; these assert
their claim to development; and side by side with the perfecting
of society, this, the perfecting of humanity, proceeds to complete
our conception of a durable civilization. Which of these two
must be accepted in the light of final cause?whether man perfects
his faculties in order to improve his social relations, or whether
the improvement in social relation is but the groundwork for the
development of the individual: in short, whether man is made to
serve society, or society to serve man ? These are questions
upon which we must not enter. We will conclude this part
184 ON CIVILIZATION.
of our subject with a noble sentiment uttered by M. Rover
Collard :?
" Human societies are born, live, and die on the earth; it is there
their destinies are accomplished. But they contain not the
whole man. After he has engaged himself to society, there remains
to him the noblest part of himself, those high faculties by which he
elevates himself to Grod, to a future life, to unknown felicity in an
invisible world. We, persons individual and identical, veritable beings
endowed with immortality,?we have a different destiny from that of
states."
But leaving these introductory questions as to the phenomena
and essential nature of Civilization, it is time that we inquire
into the agencies internal and external to man, which are engaged
in its development. As these agencies are treated of most
elaborately in the work, the title of which is prefixed to this
essay, we propose to give an abstract of the author's views, with
such comments as may seem needful, either for pm'Poses of
illustration or refutation.
Mr. Buckle has produced the first volume of a work of most
extensive and profound research and learning; liis theories, how-
ever, are startling and extravagant in no ordinary degree. Of
those circumstances and institutions which are commonly sup-
posed to influence mightily for good or for evil the fate of
nations, he believes in very few. In man's "natural progress" he
believes much?in an overruling Providence, not at all; in the
power of a people to work out its own beliefs and civilization, he
lias much faith; but any assistance from without is " a tamper-
ing" with this natural progress. In climate, soil, and aspects of
nature, there is great virtue and power as to the production of
civilization; but none whatever in religion, morals, literature, aDd
government.* These, and other propositions of similar import,
will receive ample illustration as we proceed in our analysis.
The first chapter is devoted to an exposition of the probability
that history is governed by laws as definite as those of physical
science; that the elements are more numerous, and, from our
imperfect knowledge of them, the results are less easy to predict,
and more complex; that the laws of human action are so defi-
nite, that if we were fully acquainted with all the elements of
character and motive in individuals or communities, we should
be able to predict their history with the same certainty that we
can predict eclipses of the sun or moon. The doctrines of chance
and necessary connexion, of free-will and predestination, are also
discussed, and all set aside; Mr. Buckle, so far as we can gather
* Vicle p. 232.
ON CIVILIZATION.
185
from his words, believing in nothing but an enchainment of
events. Johnson said to Boswell, " Sir, we know our will is free,
and there's an end on't." This conclusion is opposed on two
considerations?first, that perhaps consciousness does not exist
as a separate faculty; second, that even granting it to do so, its
evidences are not to be trusted! A strange, unpractical way of
discussing an important subject. No one doubts the conscious-
ness of the man who, for an infraction of the laws of his country,
is condemned to five years' penal servitude; but those who
attempt to convince man of his responsibility, and so induce him
to avoid such infractions, are met by an incomprehensible meta-
physical subtlety. As a specimen of the conclusions to which
these arguments teud, we will give one or two quotations:?
"Rejecting, then, the metaphysical dogma of free-will and the
theological dogma of predestined events, we are driven to the conclu-
sion that the actions of men, being determined solely by their ante-
cedents, must have a character of uniformity; that is to say, must,
under precisely the same circumstances, always issue in precisely the
same results. And as all antecedents are either in the mind or out of
it, we clearly see that all the variations in the results?in other words,
all the changes of which history is full, all the vicissitudes of the
human race, their progress or their decay, their happiness or their
misery?must be the fruit of a double action; an action of external
phenomena upon the mind, and another action of the mind upon the
phenomena."?(p. 18.)
" The offences of men are the result not so much of the vices of the
individual offender,* as of the state of society into which that indi-
vidual is thrown. This is an inference resting on broad and tangible
proofs, accessible to all the world; and, as such, cannot be overturned
or even impeached by any of those hypotheses with which metaphy-
sicians and theologians have hitherto perplexed the study of past
events."?(p. 27.)
Such being Mr. Buckle's view of the nature of human responsi-
bility, we feel curious to know how, in proper course, he will
justify the formation of a criminal code. Certainly, rewards of
virtue and punishments of vice should equally be dead letters, if
such be the sole source of action.
The irrefragable proofs above referred to are those derived
from statistical tables. It is shown that about the same number
of murders, suicides, and other crimes occur annually; and from
this it is most strangely assumed as proved, that these crimes
are but " the product of the general condition of society, and
that the individual felon only carries into effect what is a necessary
* "The moral actions of men are the product not of their volition, but of their
antecedents."?(p. 29.)
186 ON CIVILIZATION.
consequence of preceding circumstances. (!) In a given state
of society, a certain number of persons must put an end to their
own lives. This is the general law ; and the special question as
to who shall commit the crime depends of course upon special
laws, which, however, in their total action, must obey the large
social law to which they are all subordinate. And the power of
the larger law is so irresistible, that neither the love of life nor
the fear of another world can avail anything towards checking
its operation !!"
Is it indeed so ? Is human nature a thing only to be summed
up by tens, and hundreds, and thousands, in order to investigate
and exhaust its conditions ? Mr. Buckle speaks of statistics as
" a branch of knowledge which, though stilly in its infancy, has
already thrown more light upon the study of human nature than
all the sciences put together." Far be it from us to undervalue
so important a science ; but that it reveals anything whatever of
human nature, we dispute entirely. What can the science of
statistics know or tell us of the hopes and fears, the cares and
compensations, the joys and sorrows, the aspirations and despair,
the yieldings and resistances, the passions, desires, and emotions,
the motives and hindrances, which in their aggregate influence
human action, and constitute, so to speak, human nature ?
Nothing. But after all these have wrought their effect?when
the strife is over and the work is done?statistics can step in, and
number the slain and the survivors. As well might we try to
arrive at the true theory of a military government by counting
the slain in its wars; as well calculate the orbit of a planet by
counting the number, instead of investigating the nature, of its
aberrations; as well count the acts of parliament by way of
ascertaining tlie principles of legislation, as attempt, by number-
ing the residuum of conflicting forces, to define the source and
principles of human action. The dial of a chronometer tells
nothing of the motor force?the balance, the compensations
within; it only indicates the general result; and he who would
ascertain the laws of humanity from statistics, might also hope
to construct a chronometer from the mere contemplation of the
dial-plate.
We have dwelt at some length upon this introductory chapter,
because in it seems to be contained the key to the whole of Mr.
Buckle's strange philosophy, which, if it be intended to mean
anything, reduces man to a mere machine, an integral part of
society, having neither individuality, free-will, nor responsibility ;
a view so utterly subversive of all practical legislation, so repug-
nant to the common sense of mankind, that we cannot too strongly
protest against it.
ON CIVILIZATION. 187
We pass on to notice the effects of climate, soil, and the
aspects of nature, upon civilization?a part of the subject in
reference to which we find much valuable matter in the work
before us, interspersed still with much that is objectionable.
Mr. Buckle does not speculate upon the original state of man,
nor his passage through the earliest stages of progress; he takes
him up when he has got a fixed home, and argues that the first
subsequent step towards civilization must be the accumulation
of wealth in the community, so as to leave an overplus after
the wants of the people are supplied. For so long as every
man is fully occupied in gaining his bread, there can be 110
leisure for the cultivation of intellectual pursuits, which are
(auct. loquent.) the sole agents in civilization. But an accu-
mulation of wealth occurring, " now it is that the existence of an
intellectual class first becomes possible, because for the first time
there exists a previous accumulation, by means of which men
can use what they did not produce, and are thus enabled to
devote themselves to subjects for which, at an earlier period, the
pressure of their daily wants have left them no time."
The first sources of wealth are climate and soil, or, in general
terms, the physical peculiarities of the country; and the amount
will be determined (1) by the energy and regularity of the labour,
and (2) by the returns made by the soil to such labour. The
former will be the result of climate, influencing man's power and
disposition to work; the latter is dependent on the soil alone.
The extremes of climate are unfavourable to the regularity and
energy of man's work; thus, in Norway and Sweden, from the
severity of the winter and the shortness of the days?in Spain
and Portugal, from the heat and dryness of the weather?continued
agriculture becomes impossible. " The consequence is, that
these four nations, though so different in other respects, are all
remarkable for a certain instabiiity and fickleness of character;
presenting a striking contrast to the more regular and settled
habits which are established in countries whose climate subjects
the working classes to fewer interruptions, and imposes on them
the necessity of a more constant and unremitting employment."?
(p. 40.) Mr. Buckle takes an interesting review of the influence
thus exerted upon various nations and districts. Civilization in
Asia has always been confined to " that vast tract where a rich
and alluvial soil has secured to man that wealth without which
no intellectual progress can begin." To the north of this dis-
trict there is a long line of barren country, inhabited by Mongo-
lian and Tartar hordes, who, so long as they remained in this
place, never emerged from an uncivilized condition; yet in
their migrations arriving at more fertile soils, founded great
188 ON CIVILIZATION.
monarchies in China, India, and Persia, with a civilization
equal to that of any ancient people. The Arabs, also, in their
own country, were always a rude, uncultivated people ; but, con-
quering Persia in the seventh century, Spain in the eighth, and
the Punjaub in the ninth, they founded mighty empires, "built
cities, endowed schools, collected libraries; and the traces of
their power are still to be seen at Cordova, at Bagdad, and at
Delhi." The only civilized part of Africa?i.e., Egypt?is indebted
likewise to its soil for its power of elevating itself. Thus, in Asia
and Africa, the condition of civilization was a fertile soil. In
Europe, however, the case is different: here the climate has more
influence than the soil as affecting the energy of man. And hence
the primary difference in character between the European and all
other civilizations; for whereas the influence of soil is limited
and stationary, the development of man's resources, as favoured
by a mild and temperate climate, is probably unlimited and ever
increasing. Hence the stationary character of Asiatic civilizations;
hence the constantly progressive character of those of Europe.
Besides the accumulation of wealth, a most important question
arises as to its distribution, which in advanced societies depends
upon very complex laws, but at an early stage seems to be
governed in great part, if not entirely, by " physical laws; these
laws are, moreover,so active as to have invariably kept a vast majo-
rity of the inhabitants of the fairest portion of the globe in a
condition of constant and inextricable poverty." We must pass
over this part of the subject very briefly, omitting all arguments
connected with interest, profit, wages, and rent. After the first
tendency towards a division of society into the two classes of
workers and non-workers, the increase of the latter will be deter-
mined in great part by the presence of a cheap and plentiful
national food. In consequence of this increase, the labour-
market wTill be overstocked, wTages will be low, and a great
amount of poverty will be the result. Such is Mr. Buckle's theory ;
to discuss itwould lead us too far from our special points of interest,
and plunge us into the inextricable mazes of political economy.
The fact of the inhabitants of cold climates requiring a very
carbonized form of food, whilst those of warm latitudes require
one more oxydized, has a powerful influence upon civilization;
for whereas the latter kind of food is produced by the earth
abundantly and almost without labour, the former, being chiefly
of animal origin, is more difficult to obtain. The result is, that
in these colder climates a more adventurous and bolder spirit
has generally been observed, even in the infancy of society,
than in the inhabitants of warmer countries. Tropical popu-
lations, as a rule, increase rapidly; therefore wages are
ON CIVILIZATION. 189
low, and poverty prevalent; whilst in coltl climates the in-
crease is less rapid, the labour-market is not overstocked, and
wages are higher. Hence it arises that in temperate climates
there is a very much more equable distribution ot wealth, a con-
sequent development of a middle class and of public opinion,
and as the natural result, a greater capability of permanent
and progressive civilization. One exception to this distinction
between European and Asiatic populations is found in Ireland,?
the only country in Europe, according to Mr. Buckle, which pos-
sesses a very cheap national food, the potato. The population
of Ireland, before the aspect of the country was changed by
pestilence and emigration, was increasing at the rate of 3 per
cent., whilst that of England was only increasing 1^- per cent.
Mr. Inglis calculates the average rate of Irish wage at fourpence
per day.
To the extremely unequal diffusion of wealth, its concentra-
tion amongst the higher classes, and the abject poverty of the
lower, is ascribable the transitory and imperfect nature of the
Asiatic civilizations. In India, for instance, where on this view
the abundance and cheapness of the national food?rice?is the
source of the evil, the upper classes are enormously rich, the
lower miserably poor. The difference in wealth is attended by a
corresponding inequality in social and political power.
" It is not therefore surprising, that from the earliest period to
which our knowledge of India extends, an immense majority of the
people, pinched by the most galling poverty, and just living from hand
to mouth, should always have remained in a state of stupid debase-
ment, broken by incessant misfortune, crouching before their supe-
riors in abject submission, and only fit either to be slaves themselves,
or to be led to battle to make slaves of others."?(p. GO.)
The miserable condition of the lowest Hindus or Sudras is
something almost inconceivable to us. If one of them speaks of
a Brahmin contemptuously, his mouth is burned; if he insult
him, his tongue is slit ; if he injures him, he is put to death.
If he listen to the reading of the sacred books, boiling oil
is poured into his ears; if he commit them to memory, he is
killed. He is forbidden by law to accumulate wealth, and
continues a slave in estimation although freedom be given him ;
"for (says the lawgiver), of a state which is natural to him, by
whom can he be divested ?"
" In India, slavery?abject, eternal slavery?was the natural state of
the great body of the people; it was the state to which they were
doomed by physical laws impossible to resist. The energy of those
laws is, in truth, so invincible, that wherever they have come into play
they have kept the productive classes in perpetual subjection. There
190 ON CIVILIZATION.
is no instance on record of any tropical country, in which wealth
having been extensively accumulated, the people have escaped their
fate; no instance in which the heat of the climate has not caused an
abundance of food, and the abundance of food caused an unequal dis-
tribution, first of wealth, and then of political and social power.
Among nations subjected to these conditions, the people have counted
for nothing;?thus have been generated habits of tame and servile
submission, by which they have always been characterized. For it is
an undoubted fact that their annals furnish no instance of their
having tui-ned upon their rulers, no war of classes, no popular insur-
rections, not even one great popular conspiracy."?(p. 73.)
It would appear as though this passage must liave been written
before the recent events in India. We give it, however, as an
illustration of the general views of our author.
What rice was to India, that was the date to Africa, and par-
ticularly Egypt. The palm-tree supplies millions with their
daily food in Arabia, and almost the whole of Africa north of
the Equator. In one part of Upper Egypt, the Said or Tliebaid,
there is a food even more liberal in its returns to cultivation
than the date?i.e., the dhourra, which yields 240 to 1 in produce.
The lotus, also, and a profusion of plants and herbs growing
spontaneously, afforded food to the Egyptians. Thus, in Egypt
the people multiplied very rapidly, because at the same time that
the earth was so prolific, the nature of the climate was such that
the inhabitants only required small quantities of food; and as
the result, Egypt was probably more thickly populated than any
country of the ancient world. As in India, the wealth was very
unequally distributed, and the result was the same?a nation of
tyrants and slaves. This is shown partly by the stupendous and
costly buildings which still remain; for " no -wealth, however
great, no expenditure, however lavish, could meet the expense
which would have been incurred if they had been the work of
free men, who received for their labour a fair and honest reward.
The people at large were little better than beasts of burden; and
all that was expected from them was an unremitting and unre-
quited labour." The reckless prodigality of labour may be con-
ceived, when we know that 2000 men were occupied three
years in carrying one stone from Elephantine to Sais ; that one
canal cost the lives of 120,000 men; and that 360,000 men
?were engaged for twenty years building one of the pyramids.
Instead, then, of viewing these mighty works as evidences of a
high state of civilization, we must consider them as signs of a
condition almost utterly depraved and barbarous.
In America, the same laws have been found to prevail. The
earliest civilizations were located in only those parts which were at
once hot and moist?two conditions causing abundant fertility,
ON CIVILIZATION. 191
and consequent plenty. What rice was to India, and tlie date to
Egypt, that was maize to tlie inhabitants of Mexico and Peru.
Tlie returns of this plant are enormous, averaging in New Cali-
fornia seventy or eighty-fold, and in Mexico Proper, three, four,
and even eight hundred-fold. The same results occurred here as
in India and Egypt?the upper classes were tyrants; the lower,
slaves; and there was little or 110 medium. The arts were culti-
vated with some success, hut there was 110 power of diffusion in
the "scanty civilization which they possessed; there was no such
thing as public opinion, but a stern despotism of the higher
classes, and a slavish subserviency of the lower, who were sepa-
rated from the former by the impassable barriers of caste and
legislation. The expenditure of labour was as lavish as in
Egypt: the erection of the Royal Palace of Peru occupied 20,000
men for fifty years; and that of Mexico cost the labour of
200,000 men.
The natural advantages of heat and moisture may, however, be
so much in excess as to prevent any form of civilization what-
ever. Such is the case in Brazil, which, from its situation and
natural advantages, might be expected to have been the seat of
such civilization as similar physical causes had produced in other
parts of the world. But the moisture here is in excess; the
trade wind pours deluges of rain upon the country, producing the
most destructive torrents at certain times. This abundant supply
of water, aided by the vast river system and the heat of the
climate, stimulates the earth into a productive activity unequalled
in any other part of the world. In his description of Brazil,
Mr. Buckle evinces descriptive powers of no ordinary kind. We
make no apology for quoting at length:?
11 Brazil, w^iich is nearly as large as tlie whole of Europe, is covered
with a vegetation of incredible profusion. Indeed, so rank and
luxuriant is tlie growth, that nature seems to riot in the very wanton-
ness of power. A great part of this immense country is filled with
dense and tangled forests, whose noble trees, blossoming in unrivalled
beauty, and exquisite with a thousand hues, throw out their produce
in endless prodigality. On their summit are perched birds of gorgeous
plumage, which nestle in their dark and lofty recesses. Below, their
base and trunks are crowded with brushwood, creeping plants, innume-
rable parasites, all swarming with life. There, too, are myriads of
insects of every variety ; reptiles of strange and singular form ; serpents
and lizards spotted with deadly beauty; all of which find means of
existence in this vast workshop and repository of nature. And that
nothing may be wanting to this land of marvels, the forests are skirted
with enormous meadows, which, reeking with heat anc\ moisture, sup-
ply nourishment to countless herds of wild cattle, that browse and
fatten on their herbage; while the adjoining plains, rich in another
NO. X.?NEW SERIES. O
192 ON CIVILIZATION.
form of life, are tlie chosen abode of the subtlest and most ferocious
animals, which prey on each other, but which, it might almost seem,
no human power can hope to extirpate. Such is the flow and abun-
dance of life by which Brazil is marked above all the other countries
of the earth.
" But amid this pomp and splendour of nature, no place is left for
man ; he is reduced to insignificance by the majesty with which he is
surrounded; the forces that oppose him are so formidable, that he has
never been able to make head against them?never able to rally against
their accumulated pressure. The whole of Brazil, notwithstanding its
immense apparent advantages, has always remained entirely uncivi-
lized?its inhabitants wandering savages, incompetent to resist those
obstacles which the very bounty of nature has put in their way. ....
The progress of agriculture is stopped by impassable forests, and the
harvests are destroyed by innumerable insects. The mountains are too
high to scale, the rivers are too wide to bridge ; everything is contrived
to keep back the human mind, and repress its rising ambition. Tt is
thus that the energies of nature have hampered the spirit of man."?
(pp. 94-G.)
The whole of the immense territory of Brazil, more than twelve
times as large as France, contains only about six millions of
inhabitants; and these are in the same state of barbarity as they
ever were, do sign of progress or civilization being manifest.
Such are the relations in which, according to Mr. Buckle's
view, the two elements, soil and climate, bear to civilization, more
particularly in the aspect of the accumulation and distribution of
wealth. And in precisely the same relation to the accumulation
and distribution of thought does he conceive the aspects of
nature to stand :?
" It now remains (says he) for me to examine the effect of those
other physical agents to which I have given the collective name of
Aspects of Nature, and which will be found suggestive of some very
wide and comprehensive inquiries into the influence exerted by the
external world in predisposing men to certain habits of thought, and
thus giving a particular tone to religion, arts, literature, and, in a
word, to all the principal manifestations ol the human mind."
We shall endeavour to give a succinct account of our author's
views on this point; only premising that in this, as in the sub-
jects just discussed, he falls into the error of mistaking those cir-
cumstances which favour any particular development, mental or
physical, for the efficient and prime cause of such development.
This error is natural and inevitable in any mind which places its
trust in nature and man alone, recognising no overruling agency,
nor, in short, any principle whatever save natural progress.
The aspects of nature influence the mind in a twofold manner
?through the imagination and through the reason. With regard
ON CIVILIZATION. 193
to natural phenomena, whatever inspires terror or wonder, and
excites ideas of the vague and uncontrollable, has a tendency to
stimulate the imagination, and to dominate over the reasoning
faculties. Man then feels his inferiority to nature ; and " his
mind, appalled by the indefined and indefinable, hardly cares to
scrutinize the details of which such imposing grandeur consists."
On the other hand, when the phenomena of nature are less im-
posing, and the physical aspects of a country more under the
control of man, the imagination is less excited; man becomes
able to experiment upon the powers of nature?to bring them in
some sort into subjection to him ; and the result is, that reason
asserts lier sway. It is thus that the earlier civilizations, being all
seated near the tropics, where the aspects of nature are most
sublime and terrible, were marked by much superstition, and a
great development of the imaginative faculties. Earthquakes are
amongst the most fearful of the cosmical phenomena, and " there
can be 110 doubt as to the effect they produce in encouraging par-
ticular associations and habits of thought." The mind becomes
anxious and timid, and oppressed with a sense of its own help-
lessness. "Human power failing, superhuman power is called
in; the mysterious and the invisible are believed to be present;
and there grow up among the people those feelings of awe and
of helplessness on which all superstition is based, and without
which no superstition can exist." Wherever these and analogous
phenomena exist, the imagination dominates over the reason, and
produces its natural effects upon the psychical manifestations in
the form of superstition, and in the development of the fine arts
rather than of the sciences. Thus Spain, Portugal, and Italy?
the countries of Europe where earthquakes are most frequent?
have produced most of the great painters and sculptors of
Europe. The purely reasoning faculties are undeveloped, and it
is here that superstition has taken its deepest hold of the people.
In some other countries, all serious dangers are viewed as super-
natural occurrences, and are not only submitted to, but wor-
shipped ; as is the case amongst some of the Hindus.* Some,
from feelings of reverential fear, refuse to destroy wild beasts and
noxious animals.
" Summing up these facts, it may be stated that, in the civilizations
exterior to Europe, all nature conspired to increase the authority of
the imaginative faculties, and weaken the authority of the reasoning
ones In Europe this law is opposed by another diametrically
opposite, by virtue of which the tendency of natural phenomena is, on
the whole, to limit the imagination and embolden the understanding;
'* The Hindus in the Iruari forests (says Mr. Edye) worship and respect every-
thing from which they apprehend danger.
o 2
194 ON CIVILIZATION.
thus inspiring man with confidence in his own resources, and facili-
tating the increase of his knowledge, by encouraging that hold, inquisi-
tive spirit which is constantly advancing, and on whic hall future pro-
gress must depend."?(pp. 118-9.)
The civilization of Europe has diverged from all those that
preceded it; and this is supposed to he owing to the operation
of the causes alluded to, since?1. There are certain natural phe-
nomena which act on the human mind by exciting the imagina-
tion ; and 2. These phenomena are much more numerous out of
Europe than in it. The mode of operation of these phenomena
is illustrated by their effects upon the literature, religion, and art
of India and Greece respectively, " these being the two countries
respecting which the materials are most ample, and in which the
physical contrasts are most striking."
The ancient literature of India is marked by the ascendancy
of an imagination luxuriant even to disease. Almost the wrhole
of their writings are poetical : their works on grammar, law,
history, medicine, mathematics, geography, metaphysics, are all
in a regular system of versification. Their geographical and
chronological systems, apparently the least likely to be so affected,
are full of imaginative flights, connected with an exaggerated
respect for past ages, and a belief in the extraordinary longevity
of ancient times.* The Institutes of Menu also are said to have
been revealed to man about two thousand million years before
the present era.
"Not only in literature, but also in religion and art, this tendency
(to exaggeration) is supreme. To subjugate the understanding and
exalt the imagination is the universal principle. In the dogmas of
their theology, in the character of their gods, and even in the forms
of their temples, we see how the sublime and threatening aspects of
the external world have filled the minds of the people with those
images of the grand and terrible, which they strive to repi'oduce in a
visible form, and to which they owe the leading peculiarities of their
national culture."
* The common duration of life was 80,000 years; holy men lived 100,000 years;
some of the poets lived to the age of half a million. But all these are short lives
compared to that of "a very shining character in Indian history, who united in
his single person the functions of a king and a saint. This eminent man lived
in a pure and virtuous age, and his days were indeed long in the land, since when
he was made king he was 2,000,000 years old : he then reigned 6,300,000 years;
having done which, he resigned his empire, and lingered on for 100,000 years
more.''?A si ati c Researches.
Mr. Buckle on this subject takes the opportunity of classifying the Hebrew
and Christian writings with these fables. "A belief in the longevity of the
human race, at an early period of the world, was the natural product of those
feelings which ascribed to the ancients an universal superiority over the moderns ;
and this we see exemplified in some of the Christian, and in many of the Hebrew
writings. But the statements in these works are tame and insignificant when com-
pared with what is preserved in the literature of India."?(pp. 122-3.)
ON CIVILIZATION. 195
Whilst such are tlie effects of the wondrous and fearful works
of nature in India, in Greece the aspects of nature are so different,
that " the very conditions of existence are changed." The country
is of small extent, easy of access from others; the mountains are
less, the streams are smaller; earthquakes are less frequent, the
climate more healthy, hurricanes less disastrous, wild beasts and
noxious animals less abundant. Thus, whilst in India the ten-
dency of natural phenomena was to inspire fear, in Greece it was
to give confidence.
" In Greece, therefore, the human mind was less appalled and less
superstitious ; natural causes began to be studied ; physical science first
became possible; and man, gradually waking to a sense of his own
power, sought to investigate events with a boldness not to be expected
in those other countries, where the pressure of nature troubled his in-
dependence, and suggested ideas with which knowledge is incompa-
tible."?(p. 127.)
Whilst the deities of both India and Greece retain somewhat
of human attributes, in the former they are all exaggerated into
images of the extremest terror,* whilst in the latter they were
all strictly human; stronger, or more beautiful than man they
might be, but still never grotesque. The actions of the Indian
gods were all preternatural; those of Greece had human tastes,
pursuits, and passions, and most of them were merely embodi-
ments of the emotional ideas. In Greece, also, we first meet
with hero-worship, the approximation of humanity to deity. " In
Greece, for the first time in the history of the world, the imagina-
tion was in some degree tempered and confined by the understand-
ing Whether or not the balance was accurately adjusted,
is another question; but it is certain that the adjustment was more
nearly arrived at in Greece than in any previous civilization."
We cannot pause to trace the resemblance between the evolu-
tions of these laws in the other ancient civilizations ; but having
arrived at the verge of the permanent forms of civilization, we
must now follow our author in his investigation of the influence
of mental laws upon the progress of society, under the twofold
nspect of moral and intellectual development. Mr. Buckle in the
outset recognises this division, " for" (says he) " there can be no
doubt that a people are not really advancing, if, on the one hand,
their increasing ability is accompanied by increasing vice; or if,
on the other hand, while they are becoming more virtuous, they
* Siva is a hideous being, witli a girdle of snakes, a human skull in his hand,
.and with a necklace of human bones. He has three eyes, is clothed in a tiger s
skin, and over his left shoulder the deadly cobra di capello rears its head. His
wife, Doorga, is still more revolting in appearance, and has an insatiable appetite
for blood.
196 ON CIVILIZATION.
likewise become more ignorant." Acknowledging, then, the
necessity for the mutual working together of these two elements,
morality and intellect, Mr. Buckle proceeds to inquire which of
the two is the " more important." Guarding at first against the
interpretation of <c natural progress" into a progress of natural
capacity, which may or may not be the case, and at all events is
not proved, he shows that this progress is one of opportunity?of
external advantage, not of internal power. It is here that Mr.
Buckle's most dangerous subtleties commence. On this seem-
ingly innocent basis he founds an argument, feeble yet plausible,
abounding in sophistry, by which be attempts to prove the very
small influence which morals exert upon the progress of societies.
The line of reasoning is to this effect:?The moral and intellectual
conduct of the aggregate of men is regulated by the moral and
intellectual notions prevalent in their time. Some will go beyond,
some will fall short of this standard; but, generally, this will be
the rule. Now, this standard is continually varying; the paradox
or heresy of one period is the received doctrine of the next: a
mutability which shows that " the conditions on which the
standard depends must be themselves very mutable; and these
conditions, whatever they may be, are evidently the originators of
the moral and intellectual conduct of the great average of man-
kind." Knowing, then, that the main cause of human actions is
necessarily extremely variable, if any set of circumstances claim
to be such cause, we have but to apply the test of variability, in
order to adjudicate on their claims. The next step in the argu-
ment is so daring in its unscrupulous assertions, that we give it
at length in the writer's words :?
" Applying this test to moral motives, or to the dictates of what is-
called moral instinct, we shall at once see how extremely small is the
influence those motives have exerted over the progress of civilization.
Eor there is, unquestionably, nothing to be found in the world which
has undergone so little change as those great dogmas of which moral
systems are composed. To do good to others; to sacrifice for their
benefit your own wishes; to love your neighbour as yourself; to for-
give your enemies ; to restrain your passions ; to honour your parents ;
to respect those who are set over you?these and a few others are the
sole essentials of morals; but they have been known for thousands of
years, and not one jot or tittle has been added to them by all the ser-
mons, homilies, and text-books which moralists and theologians have
been able to produce."?(p. 163.)
It is added, in a note to this passage:?
" That the system of morals propounded in the New Testament
contained no maxim which had not been previously enunciated, and
that some of the most beautiful passages in the Apostolic writings are-
ON CIVILIZATION. 197
quotations from Pagan authors, is well known to every scholar; . . .
and to assert that Christianity communicated to man moral truths
previously unknown, argues, on the part of the assertor, either gross
ignorance or wilful fraud."
And, as a quotation from Sir J. Mackintosh:?
" More than 3000 years have elapsed since the composition of the
Pentateuch ; and let any man tell me, if he is able, in what important
respect the rule of life has varied since that distant period. The fact
is evident, fchatjio improvements have been made in practical mo-
rality."
This assumed stationary character of morality is contrasted
forcibly with the advance of the intellectual sciences; and then
comes the conclusion, that as civilization is the product of moral
and intellectual agencies, and " since that product is constantly
changing, it evidently cannot he regulated by the stationary
agent,"?and, therefore, the only ot-lier agent being the intellectual-
one, this must he and is the real mover of all civilization. The
good or evil works of men or states die with them(.f), but the
intellectual contributions are preserved, and become " the heir-
looms of mankind?the immortal bequest of the genius to which
they owe their birth." These remarkable views are modestly
summed up as follows:?
" These conclusions are, no doubt, very unpalatable; and what makes
them peculiarly offensive is, that it is impossible to refute them.
For the deeper we penetrate into this question, the more clearly shall
we see the superiority of intellectual acquisitions over moral feelings."
-(p. 166.)
Although these arguments are such that Mr. Buckle is " quite
unable to see on what possible ground their accuracy is to be
impugned," we must confess them to be far otherwise than
convincing. We hesitate which most to admire in all this?the
arbitrary manner in which Mr. Buckle excludes the Maker from
all participation in the conduct of the affairs of His creatures;
the gratuitous assumption that his classification of the sources
of human action is and must be an exhaustive one; the feeble
inefficiency of method in the argument built upon so sandy a
foundation; the self-complacency with which the conclusions are
deemed irrefragable; or the threefold crowning error, in fact, in
inference, and in philosophy, with which the ingenious structure^
is completed. We are indebted to him, however, for one classifica-
tion which we clo accept as exhaustive?viz., the division of the
motives for misrepresentation into " gross ignorance or wilful
fraud;" we accept it, and proceed to show that he himself is
amenable to one or other of the allegations.
198 ON CIVILIZATION.
Firstly, in reference to tlie error as to fact with which we
charge the author.
When Mr. Buckle alleges that the laws of morality have
always remained the same, or have been unaltered for thousands
of years, since the composition of the Pentateuch, and that
Christianity revealed nothing new, can he possibly be ignorant
that the Great Author of our faith, in his personal ministry,
changed the entire spirit of the Mosaic law ? Speaking to a
people who were jealous of the slightest misinterpretation of
their law, and who were intently watching for some grounds for
accusation against him, he stated that the social spirit of their
Levitical code was " an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth."
And who had ever heard in the Heathen world of such a law as
that which was then and there substituted for this?" Resist
not evil; love your enemies; bless them that curse you; pray
for them which persecute you ?" Is Mr. Buckle " grossly igno-
rant" of this, or is his statement a "wilful fraud"?
So much as to the error in fact, of which many other illustra-
tions might be given; but this is sufficient to show the loose,
careless manner in which our author treats all matters which do
not tend directly to the support of his foregone conclusions.
But, even supposing, for the sake of argument, that the moral
law was a constant quantity; is its progressive recognition,
and its reception as a rule of life, to count for nothing in man's
progress ? Because constant, is it inoperative, where, by means
of teaching from without, or more energetic inculcation within,
it is more forcibly impressed upon a community? Apply the
same hypothesis to intellectual attainments: suppose that the
entire present knowledge of European science could be transfused
at once into China or some other Asiatic nation, the absolute
grade of human knowledge would not be advanced one step, yet
the nation would be greatly advanced in civilization. The laws
of nature have been the same from the foundation of the world;
it is only the ever-increasing recognition of them which has
produced intellectual development?only their application to art
and science which has led to the advance in them. And so,
although the moral law may have been constant for two thousand
years, it is to its recognition that wre look for the progress of
humanity on a fixed basis.
The third error?that in philosophy?is connected with the
assumed superiority of the intellect over the moral nature, be-
cause the one is cumulative in its results, and the other not so.
The fact is doubtless so in one point of view?we do not reco-
gnise moral truth more readily nor clearly because others have
recognised it before us; whilst intellectual truths, being con-
ON CIVILIZATION". 199
stantly appropriated and made subservient to the uses of man, to
his physical, moral, and spiritual desires, become permanent in
the form of the machinery of society. But not on this account
are the intellectual laws to be esteemed superior to the moral.
" It is exactly in proportion as intellectual power is capable of
yielding fruits which are 7io?-intellectual, that it is more cumulative
than moral or spiritual power. In other words, so far as the intellect
can be made the effective instrument of other human desires and
capacities beside the intellect, so far is it more cumulative than facul-
ties which have no end out of themselves But this is only saying
that intellectual agencies are subsidiary and instrumental to moral and
spiritual agencies, while the latter are not subsidiai'y and instrumental
to the former The intellectual laws are, in fact, immediately
svibordinated to the physical, moral, and spiritual desires The
intellect is cumulative in Mr. Buckle's sense, only because its results
are fitly instrumental to desires that are other than intellectual: while
the higher capacities of human nature have their fittest ends only in
themselves, and are utterly distorted and defaced by being made the
instruments of lower capacities.
Mr. Buckle illustrates his principles by the decline of what he
considers the two greatest evils that have ever afflicted humanity
??viz., religious persecution and war. As to the former, he con-
siders that he has proved that it is essentially an intellectual
process, and that no good could he effected by the operation of
moral feelings.
" The causes of the decline of the warlike spirit ... is owing to the
increase of the intellectual classes, to whom the military classes are
necessarily antagonistic. In pushing the inquiry a little deeper, we
have, by still further analysis, ascertained the existence of three vast
though subsidiary causes, by which the general movement has been
accelerated. These are, the invention of gunpowder, the discoveries of
political economy, and the discovery of improved means of locomotion.
... "VVe are bound to infer that the two oldest, greatest, most inve-
terate and most widely-spread evils which have ever been known, are
constantly, though, on the whole, slowly diminishing; and that their
diminution has been effected not at all by moral feelings nor by moral
teachings, but solely by the activity of the human intellect, and by
the inventions and discoveries which, in a long course of successive
ages, man has been able to make."
Mr. Buckle also pledges himself to show, in his future volumes,
that the progress which Europe has made from barbarity to civi-
lization is " entirely due to its intellectual activity," and that
* "National Review," January, 1858. We owe an apology to tlie able writer of
the Article on "Civilization and Faith," for appropriating his expressions on
this subject.
200 ON CIVILIZATION.
" the changes in every civilized people are, in their aggregate, depen-
dent solely on three things?first, on the amount of knowledge pos-
sessed by their ablest men; secondly, on the direction which that
knowledge takes?that is to say, the sort of subjects to which it refers ;
thirdly, and above all, on the extent to which the knowledge is
diffused, and the freedom with which it pervades all classes of societv."
?(p. 205.)
Mr. Buckle is too close an observer to be able to ignore tlie
conviction that the actions of individuals are greatly affected by
their moral feelings and their passions; but, inasmuch as these are
antagonistic to the passions of others, their effects are neutralized,
and "the total actions of mankind, considered as a whole, are
left to be regulated by the total knowledge of which mankind is
possessed." With that strange one-sidedness of argument which
characterizes the whole work, it never seems to occur to him that
knowledge or intellectual opinion may in its divisions neutralize
itself, or be neutralized by ignorance ; and that a determined
opponent might with equal reason assert that the knowledge and
ignorance of mankind being continually at war, the total actions
of man were left to be regulated by such moral sentiments as
they possess. But we reserve our general comments on these
views until we have examined the author's opinions on the three
great subjects?Religion,. Literature, and Government?in their
effects upon civilization. These are allowed to be subjects of
vast importance, 1
"and which (says Mr. Buckle), in the opinion of many persons, are
the prime movers in human affairs. That this opinion is altogether
erroneous, will be amply proved in the present work; but as the
opinion is widely spread and is very plausible, it is necessary that we
should come at once to some understanding respecting it, and inquire
into the real natui'e of that influence which these three great powers
do actually exercise over the progress of civilization."
It might be amusing, were the subject less serious, to observe
the extremely off-hand manner in which Mr. Buckle disposes of
the most important considerations connected with the progress of
society. A country which holds no communion with other
countries, but is completely isolated, will, or rather tvoidd, of
necessity, form its own religion (premising the absence of a re-
vealed one), its literature, and its government; and these would evi-
dently be the results and symptoms of the state of society, rather
than its cause. But we have already shown that one of the
most important agencies influencing any given civilization, is the
intercourse of the country with others in a higher state of
cultivation. It will scarcely be credited, unless we quote the
"writer's own words, that he briefly sums up this powerful agency
ON CIVILIZATION. 201
under the head of " tampering" with natural progress; considers
the religion, literature, and government of nations merely as
symptoms; and attributes no influence, save a deleterious one,
to any efforts made from without to assist in the amelioration of
^ debased condition.
" Out of a certain condition of society, certain results naturally
follow. Those results may, no doubt, be tampered with by some ex-
ternal agency; but if that is not done, it is impossible that a highly-
civilized people, accustomed to reason and to doubt, should ever em-
brace a religion of which the glaring absurdities set reason and doubt
at defiance." . . . . " The truth is, that the religious opinions which
prevail in any period are among the symptoms by which that period
is marked. "When the opinions are deeply rooted, they do, no doubt,
influence the conduct of men ; but before they can be deeply rooted,
some intellectual change must have taken place. We may as well
expect that the seed should quicken in the barren rock, as that a mild
and philosophic religion should be established among ignorant and
ferocious savages."?(p. 233.)
It naturally follows, that the author throws all possible dis-
credit upon missionary enterprise and narrative, inasmuch as a
broad denial of the accuracy of these statements is quite neces-
sary for the support of his doctrine. Yet, accustomed as Ave had
become to his habit of dogmatism and rash assertion, we were
somewhat startled on meeting with the following passage :?
" After a careful study of the history and condition of barbarous-
nations, I do most confidently assert that there is no well-attested
case of any people being permanently converted to Christianity, except
in those very few instances where missionaries, being men of know-
ledge as well as men of piety, have familiarized the savage with habits-
of thought, and, by thus stimulating his intellect, have prepared him
for the reception of those religious principles which, without such
stimulus, he could never have understood."?(p. 234.)
And this is written by an inhabitant of England, a country of
all others affording the most remarkable refutation of such an
assertion ! For what were the people of England but idolatrous
barbarians before St. Augustine's mission ? And we hear nothing
of his having familiarized the savages of our island with habits
of thought before he preached to them the pure Gospel of the
kingdom. Let us hear what a recent writer, an enemy to mis-
sions, if not to Christianity itself, says :?
" Beginning with the early times, however, we are first struck with
the thought of what we ourselves owe to missionary enterprise. In
the south of England and in Ireland, there was probably some early
preparation, by the influx of persecuted Christians from the Continent i
but the great release from the iron rule of Druid caste-tyranny we owe
202 ON CIVILIZATION.
to St. Augustine and otlier missionaries, who came for the express pur-
pose of making us Christians."
It may be asserted that we were not savages ; but whether we
consider the religion of a nation in the light of cause or symptom
of its condition, we may feel certain that the Druid faith can
only coexist with a very low development of intellect, and is in-
compatible with any high form of civilization. Mr. Buckle
gives some illustrations of his views of the introduction of a
religion too pure for the intellectual state of the people, which
appear to us much more rash and bigoted than many of the
opinions of which he complains, and irreverent in the extreme
from their utter disregard of all those principles which are held
sacred in a Christian land. He presupposes that it is a mark of
the utmost intolerance to blame a person for irreverence, because
he does not revere what we do. But he who, in a Christian
country, takes every opportunity of sneering at the faith and
creed of that country, must expect to meet with the natural
return. The doctrine of " One God (says he), taught to the
Hebrews of old, remained for many centuries altogether inopera-
tive. The people to whom it was addressed had not yet emerged
from barbarism ; they were, therefore, unable to raise their mind
to so elevated a conception." In other words, the revealer of
that religion committed a great mistake. Because of the lapses
into idolatry which so often characterized this people, Mr. Buckle
can quietly overlook the potency of those influences which for
three thousand years have kept the Jews a " peculiar people,"
separate from all the other nations. In like manner, the introduc-
tion of the Christian religion was altogether an anachronism and
a mistake :?
"The Romans were, with rare exceptions, an ignorant and bar-
barous race; ferocious, dissolute, and cruel. For such a people, Poly-
theism was the natural creed; and we read, accordingly, that they
practised an idolatry which a few great thinkers, and only a few, ven-
tured to despise. The Christian religion falling among these men,
found them unable to appreciate its sublime and admirable doctrines.
And when, a little later, Europe was overrun with fresh immigrations,
the invaders, who were even more barbarous than the Romans, brought
with them those superstitions which were suited to their actual con-
dition. It was upon the materials arising from these two sources that
Christianity was now called to do her work. The result is most re-
markable ; for after the new religion seemed to have carried all before
it, and had received the homage of the best part of Europe, it was
soon found that nothing had been really effected."
It will be observed that we have not often interrupted the
course of this analysis to give historical refutations of the glaring
ON CIVILIZATION. 203
errors into whicli our author, by viewing casualties as essentials, and
essentials as casualties, is perpetually falling. But here we must
examine the question in a little more detail. Perhaps from Mr.
Buckle's point of view, considering all religion as entirely secon-
dary and subordinate to intellectual development, and all morality
as nearly inoperative in society, it may seem that nothing zcas
done when a pure form of religion (with certain growing corrup-
tions) was introduced in the place of one which permitted all
society to he one mass of corruption. " The Roman empire in-
cluded," says Shaftesbury, " a race of men who seemed to vie
with each other in the commission of as grand crimes, and in the
perpetration of as odious vices, as ever disgraced humanity."
Vice was national, sanctioned hy the highest examples, followed
by the lowest of the people, soaking through every grade of
society. The satirists of those days present a picture of society
unfit to translate, almost even to allude to. " Murder, and everv
variety of unutterable crime characterized that declining age;
and had not the Almighty mercifully interposed, the human race
ran the risk of being extinguished by the pressure of its own
detestable vices." ? Fraser. That the introduction of Chris-
tianity did not do all that might have been hoped in a better
state of society, is matter of history; but to say that "nothing
was done," argues either " gross ignorance or wilful fraud," in the
face of the edicts of the Emperor Constantine alone, the practical
benefits of which were immediate and visible. For, says the
writer just quoted, "the laws concerning slavery were remodelled
and mitigated, abduction and adultery were visited with severe
punishments, divorce was subjected to intelligible restrictions,
and some of the more obvious vices of the age were removed by
the improved tone of public opinion."
We cannot enter more deeply into the question why Chris-
tianity failed to regenerate man completely; to do so would re-
quire volumes, instead of pages; but we notice this one point
to show how Mr. Buckle slurs over all history which is not in
accordance with his theory of development, and then proves from
this historia expurgata that his theory must be the true one.
Let us, however, before leaving the subject, retort upon him by
asking, if Christianity did so little, what was the-much-boasted
" natural progress" doing ? What of the intellectual activity, to
the effects of which Mr. Buckle pledges himself to trace all the
progress that Europe has made in civilization ?* Why did the
gorgeous civilizations of Greece and Rome decay ? Was it that
the intellectual activity of the Golden Age was less than in the
* See p. 204.
204) ON CIVILIZATION.
days of tlie commonwealth of Rome ? Was it that the age of
Socrates, of Plato, of Pythagoras, Pindar, vEschylus, Sophocles,
Euripides, of Herodotus and Xenophon, was an age of mental
stagnation and decay'? Were not these times when the thinking
faculties of man were developed to an extent since unknown?
when thought received an impulse, and a direction, and a form
which have never ceased to operate upon it ? In one at least of
these empires, also, there was, in addition to its intellectual acti-
vity, a powerful middle class, and a "public opinion." Yet the
empire fell, and upon its ruins wandering hordes of barbarians
fixed their seat. Why was this ? In answering the question,
we will strictly follow Mr. Buckle's method of induction.*
If the causes of progress in civilization are moral and intellec-
tual, the causes of decay are necessarily of the same order, and
depend upon a deficiency of one or other element. But as we
see that at the times of the decay of the Greek and Roman
empires the intellectual element was in full vigour, we are com-
pelled to attribute the phenomenon to the absence of the moral
element?a theory which will be amply supported by the evidence
of the times themselves; for, " among the people the most un-
blushing and disgusting profligacy was common, with all the
immorality and all the vices that can disgrace human nature.
To this general corruption of manners may be added, levity of
character, a total disregard of decency, laxity of social relations,
and grossness of political institutions. Such were the causes of
the downfall"f of these empires. Thus, by his own method, our
author is confuted; and, like him, we are " quite unable to
imagine on what possible grounds" the force of this view can be
contested.
Religion, literature, and government are classed by Mr. Buckle
as " disturbing causes"! in civilization. In reference to the
second, the same views are promulgated as those on the first.
* " Since civilization is the product of moral and intellectual agencies, and since
that product is constantly changing, it evidently cannot be regulated by the sta-
tionary agent; because, when surrounding circumstances are unchanged, a stationary
agent can only produce a stationary effect. The only other agent is the intellectual
one ; and that this is the real mover, may be proved in two distinct ways?first,
because being, as we have already seen, either moral or intellectual, and being, as
we have also seen; not moral, it must be intellectual; and secondly, because the
intellectual principle has an activity and a capacity for adaptation, which, as
I undertake to show, is quite sufficient to account for the extraordinary progress
that, during several centuries, Europe has continued to make."?(p. 165.)
" By each successive analysis, the field of the inquiry has been narrowed, until
we have found reason to believe that the growth of European civilization is solely
DUE TO THE progress OF knowledge, and that the progress of knowledge
depends on the number of truths which the human intellect discovers, and on
the extent to which they are diffused."?(p. 265.)
Mackinnon's "History of Civilization," vol. i. p. 60. + Yide p. 244.
ON CIVILIZATION- 205
Literature is " simply tlie form in which the knowledge of a
country is registered." It is a symptom of the state of the people,
not a cause of it. It is scarcely credible that the author seems
to take no account of the influence of literature from without;
nor does he dwell more on the effect of great lights within than
this passing notice :?
" Individual men may of course take great steps, and rise to a great
height above the level of their age. But if they rise beyond a certain
point, their present usefulness is impaired; if they rise still higher, it
is destroyed."
The author must have felt sensible of the feebleness of this
part of his subject, when he wrote the following profound obser-
vations :?
" The truth is, that although Europe has received great benefit from
its literature, this is owing not to what the literature has originated,
but what it has preserved"! .... "Knowledge must be acquired
before it can be written" !!...." Literature, in itself, is but a
trifling thing, and is merely valuable as being the armoury in which
the weapons of the human mind are laid up; and from which, when
required, they can be drawn" !!!
The same principles are applied to the third " disturbing-
cause," government, which is, or ought to be (in Mr. Buckle's
view), nothing more than an exponent of popular progress.
When it has attempted to be anything more than this, all "that
it has done has been done amiss."
" The other opinion to which I have alluded is, that the civilization
of Europe is chiefly owing to the ability which has been displayed by
the different governments, and to the sagacity with which the evils
of society have been palliated by legislative remedies. To any one
who has studied history in its original sources, this notion must appear
so extravagant as to make it difficult to refute it with becoming
gravity. Indeed, of all the social theories which have ever been
broached, there is none so utterly untenable, and so unsound in all its
parts, as this."?(p. 250.)
A sufficient proof of this is supposed to be afforded by the
repeal of the Corn Laws, and the lieform Bill, which, being in
their origin popular movements, carried Government along with
them. The whole system of taxation is repudiated, as utterly
evil; the "laws in favour of industry have injured industry; the
laws in favour of religion have increased hypocrisy ; and the
laws to secure truth have encouraged perjuryand one main con-
dition of the prosperity of a people is, " that its rulers shall
have very little power, that they shall exercise that power very
sparingly, and that they shall by no means presume to raise them-
206 ON CIVILIZATION.
selves into supreme judges of tlie national interests, or deem
themselves authorized to defeat the wishes of those for whose
benefit alone they occupy the post entrusted to them."
In alluding to the history of the Middle Ages, Mr. Buckle finds
three things to complain of?the art of writing, the change of
religion, and the monopoly of history by a certain class. The
art of writing was objectionable, because it enabled men to dis-
pense with those invaluable old ballad-singers and their ballads.;
the change of religion, because it interrupted and interpolated the
old traditions; and the third, " more powerful than all, was,
that history became monopolized by a class of men whose pro-
fessional habits made them quick to believe; and who, moreover,
had a direct interest in increasing the general credulity, since
it was the basis upon which their own authority was built."
These men are, of course, the priests and ministers of religion
generally, at whom Mr. Buckle takes every opportunity of sneer-
ing. In fact, he speaks of all men who believe in an overruling
Providence with the most lofty, yet pitying and wondering con-
tempt. This is exemplified in his remarks on Comines :?
" This eminent politician, a man of the world, and skilled in the
arts of life, deliberately asserts that battles are lost, not because the
army is ill supplied, nor because the campaign is ill conceived, nor
because the general is incompetent, but because the people or their
prince are wicked, and Providence seeks to punish them. For," says
Comines, ' war is a great mystery, and being used by God as the means
of accomplishing His wishes, He gives victory, sometimes to one side,
sometimes to the other.' .... The last vestige of this once universal
opinion is the expression, which is gradually falling into disuse, of
' appealing to the God of Battles.' "
In like manner, in the following chapter we meet with a scoff
at all prayer or invocation of Divine assistance :?
. . . "We still see the extraordinary spectacle of prayers offered up
in our churches for dry weather or for wet weather; a superstition
which to future ages will appear as childish as the feelings of pious awe
with which our fathers regarded the presence of a comet, or the ap-
proach of an eclipse. We are now acquainted with the laws which
determine the movements of comets and eclipses, and . . . have ceased to
pray to be preserved from them. But because our researches into the
phenomena of rain happen to have been less successful, we resort to
the impious (!) contrivance of calling in the aid of the Deity to supply
those deficiencies in science which are the result of our own sloth ; and
we are not ashamed, in our public churches, to prostitute the rites of
religion by using them as a cloak to conceal an ignorance we ought
frankly to confess."
We are neither able nor disposed to contest these points with
ON CIVILIZATION. 207
Mr. Buckle; his intellectual creed is not ours; liis faitli is not
our faith, nor his God our God; he who has sought so deeply
into history will not be shaken by arguments of ours; he that
holds that scepticism* is the great adjunct to civilization,
and that expediency,f not truth, is the most to be desired poli-
tically, will not be ready to relinquish his principles for a despised
and, as he supposes, expiring faith. As Nebuchadnezzar, in the
pride of his wealth, looked upon the evidences of his riches, and
said, " Is not this great Babylon that I have built by the might
of my power ?" so Mr. Buckle, in the pride of bis inexhaustible
stores of learning, seems to look forth upon the conditions of human
existence, and say that human intellect is sufficient for all this.
It is a common error, whilst life is young and strong within us,
to believe in and be satisfied with secondary causes, and take no
thought of the One Great Cause. But as the problems of life
press upon us, and approach to their final solution, it is well that
we discover that there is a want of something more than food, and
intellect, and scepticism, and expediency. Happy is he to whom
this discovery comes in time, and who finds that, let the nations
rage as they will, there is indeed One that ruleth over the affairs
of men.
It will be pleasant, in conclusion, to review the opinions of
some others as to the bearing of morality and religion on civiliza-
tion, that none may be left with the idea that high intellectual
attainments tend, of necessity, to a disbelief in all religion as a
means of ameliorating the condition of humanity. We will
notice only three, whose names will certainly carry some weight?
John Milton, Samuel Johnson, and Montesquieu.
Milton says that?
" A commonwealth ought to be but as one huge Christian personage,
one mighty growth and stature of an honest man, as big and compact
in virtue as in body; for look what the grounds and causes are-of
single happiness to one man, the same ye shall find them to a whole
state, as Aristotle, both in his Ethics and Politics, from the principles
of reason, lays down. By consequence, therefore, that which is good
and agreeable to the true welfare of every Christian, and that which
can be justly proved hurtful and offensive to every true Christian, will
be evinced to be alike good or hurtful to monarchy; for God forbid that
we should separate and distinguish the end and good of a monarch from
the end and good of a monarchy, or of that from Christianity."?
Reformation in England.
Dr Johnson, speaking of calamities incident to a want of reli-
gion, says:?
"Discord must inevitably prevail among men who have lost all
sense of Divine superintendence, and who have no higher motive of
* Vide p. 308. f Vide p. 416.
NO. X.?NEW SERIES. P
208 on civilization:
action or forbearance than present opinion or present interest. Surely
there will come a time when every passion shall be put upon the guard
by the dread of general depravity ; when he who laughs at wickedness
in his companion, shall start from it in Ms child; when the man who
fears not for his soul, shall tremble for his possessions; when it will
be discovered that religion only can secure the rich from robbery, and
the poor from oppression,?can defend the State from treachery, and
the Throne from assassination."
Let us, finally, hear the testimony, of Montesquieu, than whom
110 one lias thought more deeply upon, or entered more fully into,
the philosophy of nations :?
"Chose admirable! La religion Chr6tienne qui ne semble avoir
d'objet que la felicite de l'autre vie, fait encore notre bonheur dans
celle-ci.
" C'est la religion Chretienne qui malgre la grandeur de l'Empire,
et le vice du climat, a emp6ehe le despotisme de s'etablir en Ethiopie,
et a porte au milieu de l'Afrique les moeurs de l'Europe et ses loix. . . .
Nous devons au Christianisme et dans le Gouvernement un certain
droit politique, et dans la guerre un certain droit des gens, que la
nature-humaine ne scauroit assez reconnoitre."?JEsprit des Loix.
Before taking final leave of Mr. Buckle, we will briefly review
his theory, so as to present it in one view.
Man's civilization is first originated by?1. The nature of the
soil, producing food in more or less abundance; 2. By the nature
of the climate, influencing the energy and continuity of man's
operations upon the soil?these two combining to originate an
accumulation of wealth, without which there can be no leisure for
thought, and therefore no civilization; and 3. By the aspects of
nature, which are to the accumulation of thought, what soil and
climate are to that of wealth.
The tropical civilizations are characterized, in consequence of
the abundance and cheapness of food,,by broad, impassable inter-
vals between high and low?by tyranny and slavery ; and in their
mental aspect, by the marks of the ascendancy of physical agencies
over man, in the development of the imagination and of super-
stition.
The European civilizations, on the contrary, are marked by the
ascendancy of man over nature in the development of the reason-
ing faculties, and of free inquiry. Hence arises intellectual pro-
gress, the source of all the advance which Europe has made in
civilization. In this, scepticism is a prime agent.
Religion, literature, and government are merely " disturbing
causes," of which no account need be taken in respect of general
or universal progress. Morals influence every individual, but
not nations. Literature is a mere nothing. Government is a
clog upon the wheels of progress.
ON CIVILIZATION.. ; 209 ;
Prayer is a folly or ail impiety. Providence is an impossibility.
Expediency is tlie proper end and aim of politics.
Such is the author's physical and mental creed. His bitterest
scorn is reserved for Christianity. Truly it has been said
" L'homme pieux et l'Athee parlent toujours de religion; l'un
parle de ce qu'il aime, et l'autre de ce qu'il craint."
It would appear almost sufficient,for the refutation of this
theory to have disentangled it from the enormous mass of learn-
ing from which it is evolved, and to have placed it in a clear,
consecutive form. But it may be useful as briefly to indicate its
errors and their sources.
The first and fundamental error is that of considering those
circumstances which are merely favourable to the development of
civilization, as actual "dynamics:" viewing, for instance, the
abundance and cheapness of food as the efficient and final cause
of the accumulation and distribution of wealth. For it is clear
that, in the most prolific lands, there could be neither accumu-
lation nor distribution of wealth were it not for the passions and
desires?in other words, for the moral nature of man. What,
creates an enormously rich aristocracy and a people of slaves but
the selfishness of man, and the absence of love and charity ?
Physical conditions may favour, but cannot create, such a state
of things.
Another great and cardinal error is that of considering intel-
lectual progress as the sole source of civilization in Europe. We
have partly entered upon this subject before; but we may add
one or two observations. It is an error to consider -morals
" stationary," and therefore unable to produce a " progressive"
result. For it is almost too evident to require allusion, that,
between the condition of the savage and that of the civilized
man, there is quite as great a moral as an intellectual difference.
And again, experience proves that intellect alone is unable to
found a permanent civilization. For why, we again ask, did the
civilizations of Greece and Rome decay at a time when intellect was
more active than at any previous period ? Mr. Buckle responds
that the intellect was indeed active, but that there was no power of
diffusion in it. True. But what is this but to say that intellect of
itself has no diffusive power, consequently of itself no civilizing
power ? And upon what does this spirit of diffusion depend, but
the presence amongst the intellectual classes of the constantly
operative moral law of" loving our neighbour as ourselves ?" It
is the moral principle of self-negation, and love and charity to our
fellow-creatures, that makes the difference between a diffusible
and non-diffusible intellect. It is true that this moral law may
be considered in effect the same?i. e., stationary in all ages?
but only as a theory; in practice it requires perpetual re-investi-
p 2
210 ON CIVILIZATION.
gation and perpetual re-reception. Its presence or absence in
any community makes tlie difference between a permanent and a
transitory civilization; and this is equally in accordance with
theory and experience.
But we go further than this, and assert that Mr. Buckle
entirely mistakes the philosophy of intellectual development, as
bearing upon the progress of nations. For intellect of itself is
not necessarily expansive?it is self-contained; its improvement is
to some extent dependent upon the fruits of past intellect, but
its immediate operation is upon individual minds, which do not
necessarily impart their knowledge; so that intellect may be, and
is in its essence, unsocial. But not so with morals, for these
have reference expressly to the relational faculties of man, and
cannot be exercised except relatively to others. These, then,
are of constant operation, and enter into and ramify through all
societies and communities : whilst the communion of the intel-
lect, however common or frequent it may be, is still not essential,
but only voluntary and casual; and the spread of intellectual
discoveries never can be due to the discoveries themselves, but
only to the presence in the discoverer of an impulse arising from
some ramification of the moral law, or in obedience to his own
desires or passions. Love of fame, love of money, love of man-
kind?three of the great stimuli to the spread of intellectual dis-
coveries?none of these are in any way intellectual, but have
immediate reference to our moral nature.*
We say, then, that what has been proved to be true by expe-
rience is equally accordant with theory?viz., that intellect of
itself, and disunited from a moral law, is, and must of necessity
ever be, utterly inoperative in advancing, consolidating, or pre-
* We have dwelt upon the subject of the influence of the moral law on civiliza-
tion at great length, for this reason?that it is chiefly to this influence that we look
for the regeneration of the " degenerate" beings and races that mingle with and
corrupt all grades of our civilized societies. Our meaning will be rendered more
clear by a reference to the Essay on the "Degeneracy of the Human Race," in
this Journal, April, 1857. M. Morel thus speaks of moral treatment
" Le traitement moral qui n'est que l'application des devoirs imposes par la loi
morale, divine, fixe et immuable, n'est pas une chose nouvelle. La propagation de
cette loi, sa pratique, son application aux individus, selon leur age et le degrd de
leur intelligence, ne sont pas non plus des fonctions exclusivement rdservees a
quelques hommes, et ne representent pas davantage des devoirs que les uns sont
libres d'accepter et les autres de rejeter Ceux qui sont charges de l'ap-
pliquer, sont non seulement les moralistes, les pretres, les magistrats, les institu-
teurs de la jeunesse, les m^decins, mais le pbre de famille et les membres qui com-
posent la famille.
"Sans doute, la loi morale n'est pas une chose nouvelle, mais l'exposd clair et
methodique . . . . de toutes les questions qui ont trait a l'am&ioration des masses,
autrement dit, a leur morcilisation, est une science encore toute nouvelle."
Such are the opinions of one of our deepest and most philosophical thinkers,
on one of the most difficult problems connected with our social condition and
prospects.
ON CIVILIZATION. 211
serving a civilization. Its inefficiency was proved in all the
ancient civilizations, which, whilst intellect was in its most active
state, died out for lack of faith, conscience, and a moral law, as a
rule of national and private life. In modern times we have had
but one instance of a highly-civilized state relapsing (temporarily)
into a state of barbarism; and this was synchronous with a
preternatural activity of the intellectual faculties, and a formal
national rejection of the restraints of the moral law, and of its
entire faith. Many other causes were in operation, of much too
complex a nature to be analysed here; but the combination of
these two elements clearly indicates that the lack was not in the
deficiency of intellectual energy, and might be in the moral want.
And with the thunder of the French Revolution still sounding in
our ears, Mr. Buckle would assert that the literature of the
Encyclopaedia was " merely the record of the knowledge" of the
people.
But we will cease our refutation of these flimsy paradoxes,
and take our leave of Mr. Buckle with a cordial expression of
our admiration for his vast learning and ability, and an undoubt-
ing trust that of the many who will be charmed with the literary
merits of his work, but few will adopt his philosophy ; but, above
all, with an earnest hope that in later years he himself may be
able to borrow a mot from a notorious character of our country,
and, for the sake of truth and religion, be able to confess that he
is not a Buckle-ite.*
The benefits of civilization are found in the improved moral,
physical, and intellectual condition of a people, and the mode in
which these improvements manifest themselves are patent to all;
we need not weary onr readers by recapitulating them. But
these benefits are not without alloy. It seems to be a law of
society that the happiness of the many shall involve the
wretchedness of a few. Whilst comfort and riches are diffused
on a more graduated plan, the more highly civilized is the com-
munity ; yet it seems to admit, exceptionally, of greater misery
amongst certain classes than even some forms of savage life.
And this must continue to be the case so long as civilization is a
state of becoming, and not being.
Civilization also introduces into society certain sources of
sudden alternations of prosperity and adversity, which are unknown
in savage life. An illustration of this is found in the tendency to
speculation, of which such frightful examples have been before
us of late years. On these and analogous points we need not
dwell.
* John Wilkes, in his later years, being asked by the King after one of his former
friends, replied, " Oh, please your Majesty, don't call him a friend of mine; he
was a Wilke-ite?1 never was."
212 -ON CIVILIZATION.
:M. Guizot, in his eloquent introductory lecture on the
" History of Civilization in Europe," acknowledges tliat one of
the questions which may be asked about civilization is, whether
it is a good or an evil ?" for some bitterly deplore it, some
rejoice at it."' Although we do not hesitate in any degree to
agree with him as to the magnitude of the blessings of civilization
to the world, yet we see that in the transition periods evils of
gigantic character do occur. Our limits compel us to confine
ourselves to a brief notice of only two of these. The first is the
effect of the contact of civilized with savage life ; the second is
concerning the great increase of mental maladies proportionate
to the advance of civilization.
The disappearance of entire races of men before the civilizing
influences of the white man, is an established fact. It has been
observed even in Europe, it is notorious in America, and also in
Australia to a smaller extent. This is due to many and com-
plicated causes. We introduce diseases amongst them to which
they were strangers before, such as the small-pox, which has
?swept away whole tribes of the North American Indians. We
introduce amongst them gunpowder and alcohol, in their effects
as deadly as the small-pox. We cultivate their land; and this
process once begun has no limits to the Teutonic race, save the
nature of the soil and the climate. The native is driven before
us, until one or other of these influences stops our progress. In
America these results are very rapid ; from the Atlantic to the
Appalachian system, scarcely any vestige of the red man is to be
found ; from the latter to the Mississippi the same results are
rapidly approaching. The red man is fast disappearing before
the aggressions of his white brother; and in other parts of the
world a similar process is taking place.
Yet, though these results emanate from civilized lands, they
cannot be fairly considered the products of civilization, but
rather of the want of that true civilization which, as we have
been endeavouring to show, depends upon a due recognition of the
moral law, keeping strict pace with the intellectual development.
It is because there is not true love and charity and brotherhood
between man and man, that these inhuman encroachments upon
native privileges occur. And of these we shall see no more,
should the time ever happily arrive when civilization is firmly
established upon the foundation of the moral law, which for one
of its great roots has the command to " love our neighbour as
ourselves." Yet, before that time arrives, it is to be feared that
an interesting race of people will have vanished from the face
of the earth, whom we may mourn, but cannot restore.
The second and last point connected with the evils attendant
upon civilization which we propose to notice is, the very great
ON CIVILIZATION. 213
increase of insanity as civilization progresses. The following
Table shows how great is the proportion of insane persons to the
whole population in the most civilized cities, compared with that
in those less so. The numbers refer to the population of some
years back:?
Population. No. of Insane. Proportion.
London ...1,400,000 ... 7000 ... 1 in .200
Paris   890,000 ... 4000 ... 1 ? 222
Milan  150,000 ... 618 ... 1 ? 242
Florence ... 80,000 ... 23G .... 1 ? 338
Turin    114,000 ... 331 ... 1 ? 344
Dresden ... 70,000 ... 150 ... 1 ? 406
Rome  154,000 ... 320 ... 1 ? 481
Naples  364,000 ... 479 ... 1 ? 759
Petersburg!!.. 377,046 ... 120 ... 1 ? 3142
Madrid ... 201,000 ... 60 ... 1 ? 3350
; Cairo ... ... 330,000 ... 14 ... 1 ? 23,571
It is not unlikely that there may be some error in the formation
-of some of these statistics ; but with all allowance made for error,
it is clear that the principal seats of civilization are those where
in sanity is most rife.
M. lirierre de Boismont, in a memoir upon " The Influence of
?Civilization on the Development of Insanity," comes to the
following conclusions:?
1. Insanity is more frequent in proportion as civilization is
more developed, and is more rare where the people is less
?enlightened.
2. Amongst the former, insanity is due to moral causes;
amongst the latter, almost exclusively to physical causes.
3. A like distinction is observed in the civilized and uncivi-
lized classes in the same community. Amongst the former,
insanity is chiefly due to moral, in the latter to physical causes.
- 4. Every age and every country witnesses the origin of forms
-of insanity bearing the impress of the dominant ideas of that age
or country, and having the seal of the epoch.
5. Every remarkable event, every grave public calamity, aug-
ments the number of the insane.
G. The increase of insanity is in relation to the development of
the intellectual faculties, of the passions, of industry, of riches,
.and of misery.
7. As the amount of insanity is strictly in proportion to the
amount of civilization, and is determined in great part by moral
?causes; moral means?especially those which will exercise a mild
regulating influence over the passions?will form the principal
basis of cure, especially in convalescence. And the chances of
restoration will be the greater in proportion as the patients are'
214 LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY IN CASES OF INSANITY.
better instructed, and the social classes more enlightened. But
as for this the strictest surveillance is requisite, the best results
are to he expected from well-regulated and numerous establish-
ments, founded and carried on upon these principles.
We will conclude this subject by some observations of Dr.
Feuchtersleben, which fully express our sentiments on the cause
of this effect of civilization on insanity :?
" A practical proof of the morbific power of the emotions and pas-
sions is found in the frequent occurrence of psychopathies in times
when all the elements of social life are in a state of fermentation; in
and after revolutions, when sudden changes of fortune, loss of property,
worldly elevation and depression, fill the lunatic asylums, and (if
Pariset be right) produce a thousand cases of mental disorder which,
in the general turmoil, remain unknown and unmentioned. And
herein lies the answer to the question, why the number of mental
diseases has increased with civilization ??a question which has cer-
tainly proved to be a fact. It is not civilization, but the increasing
want which it brings in its train,?partial education, passions, emo-
tions, &c., all which set the mind in passive motion; the forced culture
to which they lead; the over-indulgence,?these contain the reasons,
of the fact. Civilization, as external education, is but a transition to
culture as internal education; and in this first stage it produces evils
for which it furnishes the remedy in the higher stages. It carries the
poison and the antidote in the same hand."
Thus have we attempted to trace the nature, progress, results,
advantages, and evils of civilization. At some future time we
propose to indicate the application of some of these principles to
the regeneration of the fallen and dangerous classes of civilized
societies.
