Homicide In Insanity
=====================

142
Art. IX.-

BY JOHN P. GRAY, M.D.
Read before the Association of Medical Superintendents of American Institutions
for the Insane. *
A DISPOSITION to violence is a common characteristic of mental
disease. It is exhibited in every conceivable manner, from harsh,
words to suicide and the most cruel and brutal murders, and is
found in every form of insanity. If, then, among the unhappy
phenomena or symptoms developed under the influence of the
delusions and hallucinations peculiar to the disease, we meet with
a tendency so universal, so destructive of happiness, and so dan-
gerous to society, how important is its careful study, with refe-
rence to the welfare both of the patient and the public !
If, however, as some assert, neither delusion nor hallucination
is necessary to the development of a tendency to violence ; that
it may burst forth in its most terrible forms suddenly, without
premonition, and even without the accompaniment of apparent
physical derangement; that the first and only manifestation of
disease may be a blind, irresistible desire to take life,?then the
subject is of still deeper and more vital importance, and insanity
is invested with a degree of interest which pertains to no other
disease. If a passing fit of indigestion, or a slight modification
in the character or quantity of the blood circulating through the
brain, be all that is required to beget suicide and murder, what
a lesson on the frailty of man, and yet, at the same time, how
impressively does this sad feature of mental disease teach us the
dignity and value of reason !
It is of the first importance, therefore, to know whether these
serious consequences are always preceded by appreciable physical
and mental disturbance, or whether they may appear without
either; in other words, whether there is ample foundation, in
well-attested facts, for the belief that there is such a thing as a
sudden explosion of homicidal impulse, independent of appre-
ciable disease?a moral mania, having for its essence a desire to
kill.
We propose, therefore, in this paper, to bring before the pro-
fession a series of cases treated in the institution at Utica, for
the past seven years; not so much, however, with the view of
discussing the question of homicide, but rather as a contribution
to the general stock of facts already recorded on this important
subject. The cases selected are those which have passed under
the writer's own observation, and with the details of which he is
* From the "American Journal of Insanity" for October, 1857.
HOMICIDE IN INSANITY. 143
personally familiar. It may be remarked further, that the expe-
rience of a State institution so large as that at Utica (having
treated nearly five thousand cases of insanity in a period of four-
teen years) must be valuable in this connexion?more especially
when it is remembered that, by law, all those in the state acquitted
of criminal charges by reason of insanity, as well as those under
indictment, and found to be insane previous to trial, are sent,
together with a large number of dangerous and homicidal cases
committed by justices or by friends. Indeed, the cases of homi-
cide or homicidal attempts coming by order of the courts alone,
in a population of over three millions of people, must be a valu-
able record.
For the sake of convenience, the cases are arranged in three
classes :
1st. Those who have committed homicide, and who have been
placed in the asylum under an order of the Court, or by friends.
2nd. Those who have made homicidal attempts under circum-
stances which led physicians and others to regard the homicidal
tendency as the distinguishing feature of the disease, and some
of which were considered as cases of pure homicidal monomania,
and as such were committed to the care of the institution by
official orders or otherwise.
3rd. Miscellaneous cases, illustrating certain points having a
bearing upon the subject under consideration.
I. Those who have committed homicide.
Under this classification we have a list of twenty-four patients
?nineteen males and five females?whose violence resulted in the
death of thirty-three persons.
Case I.?S., admitted May, 1843. Male, aged 32, labourer,
no education, no religious belief, a man of bad habits; form of
mental disease, chronic mania following prolonged ill-health ;
killed the adopted son of his brother-in-law by repeated stabs
with a pitchfork and knife. The murder was premeditated,
well-arranged plans of concealment were laid and carried out,
the instruments were carefully washed, and the body buried.
His motives were grounded in personal hatred and revenge. He
had always borne the reputation of being a bad man. The act
was committed in the daytime. Is still in the asylum.
Case II?admitted September, 1843. Female, mother
of a family, aged 44, of common education, good habits, and
even temper. Form of mental disease, paroxysmal mania, com-
mencing at the climacteric period. During one of her parox-
ysms, while in a furiously maniacal state, she cut the throats of
two of her children, and attempted the life of her husband.
144 HOMICIDE IN INSANITY.
When homicidal was always suicidal. The act was committed
in the daytime. Still in the asylum.
Case III.?K, admitted May, 1845. Male, aged 40, a cabi-
net-maker, of intemperate habits. Under the delusion that he
was the object of plots and evil designs, he killed a neighbour's
wife by stabbing and burning. Act committed in the daytime.
Is still in the institution, a demented, dangerous man.
CASE IY.?W., admitted August, 1846. Male, aged 25, a
boatman, no education or religious belief, but of fair morals, and
an industrious man. The hereditary tendencies in the case are
not known. In a paroxysm of violence and insanity, killed a
man during the daytime on board boat. Was tried and sent to
the State prison, where he was found to be insane. Had there
frequent paroxysms of insanity, in which he made desperate as-
saults upon several persons. Is still in the asylum, a very vio-
lent and dangerous man. His epileptic paroxysms succeed each
other at brief intervals, and mark his periods of violence.
CASE V.?K., admitted October, 1848. Male, aged 40, a
wealthy land speculator, of intemperate habits; was a violent,
revengeful, suspicious man. At the first outbreak of an attack
of acute mania, stabbed a man in the street, in the daytime,
under the delusion that he was following his footsteps to rob
him. Recovered, and eloped from the asylum in 1852.
Case "VI.?B., admitted January, 1850. Male, aged 50, far-
mer, of violent and ungoverned temper, a drunkard ; was labour-
ing under chronic mania, caused by his prolonged intemperance.
One morning openly stabbed a neighbour, under the delusion
that he was unkindly disposed to him. Was tried, convicted,
and sentenced to prison for life. Was there found to be insane,
and sent to the asylum, whence, after three years' confinement,
he escaped, and died on his way home. Was a very dangerous
man, constantly secreting and making instruments with which to
kill those whom he disliked.
Case YII.?F., admitted October, 1850. Male, aged 30, a
labourer, of good habits, of hereditary taint. Had an attack of
acute mania, induced by fatigue and anxiety ; the first indication
of which was a maniacal frenzy, during which, as a matter of re-
sistance, under the delusion that he was about to be murdered,
he stabbed two men on the deck of a steamboat. Act was com-
mitted in the daytime. Patient recovered, and was discharged.
Case VIII.?H., Sandwich Islander, admitted November,
1850. Male, aged 30, a sailor, of good habits, educated. His
purse was stolen by the steward of the vessel while in port; and
under the impression that he was doing right, he stabbed the
steward, when an attempt was made to arrest him. In maniacal
frenzy he killed two men by stabbing, and wounded many
HOMICIDE IN INSANITY. 145
others; was finally shot down and captured. Acute mania fol-
lowed. "Was acquitted on the ground of insanity. Recovered
and was discharged.
Case IX.?P., admitted June, 1851. Male, aged 51, of in-
temperate habits; had an attack of melancholia, induced by his
vicious indulgences. One morning after breakfast, shot a neigh-
bour, under the delusion that he was plotting against him. Gave
himself up to the authorities, evincing no regret or sorrow. Re-
covered, and was discharged.
Case X.?N., admitted March, 1852. Female, aged 58, of
insane parentage, a worthy member of the Baptist church. Had
an attack of sub-acute mania, caused by domestic trouble. In a
paroxysm of maniacal passion she killed a neighbour's child by
dashing its head against the wall. She was also suicidal. Re-
covered, and was discharged from Asylum.
Case XI.?B., admitted April, 1852. Male, aged 32, a gar-
dener, of good habits, inherited insanity from his father. Had
an attack of acute mania, caused by domestic trouble, and killed
his wife by stabbing, under the delusion that she was not his
wile, and was plotting against him. Still in the Asylum, a very
dangerous man.
Case XII.?D., admitted April, 1852. Male, aged 35, a la
bourer, was an intemperate man, and of intemperate ancestry.
Was for some time depressed and suspicious. One morning he
went forth deliberately and knocked down and stamped upon a
kinsman of his, until he was dead, under the delusion that he was
inimical to him. The following day he was seized with acute-
mania, demented rapidly, and died of general paralysis before
the end of the year.
Case XIII.?D., admitted March, 1853. Male, aged 29, a
boatman, of intemperate habits, and of insane parentage; had
been in a melancholy, half-demented state for some months.
His father went to his room one evening to ascertain whether his
son was at home. Having no light, he repeated his name several
times. Patient, who was dozing upon liis bed, sprang up, think-
ing his father was shouting for help, seized a club, and encoun-
tering him in the dark, killed him by a single blow. Recovered,
and was discharged.
Case XIV.?W., admitted June, 1853. Male, aged 42, a
pedlar, of intemperate habits; was demented from long-continued
dissipation. He loaded a gun one morning, and under the de-
lusion that he was obeying a command of God, shot a man who
was ploughing in a neighbouring field. Was very suicidal,
died in the Asylum.
Case XV. T., admitted August, 1853. Male, aged 33, a
cabinet-maker, of good habits, a Swedenborgian; killed his
NO. IX.?NEW SERIES. L
146 HOMICIDE IN INSANITY.
brother-in-law with an axe. The act was committed in the
evening, and in connexion with some family quarrel. On second
trial, after prolonged imprisonment, was acquitted on the ground
of insanity. Was subsequently discharged by the court as not
insane.
Case XVI.?W., admitted March, 1854. Male, aged 42, far-
mer, sober and industrious, of a kind and amiable disposition.
Hereditary taint in family. Had twice suffered from mental
disease. Suddenly, and without assigned cause, became gloomy
and depressed; talked much about his soul, and the earthly and
future Welfare of his family. Read his bible a great deal, and
finally secluded himself; and on one occasion prayed for thirty
hours in succession, without rising from his knees. Thought he
could look directly into heaven, and converse with the Saviour.
Suddenly became composed, took his razor very deliberately,
and cut his wife's throat to the vertebrae, producing instant death.
He then made a similar attack upon his daughter, who, however,
escaped from him with the remainder of the family. Patient at
once sank into profound stupor, refused food, rapidly emaciated,
and was brought to the Asylum demented. Subsequently re-
covered, retaining only a dreamy recollection of the homicide.
Was discharged.
Case XYII.?S., admitted May, 1854. Male, aged 56, a
quiet, industrious man, the father of ten children. Was slightly
intempei-ate, rather reserved in disposition, but kind to his family.
Began to complain of intense headache, became jealous of
his aged wife, and cross to his children. One morning walked
out to the woodpile, procured an axe, returned to the house,
knocked down his wife, dragged her to the door, and deliberately
cut off her head. The children fled and aroused the neighbours.
Patient gave himself up and desired to be hung. On opening of
the court, was so evidently insane that he was ordered to the
Asylum without trial. When admitted was labouring under
dementia. Has recovered ; seldom sj)eaks of the act, of which,
however, lie has a perfect recollection.
Case XVIII.?A., admitted May, 1854. Male, aged 40,
shiftless and uneducated, abjectly poor, lived with and was sup-
ported by his sisters. Was addicted to the free use of intoxicat-
ing drinks; was of insane parentage. Became silent, pale, and
emaciated; soon imagined that he was possessed oi great wealth,
which his neighbours were trying to get away from him, and
under this delusion procured a gun and shot one of them. Was
brought to the Asylum, and in a few months died of general
paralysis.
Case XIX.?G., admitted August, 1854. Female, aged 36,
of an even temper, and gentle disposition. While nursing child.
HOMICIDE IN INSANITY. 147
and in rather delicate health, contracted an ungrounded jealousy
of her husband. This continued for two years. At times she
was also suspicious of and violent towards others. One morning
locked herself in the house and barricaded the windows and
doors. Attempts were made to gain admission, when, in a par-
oxysm of maniacal passion, she seized her children by the feet
and dashed their heads against the wall, fracturing the skulls of
two, of whom one died. She was brought to the institution in
a state of dementia, and was subsequently removed to the country
house, unimproved.
Case XX.?T., admitted February, 1855. Male, aged 45, a
clergyman, of academic education ; of insane parentage, of intem-
perate habits, and violent, ungovernable disposition. Had an
attack of mania a potu, during which he made a murderous
assault upon his family with a razor. He killed one child, and
wounded others. After a trial, in which the jury could not
agree, and pending a second, was sent to the Asylum on order
of judge. Feigned dementia. He eloped in 1855.
Case XXI.?L., admitted May, 1855. ' A labourer, of tem-
perate habits, but of violent, passionate disposition. Became
very angry with his wife on account of her refusing to sign a
deed of convej^ance. Subsequently killed her and three children.
Committed the act in the daytime. Does not deny it, but says
he has his reasons for it. Is demented. Was long imprisoned
before being sent to the Asylum. Has a large scrofulous tumour
upon his neck. Says that he has always had it. Is still in the
Asylum.
Case XXII.?E., admitted October, 1855. Female, aged 35,
German, religiously educated, and. of gentle disposition; sank
into dementia after childbirth. Had a ,delusion that her hus-
band was not really married to her?that he was an adulterer.
On his returning from his work at noon, one day, he lay down
to rest while his dinner was preparing. Falling into a light
sleep, the wife seized the opportunity to cut off his head with a
h?e- Is still in the Asylum, demented.
Case XXIII. W., admitted March, 1856. Female, aged 27,
?f insane parentage, religiously educated, member of Episcopal
church, of great evenness and gentleness of disposition; was sub-
ject to periods of depression, owing to the intemperance of her
husband, poverty, disappointment, and home-sickness. Had
attempted suicide. One Sabbath morning, and while she was
labouring under depression, her husband left to go fishing. In
his absence she seized an axe, killed four of her children, and
cut her own throat. Is in the Asylum, demented.
Case XXIV.?L., admitted April, 1857. Male, aged 22, a
shoemaker, unmarried, of vicious habits. Procured a pistol, went
l 2
148 HOMICIDE IN INSANITY.
to a road which farmers, returning from market, were accustomed
to travel; was invited by a man, whom he supposed to be a
farmer with money, to ride with him ; rode some distance, then
got behind him and shot and robbed him. On preliminary
trial was ordered to Asylum, where he remains in a state of de-
mentia.
II. Those who have made homicidal attempts under circum-
stances which led physicians and others, in many in-
stances, to regard this homicidal tendency as the distin-
guishing feature of the disease, and some of which were
considered cases of "pure homicidal monomania, and as
such committed to the institution by official order or other-
wise.
Under this classification twenty-five cases are presented, twenty
of which are males, and five females.
Case I:?S., admitted March, 1846. Male, aged 25, unedu-
cated and vicious. Had epilepsy induced by intemperance.
Became quarrelsome, considered himself injured, and in a rage
would attempt to stab those whom he disliked. At time of
admission to the Asylum, exhibited no marked mental aberra-
tion. Soon began to dement; was always a dangerous man ;
invariably makes his attacks in the daytime, and on persons
whom he dislikes, and never threatens or uses violent language.
The homicidal tendency is not constant, and is at times attended
with strong suicidal disposition, and occurs independently, so far
as can be observed, of his epileptic seizures.
Case II.?R, admitted August, 1847. Male, aged 42, mar-
ried, the father of five children, common education, not religious,
of good moral habits, and an industrious man. Hereditary ten-
dencies not known. For many years had paroxysms of violence,
in which he would threaten his family and neighbours; but, upon
recovery, was a kind and peaceable man. In one of these periods
went to the office of two physicians and attacked them, as he
afterwards said, with the intention of killing them, under the
impression that they had given him medicines which had injured
him. They resisted him, barely escaping with their lives. He
was tried, and sentenced to the state prison for the term of six
years. Remained for that time in prison, where his attacks of
maniacal excitement were frequent, and during which he was
violent, attacking those about him suddenly and furiously.
After his return home these paroxysms continued, with the
attempts to kill. His physician then detected symptoms of
epilepsy, and, on inquiry, ascertained that he had received a
blow on the head some years previous, which had left a consi-
HOMICIDE IN INSANITY. 149
derable depression in the occipital region of the skull. He bad
"frequently thought of operating upon him, thinking it possible
that from the blow some portion of the skull might perhaps be
pressing upon the brain."
He was committed to Asylum upon an order of the Superin-
tendent of the Poor, and for two j'ears was subject to paroxysms
of violence, lasting a few hours, in which he frequently attacked
those about him. These paroxysms were usually followed by
epileptiform seizures. At other times he was uniformly kind
and industrious, and having, during his periods of violence, on
several occasions injured patients and attendants, he came at
length to anticipate his seizures, and request to be placed in his
room, and to have no one approach him suddenly. He ex-
perienced at these times pain in the head, a sensation of ringing
in his ears, dimness of vision, with a vague idea of impending
danger. His violence was occasioned by the delusion that per-
sons were attacking him with the intention of killing him; and
on several occasions, while alone in his room, had a distinct sen-
sation of a blow upon the head, when he would immediately
begin a furious contest with his imaginary enemies. At the end
of six years, during which the violence of his epileptic periods
gradually abated, he returned home in a state of partial de-
mentia.
Case III.?L., admitted December, 1847. Patient was an
educated man, of gentle and amiable disposition. When he was
about thirty-six years old, became changed in character; neglected
his work, wandered about, was depressed, and afterwards morose
and irritable. One morning walked out of the house, returned
with an axe, and made a murderous attack upon his parents.
Was taken to prison, and soon after brought to the Asylum.
Was a dangerous man, and for a long while retained the most
revengeful and deadly hatred of his parents. Subsequently be-
came profoundly demented, and is now a harmless, inoffensive
man.
Case IV.?V., admitted July, 1849. Male, aged 25, son of a
farmer in good circumstances, and an ordinarily intelligent boy.
After scarlet fever health was impaired, and at the age of 20
began to be passionate, and to entertain suspicions of friends
and neighbours. Continued to grow worse, though worked re-
gularly on farm. One day took a gun and shot at a neighbour,
with the intention of killing him. Was arrested, but considered
insane, and sent to the Asylum by order of the court. When
received was in a state of dementia, which increased gradually,
an ^ le was removed, after a period of three years, a quiet, harm-
less man.
Case V.- ma]ej aged 25, admitted August, 3 849. Native
150 HOMICIDE IN INSANITY.
of Ireland, no education, was a boy of violent temper, and early-
placed in the army by wish of his friends. While there, and
without known provocation, stabbed a sentinel with his bayonet,
and then made his escape, and his friends sent him to this
country. He entered the army in this country, and was fre-
quently refractory, requiring discipline. On one occasion he ran
his bayonet into a fellow-soldier, wounding him severely but not
fatally. He was brought before the proper officers, and dis-
charged from service on the ground of imbecility and insanity.
He wandered off, and was placed in an alms-house, where he was
very violent and abusive. He was sent to the Asylum on an
order of a superintendent of the poor, and was, when received,
labouring under dementia. His dangerous propensities continued
for some time, but under the progress of his disease he became
so inoffensive as to be removed again to the poor-house after
two years, where he still remains.
Case YI.?M., admitted September, 1849. Male, aged 30,
married, a lawyer, liberal education, religious, and of irreproach-
able character. At the age of 25 had an epileptic fit, which was
followed by others at somewhat irregular intervals ; not, however,
impairing his mind perceptibly, though depressing his spirits,
and rendering him at times irritable. Two weeks before admis-
sion, after several fits, became excited and boisterous, and at-
tempted to kill his mother and sister. They fled and closed a
door against him, when he spent his fury upon the glass and
furniture. He soon became calm, appreciated his condition, and
was willing to be confined in an asylum. Remained under treat-
ment for a time, and returned home, but the recurrence of a
violent disposition towards his family induced him to request his
sequestration. Subsequently he became demented, and died at
the close of a series of epileptic convulsions.
While in the Asylum, was once in the medical office, executing
a receipt for rent paid by a tenant, when he suddenly seized a
weapon, sprang across the table, and attacked the physician,
under the hallucination that he was a man who had once
defrauded him, and was present to induce him to yield up some
claim to property. He subsequently stated that he seemed
to see the man distinctly, and that he heard him speak, and make
the request. The physician had not spoken.
Case YII.? C., admitted March, 1851. Was an uneducated,
vicious, intemperate man, of decided hereditary taint. One day,
while disputing with his father about some trifling matter, en-
deavoured to kill him with a spade. Jury found him guilty of
an assault with intent to kill, but subsequently he was sent to
Asylum. Was labouring under dementia, and died in the insti-
tution in ]S57.
HOMICIDE IN INSANITY. 151
Case VIII.?T., admitted April, 1851. Wife of labourer,
second husband, member of church, good habits, common educa-
tion, mother of three children. After birth of last child general
health impaired and mind somewhat disturbed. Partially re-
covered ; nursed her child sixteen months; was passionately at-
tached to it; attempted to wean it, and in a few days was seized
with acute mania ; became violent toward husband, and abusive of
her child. Tried to drown her second child ; subsequently stripped
it and put it under the hot stove, and took the eldest into the
garden and attempted to smother it by pressing its face into the
ground. Was furious 011 the way to Asylum, and attempted to
jump from steamboat into the lake. Recovered, and was dis-
charged in 1852. Retained a dreamy recollection of her con-
duct.
Case IX.?H., admitted November, 1852. An educated
woman, and mother of a large family. Was of an amiable and
gentle disposition, but sank into melancholia at the climacteric
period. There a strong hereditary taint in her family. One
uiglit she requested to sleep at the front of the bed, which was
permitted. On retiring, she drew a small stand to the bedside,
and when she supposed her husband asleep, cautiously took a
razor, which she' had concealed in a drawer of the stand, and
drew it across his throat. He, however, had not been asleep,
and resisted. She then cut her own throat. She never spoke
after wards, but continued very suicidal to the day of her death,
'?vhich occurred about six months afterwards.
Case X.?M., admitted June, ]852. Male, aged 30, a labourer,
?f intemperate parentage. Was a bad man and a drunkard, but
generally provided well for his family, and lived peaceably with
them. Had complained for six or eight months of general indis-
position ; was subject to gastric disturbance; was depressed in
sPuits and wakeful at night. Two months before admission,
"without any apparent motive, he gave his wife a large dose of
opium. Observing its effect upon her, he ran to a neighbour, told
jttoi that he had poisoned his wife, and insisted upon being killed.
? bis neighbour's refusing to comply with this request, he
seized a razor and cut his throat. His wife was restored. He
was brought to the Asylum, gradually sank into profound de-
mentia, and died. Alwavs spoke of his family with much affec-
tion and interest,
? r. AS?E -^1-?D., admitted September, 1852. Female, aged 52,
wi e ot a farmer, common education, religious, good habits, here-
1 insane for many years, and other members of
ma einal branch. Late in life married a widower with several
grown-up children. Had occasional domestic troubles. At
climacteric period became depressed in spirits, with impaired
152 HOMICIDE IN INSANITY.
general health; sank into a state of melancholy. Thought her
husband desired to get rid of her. Secluded herself much of the
time, and frequently laid awake during the night. One morning
followed her husband inio the wood-house, seized an axe, struck
him on the head and felled him. Subsequently inflicted nume-
rous severe blows about his head and face, cutting him horribly.
She then gave herself up and requested to be punished. Said
she had done an act against the law, but had done no wrong;
that her husband was in league with the devil, and had sold her
to him ; that on several occasions in the night she had observed
them talking together, and that the night preceding the morning
of the deed, the devil had made a large fire in the centre of the
room and kept it burning a long time, waiting for her to go to
sleep ; that during this time her husband pretended to be asleep,
but at the same time she heard his spirit talking and laughing
with the devil and arranging her destruction.
This woman rapidly demented, but retained her delusions.
She was subsequently removed by her family, and become pro-
foundly demented.
Case XII.?S., a male, aged 25, a farmer's son, was admitted
to the Asylum in December, 1852. There was no inherited dis-
position to insanity. At the age of eighteen had an attack of
mania, from which it appears he recovered but partially, yet
went to school for two years, when he had a recurrence of disease.
"Was subsequently subject to paroxysms of mania, to the time of
admission above mentioned. During one of his, paroxysms he
attacked his father with an axe, and the same day set fire to his
father's barn. On admission, was labouring under dementia?
was silent, easily controlled, never spoke of his family, when his
father or mother visited him usually answered questions, but
took no interest. Never would disclose the reasons for his violent
conduct. Worked steadily, and gradually became more and
more demented, and died in 1857.
Case XIII.?G., admitted April, 1853. Male, aged 33; a
man of good habits; father was insane. Began to talk of his
troubles, and accused his brother and sister-in-law, with whom
he lived, of being their cause. Under this delusion made a mur-
derous assault upon them with an axe. Was brought to the in-
stitution slightly demented, and after a short time was removed ;
but his feelings towards his brother and sister-in-law at once
returned, and he was brought back. As his disease progressed,
the homicidal tendency disappeared.
Case XIV ? F,, admitted September, 1853. Male, aged 49 ;
was an eccentric, morose man, and occupied, entirely alone, an
isolated farm-house. Began first to shoot at every one who
passed his house. Blocked up the road, which happened to be
HOMICIDE IN INSANITY. 153
an unfrequented one. Thought that mankind wished to deprive
inn of his little farm. He wounded no one fatally. Is in the
sylum, and retains the same delusions. Is quite demented.
^ase X~V.?G., admitted November, 1853. Male, aged 27,
erman, member of Lutheran Church, of good education, a mu-
sician by profession; was married to a lady of great personal
eauty, his superior physically, and to whom he had been long
a tenderly attached. Some months after marriage he made
an attempt to push her into the canal, and also the river. After
several attempts of this kind, she demanded his reasons for such
strange conduct. He burst at once into a paroxysm of weeping,
mingled with the fondest expressions of endearment, and an'ob-
scure reference to the bliss of heaven. She concluded that
he was becoming insane, and that, under some delusion, he
desired to kill her, and afterwards take his own life. Wishing
to avoid the shame and despair of such an exposure, she cou-
lageously determined to keep the secret, and rely upon her own
strength and presence of mind to prevent the accomplishment of
his purpose. He was paler than usual, and suffered from head-
ache, but was able to discharge his accustomed duties. He con-
tinued his attempts, his wife searching him every night, often
finding a brace of pistols, a razor, or a carving-knife, then lock-
lng the door and securing the key. It occurred to her that tra-
velling might benefit him, and they accordingly started to visit
some friends at the West. On board the steamboat, crossing
Lake Erie, he war; most persistent in his efforts to induce her to
walk with him on the upper deck, and did not cease begging to
have her do so until midnight, and then cried himself to sleep,
having nothing to do, his attempts only increased in frequency.
J-hey retired one night, after a most careful search, as usual;
when about half asleep, she was aroused by feeling the edge of a
razor drawn across her throat. By combining great presence of
oiind with all the strength she could summon, she escaped with
an extensive but fortunately superficial wound; and, to use her
language, " thinking it about time," she brought him to the
syiutn. There, one of his first acts was to conceal a razor. His
ease was incomplete dementia. He soon recovered, and sub-
acknowledged that his sole and engrossing aim was to
of 1 US W^e' ail(l then himself, to secure the mutual enjoyment
with Trly ? thinking, as he expressed it, with eyes dancing
be in ^ we were so happy, happy here, what would it
his \ "f ^aven ?" His object in concealing the razor was to cut
him 7^ ^ie first time she should be permitted to visit
p' n y^ei1 his own.
aged 2Q admitted November, 1853. A clergyman,
' studious habits. From long-continued mental appli-
154; HOMICIDE IN INSANITY.
cation, as well as from confinement to an ill-selected and scanty
diet, a freak of his eccentric mental constitution, began to ex-
perience a gradual impairment of bis physical health, and to
entertain delusions of the nature of suspicions relating to his
clerical duties and his brethren. Attended a meeting of the
synod, and on his return his friends noticed him to be labouring
under considerable mental disturbance. Declared that on ac-
count of his youth he was the object of distrust. Suspected his
neighbours desired the separation of his wife from himself, and
that they were endeavouring to poison his family. During his
resdence in the Asylum the delusions connected with those with
whom he was. associated led to frequent outbursts of violence and
rage. Health gradually improved, and his mental condition so
altered that his wife and friends removed him. Soon manifested
evidence of a return of his mental disease. Began to threaten
his wife and family, and they left him through fear, and he
remained with his mother. Without assigning a motive, he
procured a knife and attempted to kill her. "Was arrested, and
after a brief confinement in jail was again removed to Asylum at
XJtica, where he remains, his condition unimproved.
Case XYII.?T., admitted December, 1853. A young man,
aged 25, of good habits and gentle disposition; lived with his
widowed mother, to whom he was tenderly attached. He had
at one time an attack of mental disease, had recovered, and
remained well for many years. He seemed a little restless; left
home, and after several days' absence returned with a gun, which
he deliberately loaded, and attempted to discharge at his mother.
The cap missed, at which he became so enraged that he broke
the gun into fragments. Was secured and placed in jail. His
conduct was variable ; he was at times noisy and excitable, after
which he would become quiet; was filthy in his habits, and
refused to walk, talk, or eat. Made several attacks upon his
attendants. While under observation in the Asylum he con-
tinued much in the same condition as is described above. After
a residence of two years, during which time he had not been
known to converse or express any wish, requested permission to
write to his mother. The letter which was written was both
appropriate and affectionate. From this time his improvement
was gradual, and he was discharged after a residence of three
years. The delusions this patient had so long entertained were
never unfolded.
Case XVIII.?B., admitted June, 1854. A merchant, aged
68, married, of good education, but of intemperate habits. Began
to manifest evidences of insanity six years prior to admission to
the Asylum. Hereditary predisposition to mental disease existed
in the paternal branch ot the lamily. The early indications of
HOMICIDE IN INSANITY. 155
the disease were found in bis restlessness, and peevishness of
manner; disposition to engage in law-suits; mismanagement of
his business, resulting in its derangement and in great pecuniary
losses; and in his suspicions of those about him. Under the
delusion that he was about to be robbed, he procured arms,
and on slight provocation discharged his pistols, which he at
first loaded with powder, then with paper balls, and eventually
with shot, at passers-by. On being arrested and searched, two
revolvers, heavily charged, were found upon his person. Had
always enjoyed an excellent reputation, but had gradually be-
come passionate, and acquired exalted ideas of property. When
it was first proposed to him to go to an asylum, he declared he
would commit suicide, but afterwards went without difficulty and
willingly. After admission became gradually quiet and easily
controlled, and, after four months' residence, returned to his
family.
Case XIX.?C., admitted September, 1854. A farmer, aged
56, of limited education, intemperate in his habits, as well as
eccentric and passionate. Gave indications of insanity two years
prior to admission. On several occasions attacked his neighbours
without provocation. Steps were taken to place ^ him in an
asylum, but he made his escape. Returned after an interval, and
continued quiet till about one week before his reception, when
he attacked a neighbour with a club, injuring him severely.
Subsequently attempted to shoot his wife. She escaped by
running away. He laboured under the suspicion that plots
existed against his life and property. Since his admission into the
Asylum has had an apoplectic seizure. He rarely speaks to any
?ne, but is disposed to seclude himself, and devotes the greater
portion of his time to reading. He is regarded as a dangerous
man.
Case XX.?L., admitted October, "J 855. A farmer, who had
been known as an intemperate, violent, and dangerous man for
fifteen years, during the greater portion of which time he had
supported himself and accumulated a small property by his in-
dustry. Began to manifest indications of insanity about four
months prior to admission. His violent conduct was such as to
excite the apprehension of persons having occasion to pass his
house, as well as his neighbours, whom he was in the habit of
threatening with violence. On several occasions fired at persons
who passed near his house, under the delusion that he was to be
attacked and robbed of his money, and an invention for exhibit-
ing a perpetual motion, which he supposed he had perfected. An
oiiicei, with the assistance of a number of persons, went to the
house for the purpose of arresting him. It had been barricaded,
and a defence prepared ? with loaded pistols and guns, a hand-
156 HOMICIDE IN INSANITY.
spike, clubs, a basket of stones, an axe, and a large pot of boiling
water. He yielded after a desperate resistance. Was confined
for nine months, gradually overcoming his delusions, when his
friends and neighbours removed him.
Case XXL?W., admitted August, 1855. Aged 42, mother of
several children, of liberal education, member of church, good
habits, strong hereditary predisposition to insanity in family.
After birth of last child was irritable, at times maniacal, enter-
tained unfounded suspicions of her husband, neglected her
domestic duties, secluded herself. Secreted a carving knife, and
in the night attempted the life of her husband. Labouring under
chronic mania. Is still in Asylum.
Case XXII.?W., admitted December, 1855. A carpenter,
aged 35, of intemperate habits and bad morals. Gave evidences
of insanity nine months previous to this time. Insanity here-
ditary on paternal side. Became violently insane ; fired a pistol
at a young man in the street, and subsequently shot at two men
riding in a buggy, and made other homicidal attempts. When
arrested had a heavily loaded pistol, a hand-saw, and a steel
square in his bed with him, with which he made a desperate
resistance. He entertained delusions concerning his property and
the chastity of his wife. Returned to his family in July, 1856.
Case XXIII.?W., admitted June, 1856. Aged 42, wife of a
captain of one of the Hudson River boats. She was a lad}' of
intelligence, much respected for her amiability and virtues, and
for many years a worthy and consistent member of the Baptist
church. She was of healthy parentage, though one paternal
uncle and two aunts had been insane. Her domestic relations
had always been very pleasant.
She resided with her family during the summer of 1855, in a
malarial district. Her second child was seized with intermittent
fever, and died in August; her eldest son, to whom she was
passionately attached, also suffered severely from the disease, and
in the following month had a series of convulsions which left him
amaurotic. The entire winter was spent in the most devoted and
assiduous attention to this child, under the hope, held out by his
physician, that his sight would return to him when he had
recovered his usual health. After months of care and watchful
nursing he eventually regained his previous flesh and strength,
but was still unable to see.
On the opening of navigation, she left home with him to
submit his case to the oculists of the city of New York, confi-
dently believing that their great experience and superior skill
would restore his sight. They, however, pronounced him hope-
lessly blind. She returned home overwhelmed with grief, feared
that she had loved her children too fondly, and in her engrossing
HOMICIDE IN INSANITY. 157
affection for them had neglected her duty to her God, who, to
punish her idolatry, had taken one away from her, and smitten
the other with blindness. In her sorrow she sought the advice
and counsel of her pastor, presented to him her view of the afflic-
tion, and suggested fasting and prayer, to which she understood
him to assent. She accordingly fasted for three days, spending
most of the time in meditation in her own room, in reading the
Scriptures, and prayer. She was more cheerful on the evening
of the third day, but passed a restless night, and on the following
morning was more uneasy, felt feverish, and, in the opinion of
a neighbour, who called upon her, seemed to talk more than
usual, and in a hurried, excited manner. During the remainder
of the week she was as cheerful and composed as^ she had been
at any time for some weeks previously, though feeling faint from
her prolonged abstinence. On the morning of the following
Sabbath she attended church and listened to a sermon, the theme
of which was the sacrifice of Isaac by Abraham, and returned
home greatly excited. At evening service, as was occasionally
the custom for females in her church, she arose, spoke of her
afflictions, the light in which she regarded them, &c. Becoming
somewhat excited, and weeping violently and hysterically, she
was advised to return home, and did so, with one of her friends,
her husband at this time being absent in command of his vessel.
She could not distinctly recall the state of her feelings, nor how
she rested during this night. On the following morning she was
detected approaching her children's bed with a large carving-
knife in her hand. She was greatly agitated, but at once
acknowledged her intention of sacrificing her children, in order
to show her submission to Divine will, as Abraham had. Her
friends explained to her the manifest insanity of such an idea,
and she came to the institution voluntarily. She was pale and
nervous, trembling whenever addressed; but under the use of
tonics and laxatives rapidly recovered, and soon returned to her
family.
Case XXIV.?W., admitted August, 1856. Male, aged 35,
of temperate habits, and a professor of religion. Having pur-
chased a farm, found himself embarrassed in meeting his pecu-
niary obligations, and applied himself very closely to work.
About two months previous to his admission his wife noticed his
actions to be unusual, and that he worked and slept irregularly.
. this state he undertook the care of a sick person, which im-
paired his physical strength. Two weeks prior to admission he
took one ot his children and a dog, and proceeded to the woods,
wheie he hung and quartered the dog. Intended to proceed in
the same manner with the child, but, under the impression that
he had brought the wrong one with'him, returned to his house
158 HOMICIDE IN INSANITY.
for another, deliberately telling what he had done and intended,
to do. His wife secured the children, and he was placed in
security till his removal to the Asylum could be effected. The
delusion under which he laboured was, that he was directed by
God to exhibit a proof of his religious devotion. He remained
under treatment seven months, and was discharged in his usual
health.
Case XXY.?S., admitted April, 1857. Male, aged 37,
farmer, member of the Methodist church, industrious in habits,
and of good morals. Showed indications of mental disease one
year prior to admission. There exists hereditary predisposition.
Nine months prior to reception began to neglect his farm and
family. The greater portion of the time sat in the house and
read the Bible, seldom conversing with any one, and objected to
his food for days together. Burned candles during three successive
days and nights. At about two o'clock one morning he left his
wife asleep, as he supposed, and went to his bam, killed a heifer,
and drew it into a field. He then returned to his wife's chamber
and, after satisfying himself that she and the children were asleep,
fastened the doors and left the house. From the house he went
to the barn, and slaughtered a number of sheep, and again
returned to the house, with an axe, with the intention, afterwards
avowed, of killing his entire family. In the meantime his wife
had been observing his movements, and had fled to a neighbour's
house. He submitted quietly to be taken to the county recep-
tacle for lunatics. When his wife visited him, several days
afterwards, he made a violent effort to attack her. He refused
food, but usually managed to secrete a portion of that brought
to him, and partook of it unobserved. For a period of three
months after his admission to the Asylum he maintained a uni-
form silence. He is now improving, and writes affectionately
to his family. He has never disclosed the delusions under which
he has been labouring.
III. Miscellaneous cases, illustrating certain points having a
bearing upon the subject under consideration.
CASE I.?S., admitted August, 1854. A farmer, aged 35,
married, three children, a member of Baptist church, academic
education, of good habits, in good circumstances, an honest, in-
dustrious man, exceedingly kind in his family, and generally
respected. His maternal grandmother and grand-aunt and two
maternal uncles were insane. His great-grandfather, grand-
mother, and an uncle committed suicide, and another uncle at-
tempted it. This man has always had a rather delicate constitu-
tion, though he has rarely been sick beyond an occasional attack
HOMICIDE IN INSANITY. 159
of dyspepsia. Is generally quiet and reserved, though, not
unsocial in his habits. Previous to admission, laboured beyond
his strength, and began to feel depressed. Thought his family
would come to want, and that everything was going to destruc-
tion. Still, however, attended to his business affairs. Four
weeks before admission he suddenly left his house. His wife
followed and he returned. Four days afterward he was missed,
and, after several hours' search, was found in a wood, near the
house, lying upon the ground, and insensible from loss of blood.
He bad made several incisions in his neck, and ojoened a vein in
his arm. When revived, he would give no account of himself,
but soon afterward told his wife, while watching him at night,
to send him to the Asylum, or he might do her some injury. He
insisted upon this, and was brought to the institution.
At this period he discovered no delusions, but at times was
possessed with a strong desire to kill his family and himself. He
felt the approach of these paroxysms, and informed those about
him of the fact. At these times he was usually sedate and
secretive, with flushed face, eyes sparkling, pleasant and bland
in manner, bowels constipated, jDulse somewhat accelerated, skin
natural, urine scanty, appetite good.
These paroxysms usually continued three or four days. At
first they occurred at intervals of two or three weeks, and as he
improved in general health became less frequent, and in five
months disappeared. He remained in the institution ten months,
and left in excellent health of mind as well as body.
After recovery the man gave the following account of himself.
For several weeks preceding the attempt at self-destruction he
felt oppressed, had pain in his head, and at times confusion of
thought. Things about him began to appear gloomy, and at
length he became very melancholy. He remembered the con-
duct of his ancestors, and determined not to entertain the idea
of the act which had terminated their existence. He had never
spoken to his wife of his hereditary tendency to insanity, but
had thought of this in the education of his children. One day,
while walking with his children in the orchard, he suddenly had
a sense of faintness and giddiness, and sat down. He also felt
a throbbing in his head. At the time he had no thought of
suicide, but determined to go into the house and tell his wife of
his situation and feelings. He did not find her, and while alone
it occurred to him that he ought to kill himself. Going where
his razors were kept, he took one, but immediately put it back,
determined to resist, and ran out of the house to the place where
he was found. There he was so overcome with the thought that
it was his duty to kill himself that he yielded. After his recovery
from the effects of this attempt, the impression that he ought to
160 HOMICIDE IN INSANITY.
take the lives of his wife and children and himself became at
times so strong that he feared he should do it, and requested to
be taken to the Asylum.
After several months his wife visited him, and was anxious to
take him home. He was, however, unwilling to go, as he did not
feel entirely natural at times, and feared that his return might
again develop the dreadful propensity. At the end of ten months
from his admission his wife again visited him, and after remain-
ing in the city three days, he seeing her daily, and experiencing
no unnatural feelings toward her, he returned home, where he has
since continued well and happy.
Case II.?S., admitted July, 1856. Aged 51, married, a phy-
sician, member of Baptist church, and of good moral habits.
Mother was hysterical. Sister has long been and is now insane.
When young was addicted to self-abuse. Always somewhat
hypochondriacal. In 1849 had an attack of cholera, which left
him with permanently impaired health. At four different times,
while suffering from indigestion, felt impelled to kill his children.
To relieve his sufferings he was accustomed to abstain from food,
and on some occasions fasted from one to sixteen days, taking
only a little at long intervals. At such times he was in great
mental agony.
About seven months before admission, and during a period of
abstinence, he was retrospecting his life, and recalled the follow-
ing trifling incident. In youth he once, with others, in jest, threw
an apple paring over his head, which in falling was, by popular
impression, supposed to form the letter of the alphabet com-
mencing the name of his future wife. He now remembered that
this letter was not the initial of his wife, and therefore he had
married the wrong person. He immediately resolved to kill his
wife, and the impression increased that it was his duty ; " some-
thing seemed to say, Kill her, kill her," and he began to fear he
should. He appreciated the nature of the crime, and felt that
it was in opposition to all the convictions of his life ; yet it
seemed his duty. In great distress he communicated his fears to
his family, and eventually left home and remained away five
months. After his return the same unhappy impressions came
upon him with increased force. He feared he should destroy
his whole family, and requested his son to chain him at night.
His son complied wTith his request, and he felt more comfortable.
In a few days he urged his son to keep him constantly chained,
or he would certainly kill his family, and then destroy himself.
He considered himself a lost man, and given over to the worst
passions. For ten days before reception was constantly chained,
except while taking his meals, and seemed at times in great agony
when considering his condition.
HOMICIDE IN INSANITY. 161
One afternoon, while walking through the room, told his son
his conscience was gone, and he would now kill his wife and
daughter; but refused to disclose the proposed means. The
same afternoon made an unsuccessful attempt to cut his throat.
Paroxysms of excitement occurred at irregular intervals.
His domestic relations had always been pleasant, and he still
has the most kindly feelings towards his family. When asked if
he did not desire to get well, replied, " If I should get well, it
would only be on the condition that I then return and murder
my family, and cut my own throat. Now I dare not kill myself,
because I am commanded first to kill my family." He complains
of various peculiar sensations?as though the back of his head
was pressed, and of pain running up his back and into the base
of the brain, and then spreading out in every direction, some-
times as though fire was flashing through his brain. Form of
disease, dementia, which increases. Still retains the idea that he
must kill his family,
Case III.?L., admitted November, 1855. Male, aged 58,
married, a farmer, well educated, member of church, and of
good moral habits. Received an injury to the spine, which
affected his general health. Began to entertain suspicions of
those about him. Thought that slanders calculated to injure him
were being circulated ; that people pursued him, and often
declared he heard voices near him. Became much excited, and
secured his house against robberies, which he constantly antici-
pated would be undertaken. These unhappy feelings continued
until he at length contemplated suicide as an escape. It then
occurrsd to him that if he did this his wife would be left to
cruelty and outrage. He therefore determined to kill her first.
This idea became so pressing that, fearing he could not resist it,
he communicated his apprehensions to a labouring man, and
employed him to sleep in a room communicating with his own,
instructing him to enter if he should hear any struggle, and pre-
vent the commission of crime. This watchfulness over himself
he continued for a long time, against the remonstrances of his
wife, who knew nothing of his murderous feelings, and to whom
he declined giving reasons for his conduct. He requested to be
brought to the asylum, where he subsequently declared the
reasons for this and other acts incomprehensible to his
friends.
. While in the institution he manifested at times extreme mental
distress, accompanied by a disposition to homicide, as well as
suicide. The former was incited by his delusions, which were
intimately associated with those about him. During his treat-
ment, for a period of five months, the violence of his disease
gradually abated, and he returned to his family, resuming the
NO. IX.?NEW SERIES. jn
162 HOMICIDE IN INSANITY.
entire management of liis affairs, which he' continues to the
present time.
ANALYSIS OF FIFTY-TWO CASES OF INSANITY MARKED BY A
DISPOSITION TO HOMICIDE.
Sex.?Of those who committed the act, nineteen were males
and five females ; of those who made unsuccessful attempts,
twenty were males and five females.
Habits.?Of the entire number (fifty-two), twenty-three were
intemperate, or vicious, bad men, and twenty-nine were of unex-
ceptionable character and habits.
Hereditary Predisposition.?In twenty-one of the fifty-two
cases there existed a marked hereditary predisposition, in nine
no such predisposition existed, and in twenty-two no facts touch-
ing this point were ascertained.
Mental Disease.?The form of mental disease was acute mania
in fourteen cases, sub-acute mania in three, paroxysmal mania in
two, chronic mania in four, dementia in twenty-four, melancholia
in four, mania a potu in one. Four of the cases of mania and
one of dementia were accompanied by epilepsy.
Time.?Twenty-two of the twenty-four homicides were com-
mitted in the daytime, the remaining two in the early part of the
evening. Of the twenty-five attempts, twenty-one were made in
the daytime, two in the night, and two both in the day and
night.
Object of Attach.?A father was the victim in one case, a
brother-in-law in one, a husband in one, wives in four, children
in ten, a cousin in one, neighbours in four, neighbours' children
in three, and entire strangers in seven cases. In nearly the same
proportion, the immediate relations of the patients were the
objects of attack in those cases in which the attempt was un-
successful.
Suicidal Disposition.?In ten of the fifty-two cases a suicidal
tendency accompanied the disposition to homicide.
Commitment to Asylum.?Of the twenty-four homicides, eleven
were acquitted by the courts before which they were arraigned,
on ground of insanity, and ordered to the asylum ; one was
found guilty, but sentence was suspended ; four were sent here
on preliminary trial; six without any criminal proceedings ; and
two were placed in the asylum by their friends.
Results? Of the twenty-four patients who committed homi-
cide, seven recovered, eleven are unimproved, two eloped, and
four have died. Of the twenty-five patients who were prevented
from carrying their homicidal purpose into execution, eight
recovered, thirteen are unimproved, and four have died.
HOMICIDE IN INSANITY. 163
Arranging these cases under Dr. BuckniU's very convenient
modified classification of Esquirol,* we have the following
result:?
1. " Those wherein the crime has been occasioned by delusion,
and no reasonable person can doubt or object to the irresponsi-
bility of the offender." In this class we have thirty-four of the
fifty-two cases.
2. " Wherein the offender, though suffering from cerebro-
mental disease, has committed the crime under the influence of
some motive not of a delusive character.'" In this class we have
seven of the fifty-two cases.
3. " Where with general symptoms of cerebro-mental disease {
neither delusion nor motive for the crime are discernible." In
this class we have eleven of the fifty-two cases.
Homicidal monomania is one of those unhappy terms in
medicine which, while it aims to express the character of the
peculiar cases intended to be included under it, is rather the
expression of a theory never yet fully established. Esquirol, in
his classification, regards it as a partial alienation, and divides
the cases generally into homicides committed or contemplated
under insane convictions, the monomaniac being influenced by
an irrational motive, and always presenting unequivocal indica-
tions of a partial derangement of the understanding and feelings;
and homicides committed or attempted under a blind, irresistible
impulse to the commission of murder, the monomaniac displaying
no perceptible disturbance of the understanding or feelings, and
his motives not acknowledged or discoverable.
Pinel says, "There are madmen in whom there is no per-
ceptible aberration of the intellectual processes, of the percep-
tions, judging faculty, imagination or memory, and yet a per-
version of the manifestations of the will in a blind impulse to
the commission of violence and bloodthirsty rage, without any
assignable dominant idea, or any delusion of the imagination
which could cause such a propensity."
The opinions of these distinguished authorities on this subject
have been entertained and reiterated by subsequent writers
down to the present time, although the existence of the impulsive
variety, not fully established even in its day, has been more and
more doubted, until it has enrolled against it many of the most
able writers on the jurisprudence of insanity in Europe and
America, Among those who either reject or question the whole
theory of moral insanity, under which this monomania is placed,
are found the names of Heinrich, Leubuscher, Winslow, Mayo, x
Bucknill, and Wharton.
' Bucknill on Criminal Lunacy, page 100,
M 2
164 HOMICIDE IN INSANITY.
That in insanity tliere is developed a disposition to the extreme
violence of murder, and that this disposition is at times irre-
sistible, no one familiar with the insane will for a moment pre-
tend to doubt; and from such observation as cases have thus far
afforded, we cannot but adopt the opinion that the morbid ten-
dency to homicide is but one of the many violent impulses of
the insane state?one among the many manifestations of per-
verted instinct exhibited in the disease; and that the homicidal
act, in irresponsible persons, generally, if not always, has for its
origin and development such motives or disturbance of feelings
as usually influence the insane to other carefully planned or
sudden acts of violence ; and that a full and reliable history of
cases of sudden or more or less persistent homicidal propensity
will reveal the fact, that, in all instances, anterior to any such
impulse, there existed for a time physical disease, or at least
perceptible disturbance of the physical health and a change in
the mental condition; or, in other words, a state of insanity.
In noticing Esquirol's classification of homicidal insanity, Dr.
Bucknill, editor of the Asylum Journal of Mental Science, one
of the ablest modern writers, and with a large practical expe-
rience of the insane, remarks :?
" The existence of the third class, in which the impulse is
sudden and unreflected on, admits of grave doubt. The testimony
in favour of the existence of such a variety is very scanty and
unsatisfactory : and it is improbable that cerebro-mental disease
can develop itself in so rapid a manner. It is probable that the
cases of insanity which have been placed under this head were
less recent and sudden than they were supposed to be. The
earlier stages of diseased feeling had been unobserved by others,
and unacknowledged by the patient/'*
On the use of the term " impulse," the same author says:?
" It conveys the idea of force communicated instantaneously, a
rapid motive ; whereas the morbid desires under consideration
are not of instantaneous production, or of rapid growth. They
arise from a chronic disease, and are resisted up to a certain
point; sometimes they are altogether and successfully resisted ;
sometimes, unhappily, they prove too strong for the power of the
will. In order to establish this form of insanity, the existence of
a diseased emotion must be proved. The will itself is a faculty
so simple and undecomposable that it may be doubted whether
it can ever lapse into a diseased condition."
Mr. Wharton, one of the ablest American writers, in his recent
valuable treatise on Medical Jurisprudence, uses the following
language:?
" The term monomania, however, is only admissible in so far
^ Bucknill on Criminal Lunacy, page 8-3.
HOMICIDE IN INSANITY. 165
as it designates certain fixed objects, towards which the ravings
of the maniac are directed, and which supply the apparent
motives of his actions; it is not to be supposed that a single
impulse is diseased, while all the other functions of the
mind retain their healthy action. While the entire intellect
enjoys sound health, there is nothing in which a morbid desire of
theft, murder, &c., could originate ; and such a phenomenon is a
psychological impossibility, and the assumption of such requires
a j)sychological contradiction. A mania without delirium, a
mania Avithout a morbid participation or disturbance of the per-
ceptive faculties, is, therefore, out of the question ; as a desire to
injure or destroy is impossible without an act of the mind by
which this purpose is entertained, and as reason and understand-
ing are alike disordered, whether they insinuate a wrong motive
for the morbidly conceived purpose of the act, or whether they
entirely omit the suggestion of any reason whatever." Again:
" Where there is no will, but only a blind impulse, a perversion
of the manifestations of the will is not to be supposed."*
Esquirol's class, then (commonly designated as "impulsive
homicidal mania"), in consequence of its tendency to embrace
within his definition of it, and therefore to shield from punish-
ment, a great mass of crimes of the most atrocious and appalling
character, should, notwithstanding the justly exalted reputation
of its author, be exposed to the test of the most convincing facts
and experience before it is allowed to stand, especially in the
criminal tribunals, as an authorized and distinctive classification
t>f insanity. That such a form of insanity has been enunciated
by Esquirol, or by other acknowledged authorities in the pro-
fession, is not in itself an evidence of its real existence. Errors,
in medical science as well as in other sciences, creep on from
generation to generation, and even become fortified by time and
tradition, until they are finally exposed by a series of facts and
observations, ca,refully analyzed and collated, which fix the truth
beyond any reasonable cavil.
V iolence against the person and against property is now so
prevalent, that we should be extremely cautious of recognising
any doubtful form of insanity that will ever shield it; and unless
we know, by accurate inquiry and observation, that some form or
other of physical disease, remote or direct, has produced a state
of insanity, it is not just to society to claim for - any homicide,
or other act of violence or wrong, the protection of such a defence.
I he closer accuracy of investigation into the history of cases
which is now demanded, and which is bestowed by a multitude
of observers, certainly shows, on a careful analysis of its results,
Wharton and Still^'s Medical Jurisprudence, page 145.
166 THE JURIDICAL SOCIETY, AND THE CRIMINAL
that many cases which might heretofore have been classed as
"impulsive homicide" do not justify the epithet of "impulsive."
Some are homicidal in the guilty sense only, and others are
homicidal as a result of insanity in its proper and common
meaning, as understood by the law and conceded by the popular
sentiment. More accurate information and more thorough obser-
vation might, and probably would, have detected, in most cases
intended by Esquirol to be comprehended in his " impulsive"
class, such a state of present disease, or of long-standing insane
tendencies, as would, in his own mind, have resolved this class
into some other of distinct and well-acknowledged insanity, not
at all (in his sense of the term) impulsive ; or discovered such a
state of evil habitudes as would have thrown them into the class
of criminals deserving of no particular clemency.
The cases we have submitted seem to favour these suggestions
and conclusions; and the facts, we trust, will aid in shedding a
more certain light upon a subject often obscure and perplexing,
and confessedly of the highest moment to individuals as well as
to society.
