The Indian Rebellion in Its Moral and Psychological Aspects
=============================================================

Art. II-
-
The operations of the mind and the play of the passions on an
extensive scale, are among the most interesting topics of Psycho-
logy. They are uncommon, because it is but seldom that the
routine of life is diverted from its accustomed channels, or broken
up into fragments so as to eliminate its component elements, and
reveal the essential spirit by which it is animated and impelled.
For the most part, society proceeds in a placid, if not an artificial
way; its temper, however restless or energetic, is subdued by a code
of conventional laws; and the natural impetus by which it would
be incited to action, were it to yield to its own instigations or
caprice, is held in check by the pressure of surrounding circum-
stances, or the force of public opinion. Thus, the wayward
youth is overruled by domestic discipline, and the populace of a
large community is overawed by a rigid system of police. But
on occasions of public or private disaster, the inward man breaks
out and unconsciously betrays himself. Those propensities and
that disposition which would, under ordinary affairs, have re-
mained latent and unperceived, suddenly come into view and
startle us by the novelty of their vice, on the one hand, or their
virtue, on the other. It would seem that we do not know with
whom we are associated, nor what we ourselves really are, till
some change of fortune draws aside the veil and discloses the
inmost workings of the soul, both in our own breasts and those
of others. The psychologist has frequent opportunities of veri-
fying the justice of this remark. Of the overthrow of the intellect,
which it is his peculiar office to manage and relieve, individual
cases of this description are continually presenting themselves to
his notice. But they are individual, not social cases; private,
rather than public ; local, and not universal. The opportunities of
observing the last kind, as in great political revolutions, or the dis-
astrous retreat of vast armies before an overpowering foe, or during
violent monetary panics, when attacks of insanity are no unusual
consequences of horrors witnessed or losses sustained, are, happily,
few and far between in the course of our lives. And yet, though
their moral effects are too well known for more than a passing
allusion to them, they do not comprise the whole of the question.
There are, besides, the distinctive differences of personal character,
of moral worth or obliquity, of intellectual strength and weakness,
and of peculiarities, finally, of race, religion, education, and
innate propensities. These discordant elements can be separately
examined only on the occurrence of signal catastrophes; and
their examination must needs be hasty and brief, because their
manifestation is nothing more than the transient ebullition of the
moment. But transient and evanescent though they be, they
are, nevertheless, both the absolute and substantial endowments of
mankind, proper to the hour of peril and the day of calamity.
They constitute the heroic, in the highest sense of the term; they
test the metal we are made of; they cost the life and name of the
actors; they ennoble or vilify a family, a class, or a clan; they
make or unmake a nation ! This is the study of psychology on
the world's stage?the analysis of the human understanding in
the living drama of races and creeds. Such is the theme that
has engaged our attention while contemplating the Indian muti-
nies, of which we now proceed to present our readers with a
narrative, comprising a comparative review of its salient inci-
dents, historical bearings, and philosophic relations.

The European inhabitants had slumbered peaceably on the
night of the 10th, and the large cantonments, garrisoned exclu-
sively by native troops, were undisturbed on the morning of the
11th of May, when some cavalry troopers dashed across the
bridge of boats on the Jumna, and entered the city of Delhi.
They left half their number to hold the bridge, while the rest?
not more than fifteen, it is said?galloping through the streets,
created a riot as they passed along among the scum of the popu-
lation,?faced the 54th Native Infantry, which was ordered down
to resist them,?pistolled the Colonel and European officers, who
were without their arms,?and in an incredibly short space of
time took military possession of a fortress and arsenal the strong-
est and the best appointed in India, and obstinately continued
to hold it till the 20 th of September following. All the Chris-
tian population within its walls were massacred. A very few
only escaped to tell the tale. The chief military officers fell;
the banks, printing houses, and other non-military stations, were
plundered, the inmates murdered,- and a vast number of clerks,
half-castes, inferior Europeans, and every real or nominal Chris-
tian, slaughtered on the spot. No massacre took place ill the
cantonments ; in fact, the regiments left there seem to have
stayed with their officer's the greater part of the day, and only
gradually or passively went over or refused to act. The officers
and ladies were collected at one point, and long and anxiously
did they expect the arrival of aid from Meerut. Mutineers in
abundance arrived thence; but the day wore away, and no
Europeans came. Some thoughtful mutineer?whether in
mer?y or in triumph, we know not?sent up a cart and depo-
sited before the survivors the bodies of the officers killed in the
city. ^ Bitter, indeed, must have been the feelings of those who
remained. In the evening, finding themselves deserted by their
men, and without aid from Meerut, they determined to fly.
They had a number of carriages of different kinds, and they
generally escaped in safety. But other stragglers from various
other quarters of the place had more difficult and perilous
escapes, wandering as fugitives from village to village ; and
some of them were thus wandering for several weeks before
they reached their European relatives, and enduring all the time
most cruel hardships of want and weather.*

Thus ended the day on which Delhi fell, and with its fall
quickly followed that of every other military station in Upper
Bengal?Benares, Allahabad, Agra, Lucknow in Oude, Cawn-
pore, and others. Regiment after regiment revolted, and, with
different episodes of bloodshed and cruelty, passed over to the
side of the rebels, and turned their arms against their employers,
and the white population generally. The first shot was fired on
the 1 Oth of May, at Meerut, and by the 10th of June the whole of
the North-west Provinces had become completely revolutionized ;
the British rule was confined to a very few insulated stations held
by European troops; in the country generally it had ceased to
exist. Entire anarchy had taken its place.f Dinapore and Arrah
revolted at a later date. Some local insurrections broke out in
the Bombay Presidency ; and the Punjaub was prevented from
following the same desperate course by nothing else than the
decision of its energetic Commissioner and the presence of
several European regiments. In all other quarters, the rebellion
was complete ; and by the beginning of July we had 100,000
well-disciplined troops of all arms?cavalry, infantry, and ar-
tillery?arrayed against us in the field, or in actual posses-
sion of the strongholds of Delhi and Cawnpore, if not of
Lucknow, Agra, Benares, and Allahabad. Never was any
military achievement so well planned, or so well achieved with-
out a plan; never was a civilized Government so easily taken
by surprise, or, if not surprised, so easily wrested of its strongest
stations and richest provinces, against its will; its officials slain,
its people tortured and killed, its highest and lowest military
officers put to death or to flight, its houses and cities burnt to
the ground, and its treasure plundered and carried off in triumph
or contempt. The rebellion was a master-stroke ; it had attained
its first object by a dash, and in the short space of a month
it had inflicted a wound on the name and character of the
British power which it will take years to heal up, more than
half a century to re-establish in its pristine strength, and, it may
be, never to recover from entirely. At all events, it can
never be forgotten by either side; suspicion must always re-
* The Times, October 24th. 1857. History of the Bengal Mutineers, from
Umballah.
+ The Times, October 26th.

main, and with suspicion come also distrust, retaliation, and re-
venge. As we stand by and look on, we are tempted to exclaim,
Alas! that in one hour so great riches should have come to nought!
In the foregoing brief account, our minds are carried back to
the ruthless period of Tamerlane, who once proposed to exter-
minate all the inhabitants of the Chinese Empire, and turn it
into a sheep-walk. From this direful project he was hindered by
death ; but a similar process was his rule with the cities he con-
quered.* Let it be understood, he came down upon cities
living in peace and prosperity, like those in India,t which had done
him no harm, which had not resisted him, which submitted to him
at discretion. He sacked the city, killed or enlisted the soldiery,
and divided the rich, the women, and the artisans, among his
followers. The Tartar character has been always the same, and
in the Indian mutinies we see it exemplified to the very letter.
Our object in selecting this popular theme for our Journal, is
on account of the very striking manner in which certain emotions
of the mind have displayed themselves on so many trying
occasions?chivalry, devotion, and fortitude, on the one hand;
cowardice, treacher}^, and cruelty, on the other. And these noble
or ignoble qualities have not been the transient outbursts of the
moment, but, on the contrary, the inborn energies of the soul,
which belong not to the individual, but to his race, and not
merely to his race, but to the political, moral, and social institu-
tions of which he is the living representative and agent. We
are accustomed to delight ourselves with tales of romance, and
the spirit-stirring scenes of the great drama of Shakspeare or
Racine ; but within the last few months fiction has been surpassed
by truth, and tragedy fades into insignificance before the actual
horrors endured by our countrymen, or resisted to the last by
their own heroic bravery, or coolly narrated by their masterly
pens in the midst of danger. Nor have our countrywomen
fallen short of their high birth and destiny. Their courage has
risen with the occasion, and shone the brighter, the darker grew
the storm. They never quailed. They literally stood to their
guns. They faced the shower of bullets?the glare of the naked
tulwar. They loaded the muskets or pistols, and handed them
to their husbands for their mutual defence, in the midst of the
hottest fire; nay, more, when all was done that could be done
* Neither age, nor the severity of winter, could retard the impatience of Timour;
he, mounted on horseback, passed the Sahun (Iaxartes) on the ice, marched 300
miles from his capital, and pitched his last camp at Otrar, where he was expected
by the angel of death. Fatigue and the indiscreet use of iced water accelerated
the progress of his fever, and the conqueror of Asia expired in the seventieth year
of his age: his designs were lost, his armies were disbanded ; China was saved.
Qiblon.

by human strength and self-possession in the front of over-
whelming forces, they gave up their lives rather than their
honour, and devoted themselves to death instead of infamy.
We see a noble Englishman and his wife defending a tower.
The woman loads her husband's pistols: he fights the ruffianly
legion till it swarms up the walls. Then the brave fellow, kissing
his wife, slays her?which he does for her sake, but which a
Rajpoot would have done for his own?and then he kills himself,
and they die as the infernal pirates rush upon them. Instead
of the anecdote of Chelonis and Cloelia, our children may in
future learn, from the victims of Bengal, how nobly an English-
woman may die?how Mrs. Skene fought by her husband's side,
how Miss Jennings offered to sacrifice herself to save her father.
And upon these countrywomen of ours?matrons, virgins, tender
girls?and upon tender children, have been practised the vilest
tortures ; things to be remembered, not descanted upon; infamies
which the Greeks would have called The Unutterable, failing to
describe them.* Nor are the instances of high devotion only a
few. At Futtyghur, the wife and child of Mr. Tucker being
about to fall into the hands of another rebellious set, she called
to her husband to shoot her at once. He did so, his child also,
and then himself. A Major Robertson also shot his wife and
children and himself, under similar circumstances.f This is a
new and melancholy feature in the history of these tragedies. ?
But everything of the sort falls into the shade compared with
the lofty and moral grandeur of the heroine of Cawnpore.? A
daughter of General Sir Hugh Wheeler's was taken off by a
sowar, and put into his house along with his wife, near the
church. This girl remained till nightfall, and when he came
home drunk and fell asleep, she took a sword and cut off his
head, his mother's head, the two children's heads, and his wife's,
and then walked out into the night air; and when she saw other
sowars she said, " Go inside and see how nicely I have rubbed
the Resseldar's feet!" They went inside, and found them all
dead. She then jumped into a well, and was killed. There is a
stern brevity in the tale that strikes us with mixed admiration
and awe ; and in those few calm, biting words, " I have rubbed
the Resseldar's feet," there is a horrible irony, expressive of the
* The Leader.

+ Let us hear both sides of the question:?" I have given up walking about the
back streets of Delhi, as yesterday an officer and myself had taken a party of
twenty men out patrolling, and we found fourteen'women with their throats cut
from ear to ear by their own husbands, and laid out in their shawls. We caught a
man there who said he saw them killed, and showed us their husbands, who had
done the best thing they could afterwards, and killed themselves."?Extract of a
letter from Delhi after the storming of it:?The Times, November 19th, 1857. So
that what is heroic on our side is dastardly on theirs.
+ Letter from Jubbulpore, August 5th. ? The Times, October 16th, 1857.

frenzy of passion at its highest pitch of exaltation. Those who
listened to these words, and saw what this girl had done, were
seized with fear, and none of the rebels would have anything to
say to the English women, whom the Nana at first proposed to
give over to the soldiery. It was Medea again, but without
her magic; Judith and Holofernes, in the midst of drunken
carnage; Yirginius and his daughter, in the Roman Forum ;
Tarquin and Lucretia. But no, it was none of these, for they
all fail in the comparison, and that tender girl stands alone
in her self-devotion?The British Soldier's high-minded
daughter. Alas! alas!?so young, so fair, so pure?to have
died so early?to have perished thus! In the history of India,
her name will descend to the latest posterity. A hundred and
fifteen women and children were imprisoned with scarcely any
food for six days, except gram and such stuff. The Nana
ordered them to be killed. When they learnt this, the ladies
tore their clothes, and with the shreds fastened the door. A
sowar jumped over the wall, and began the slaughter; other
sowars came through the doors, and all the prisoners were killed.
Their bodies were cast into the well. Twenty-five women
and children remained alive under the heap of dead bodies?
the women were killed, and the children dashed against the
ground. The floor of the apartment was clotted with gore.
Portions of dresses, collars, and children's socks, and ladies'
round hats, lay about saturated with blood; and in the
sword cuts on the wooden pillars of the room, long and dark
hair was carried by the edges of the weapons, and there hung
their tresses. " I often wish," says a writer who visited this room
upon the recapture of Cawnpore by General Havelock, shortly
afterwards?" I often wish I had never been there. Their limbs
may be seen sticking out of the mass of gory confusion down the
well into which they were thrown. I picked up a mutilated
prayer-book. It had lost the cover, but on the fly-leaf is written,
' For dearest mamma, from her affectionate Tom, June, 1845/ The
Litany, at page 38, is sprinkled with blood \" Some portions of
a diary written in pencil were found, and it broke off at the
day of the massacre, or just before; and a small work-box was
?pen, and the things scattered about in the midst of the blood.
General Neill compelled the high-caste Sepoys, whom he caught,
to wash up the blood, and afterwards hung them, by both of whicli
acts they defiled themselves and lost their caste; and the 78th
ganders, on their arrival at Cawnpore, extricated General
elers daughter from among the mangled remains, gently
removed the ringlets from her head, separated a portion of them
oi ler friends at home, and divided the remainder equally among
leaiseivesj each man swearing, as he received his share, that for
every hair he had received a Hindoo should die by his hand.
Well might Lord Palmerston exclaim, on the 9th of November
at Guildhall, " Henceforth the bravest soldier may think it no
disparagement to be told that his courage and his power of
endurance are equal to those of an English woman I"
The atrocities of the Nana Sahib at Cawnpore are, however,
only in keeping with his creed and race. At the capture of Sivas
by Timour, in 1389, four thousand Christian warriors were buried
alive by his orders. Their heads were tied down by cords lashed
tightly round the neck and under the thighs, so as to bring the
face out between the legs. In this agonizing posture they were
thrown into graves, purposely left open for a time to prolong
their misery.* After the battle of Nicopolis, Bajazet sat on a
lofty throne to see the execution of three hundred Christian
gentlemen, pitilessly murdered before his eyes. The meaner cap-
tives were sold for slaves, and the women, who had followed the
French camp, were abandoned to the brutality of the Turkish
soldiers.-J- The Sultan Musa, in 1424, caused the carcases of
three Servian garrisons to be arranged as tables, and a feast
spread upon them, at which he entertained the generals and
chief captains of the Ottoman army; and in the memory of
many of us, on the insurrection of the Greeks in Scio, their
barbarian masters carried lire and sword throughout that flourish-
ing island till it was left a desert, hurrying away women and
boys to an infamous captivity, and murdering youths and grown
men, till out of 120,000 souls in the spring time, not 900 were
left there when the crops were ripe for the sickle.j In the present
year the same scenes have been repeated in India, and the daily
journals are teeming with their horrid particulars. We see a
young girl, naked, mounted upon a cart, paraded through the
streets of a city, subjected to the last humiliations, and torn limb
from limb by gangs of black satyrs. ? Give full stretch to your
imagination, says a writer who had witnessed what he describes,
?think of everything that is cruel, inhuman, infernal, and you
cannot then conceive anything so diabolical as what these demons
in human form have perpetrated. A man who witnessed the last
massacre at Delhi gives a horrid account of it, stating that little
children were thrown up in the air, and caught on the points of
bayonets, or cut at as they fell with tulwars. One lady was
stripped, abused, and murdered in the most cruel manner, first
cutting off her breasts. Another lady, who had hid herself under
a bridge, was treated in the same manner, then hacked to pieces,
and her mangled remains thrown out on the plain. We found
* Creasy's "Ottoman Turks," vol. i. p. 74.
+ Ibid., pp. 60?84 ; on the authority of Froissart.
J Newman's " Turks," p. 186. ? The Leader.

a pair of boots, evidently those of a little child, with the feet in
them. They had been cut off just above the ankles. Children
were put to death and cut to pieces before their parents, who
were lashed to a post or tree ; and pregnant women were violated
and ripped open before their husbands' faces, or flayed alive, or
roasted over a fire, or slowly lacerated till they died. There is
no end of their horrible ingenuity in torturing their victims.
Bungalows were burnt to the ground?costly furniture broken and
despoiled?silver services, money, and jewels stolen or strewed
about. There was nothing but fire and blood, ruin, and deso-
lation, and woe.

We might suppose that a new era had commenced in the
history of the world, so regular and peaceful has been the course
of the last quarter of a century. But peace and prosperity are
not the rule of life. The historian knows but too well that his
page recounts a wearisome catalogue of contest and misery from
the first centuries to the last. Scarcely a hundred years have
elapsed since the first French Revolution, whose enormities
staggered the world; not fifty since the spoliation of Poland by
Russia. At ihe close of the last' century, to select one instance
out of many, */hen the Russians took Oczakoff, in 1788, the
same scenes were enacted. The Turks of Oczakoff had, before
the siege, surprised a Russian village in the vicinity, and merci-
lessly slaughtered all the inhabitants. Potemkin and Suwarrow*
caused the Russian regiments that were to assault the town to
be first led through the village as it lay in ashes, and with its
streets still red with the blood of their fellow-countrymen. With
their natural, stubborn, savage courage, thus inflamed by the
longing for revenge, the Russians advanced over the frozen
Linian against the least fortified side of the city. Whole ranks
"were swept away by the fire of the besieged ; but the supporting
columns still came forward unflinchingly, through musketry and
grape ; four thousand Russians fell, but the survivors bore down
all resistance, and forced their way into the city, where for three
days they revelled in murder and pillage. No mercy was shown
to age or sex; and out of a population and garrison of forty
thousand human beings, only a few hundreds (chiefly women and
children) escaped, whom the exertions of the officers in the
-Russian service rescued from the indiscriminate fury of the
soldiery.

Mr. Eton, who was with Prince Potemkin at Oczakoff, de-
scri es a touching scene which he witnessed there, and which he
u YonUw!lr~?Wa-r ^le general to whom Prince Potemkin gave the laconic order,
ninmTnlloio^i ^ ma^-" Suwarrow took it, but at a cost of carnage and crime
hp waa no? le r?c?rds of ancient or modern warfare. After his victories?for
r e ea,ted?Suwarrow used to retire to his tent and cry like a child.
cites as a proof of the fortitude and resignation, bordering on
apathy, with which the Turks bear evils of the greatest magni-
tude. He says:??" The Turkish women and children (in
number about four hundred) who were brought out of Oczakoff,
when the city was taken, to the head-quarters of the Russian
army, were put all together the first night under a tent, as no
better accommodation could, under the pressure of circumstances,
be made for them, though it froze exceedingly hard, and they
suffered dreadfully from cold and nakedness, and many from
wounds. As I spoke Turkish, I had the guard of that part, and
the superintendence of them for that night, I observed that
there reigned a perfect silence among them ; not one woman
weeping or lamenting, at least loudly, though every one, perhaps,
had lost a parent, a child, or a husband. They spoke with a
calm and firm voice, and "answered the questions I put to them
apparently without agitation. I was astonished, and knew not
whether to impute it to insensibility, or the habit of seeing and
hearing of great vicissitudes of fortune, or to a patience and
resignation inculcated by their religion ; and to this day I am
equally unable to account for it. One woman sat in a silent and
remarkably melancholy posture, insomuch that I was induced to
offer her some consolation. I asked her why she did not take
courage, and bear misforture like a Mussulman, as her com-
panions did. She answered in these striking words:?'I have
seen my father, my husband, and my children killed ; I have
only one child left!' 'Where is it?' I asked her with some
precipitation. 'Here!' she calmly said, and pointed to a child
by her side, which had just expired. I and those with me burst
into tears, but she did not weep at all. I took with me that
night into my warm subterranean room as many of those mise-
rable women and children, wounded and perishing with cold, as
it would contain; they stayed with me twelve days, during all
which time none of them either complained aloud, or showed
any signs of excessive internal grief, but each told me her story
(both young and old) as of an indifferent person, without exclama-
tion, without sighs, without tears."*

The'Russians are Mongol Tartars, and the Turks are originally
the Tartar descendants of the White Huns of Sogdiana, or Bok-
hara ; and cruelty is proper to them both. But in the sad
tale just told by Mr. Eton, we see the kind-hearted Saxon, full of
warmth and compassion ; while the sublime apathy of the Turkish
women stands out in fine contrast to the animation, courage, and
tenderness of the English women under similar circumstances.
The Anglo-Saxon spirit again comes into view in the following
incident, related, in a letter from India, by a soldier of the 78th
* Crease's " Ottoman Turks," vol. ii. p. 291.

Highlanders to a relative in Perth:?"We came to a village and
set it on fire?I saw nothing but flames around me. I came
across a woman about twenty-two years of age, sitting over a
man that, to all appearances, would not see the day out. She
was wetting his lips with siste. The fire was coming fast, and
the houses all around were in flames. Not far from this I saw
four women. I ran up to them and asked them to come and
help the sick man and woman out, but they thought they had
enough to do, and so they had, poor things; but to save the
woman and dying man, I drew my bayonet, and told them if
they did not, I would kill them. They came, carried them out,
and laid them under a tree. I left them. The flames were in
the clouds. I went to the other side of the village, and there
were about one hundred and forty women and about sixty
children all crying and lamenting at what had been done. The
old woman of that small family that I had previously taken out,
came, and I thought she would have kissed the ground I stood
upon. I offered them some biscuits from my rations," &c. &c.*
In reflecting on the causes of so great a calamity as that of the
loss of one-third of an empire in so short a space of time, we are
naturally led to inquire what was the state of the public mind, as
well as that of the Government, both political and military, at the
moment of the outbreak. Could it have been prevented ? Was it
unforeseen ? Did it happen without warning ? The matter seems
to have had the anxious care of the Government; but the Com-
mander-in-Chief took it more easily, and was out shooting, far
from the telegraph. He was at Umballah in March, and thence
went to the hills, to Simla. It was known that there had been
a disturbance at Barrackpore and Berliampore, and afterwards
at Umballah; and night after night isolated fires occurred,
as early as April. All were equally puzzled and confounded by
what they saw and heard. People gossiped or laughed ; and the
Commander-in-Chief was distracted by the most opposite opinions.
In short, nothing was done; and Delhi was in the possession of
the mutineers before any one was aware of it. There is no doubt
that if a European force, however weak, had been marched into
Delhi at the first intimation of alarm, that that fortress at least
wight have been preserved. The officers in command at Um-
ballah were Queen's officers; there were also some dragoons and
a battalion of infantry at Meerut. Had only the wing of a regi-
ment been opposite the magazine?had only a few dragoons been
?f the bridge of boats on the fatal morning of the 11th
of May, the revolc might have been averted, if not suppressed.
But the chief military oversight was at Meerut. At that station
* The Times, October 24, 1857?" History of the Indian Mutinies." This
clever resume occupies several columns in two impressions of the paper.
the European forces were stronger than at any in India ; but the
regiments of European cavalry and rifles and large artillery were
rendered inefficient by the general in command. Even in can-
tonments there was no effective opposition made to the first
beginnings of the revolt; the mutineers were allowed to depart
unmolested; and the active pursuit that might and ought to
have been followed up to the Water-gate at Delhi, was omitted;
the lucky moment was lost, and with it was also lost the whole of
the north-west provinces of Bengal, Lucknow, and the newly-
annexed kingdom of Oude.*"

A panic, likewise, was prevailing at the time, and it certainly
tended to render all arrangements more difficult. You could
believe no one. People seemed to have lost the use of their
senses; and those whom you would have implicitly believed at
any other time, now told the most wonderfully unfounded stories.
In short, there was no end of canards. It was impossible to
distinguish truth from falsehood?a palpable sign of moral
and intellectual debility commonly observed on most occasions of
alarm and danger, whether social or individual. And there was
no superior mind, cool and collected, in a position of authority
equal to the emergency. The same want of foresight and pre-
caution would have lost London on the 10th of April, 1848, as
it had already lost the throne of Louis Philippe at Paris in the
preceding February.

One, and only one, solitary instance of determination and tact
occurred at Delhi at that critical moment.]; The Subahdar of the
guard on duty at the magazine informed Lieutenant Willoughby
and me that the King of Delhi had sent down word to the
mutineers that he would, without delay, send scaling-ladders from
the palace for the purpose of scaling the walls, and which shortly
after arrived. On the ladders being placed against the wall,
the whole of our native infantry deserted by climbing up
the sloped sheds on the inside of the magazine, and
descending the ladders on the outside, after which the enemy
appeared in great numbers on the top of the walls, and on
whom we kept up an incessant fire of grape, every round of
which told well, as long as a single round remained. Previous
* The Times, October 24th, 1857, p. 8, sixth column.

*b There are two sides to every question. '' Let us for a moment suppose that
the mutiny had at its first outbreak been quelled, subsequent events and disclosures
have only proved to us that the outbreak was premature, and that had it been
overcome at the time, it would probably have come upon us at the appointed day
with a force that none of us could have hoped to withstand."?Letter from art
Engineer Officer, September 28 : The Times, November 24? 1857. Because the
outbreak was premature, it was no reason for not resisting it at the first. The
first blow might have been decisive. Ob at a in principiis, is a universal axiom.
J Official account, by Lieutenant G. Forrest, of the Ordnance department.
to the natives deserting us, they hid the priming pouches; and
one man in particular, Kurreemburkh, a durwam, appeared to
keep up a constant communication with the enemy on the out-
side, and keep them informed of our situation. Lieutenant
Willoughby was so annoyed at this man's conduct that he gave
me an order to shoot him should he again approach the gate.
Lieutenant Raynor, with the other Europeans, did everything
that possibly could be done for the defence of the magazine.
Conductor Buckley, assisted only by myself, loaded and fired
the several guns in rapid succession, firing at least four rounds
from each gun, and with the same steadiness as if standing on
parade, although the enemy were then some hundreds in num-
ber, and kept up a continual fire of musketry on us within forty
or fifty yards. After firing the last round, Conductor Buckley
received a musket-ball in his arm, above the elbow. I at the
same time was struck in the left hand by two musket-balls,
which disabled me. Lieutenant WiJloughby gave the order for
firing the magazine, which was at once responded to by Conduc-
tor Scully firing the several trains. The convulsion took place ;
and such as escaped from beneath the ruins?and none escaped
unhurt?retreated through the sally-port on the river face.
Lieutenant Willoughby and I succeeded in reaching the Cash-
mere-gate. What became of the other parties it is impossible
for me to say.
This spirited scene has had its counterpart on many other
previous occasions in the art of war. Presence of mind in
the midst of danger is the chief attribute of an officer in com-
mand. It is that which places him above the crowd, and makes
him a distinguished man. It sheds a lustre round his name,
and emblazons his deeds in the annals of fame. Three hundred
years ago, a solitary tower resisted the Turkish batteries, after
all the exterior defences had been destroyed, f The name of
the place was Szigrette j the date, 1520; the commandant's
name, Zriny ; his force reduced to not more than six hundred
men. The Janissaries advanced to the assault along the bridge
* Died, on the 10th of May last, of his wounds, in the 28th year of his age, Lieu-
enant George Dohson Willoughby, Bengal Artillery, and Commissary of Ordnance
a eldest son of the late George Thomas Eailton Willoughby, Esq., of Bath,
? Srands?n of the late Dobson Willoughby, Esq., of Belsize, Hampstead. It
j ?uPP?sed (for there is no authentic account) that after his gallant devotion in the
Hav^6 ^estructi?n the magazine at Delhi (on the morning of the 10th of
he'pn ^ a^10ugh so desperately wounded and scorched as to be hardly recognised,
had io'UaV] Tto ma^e his escape to Meerut (with three or four other officers, who
Romp n ?n kis way), but, exhausted by his wounds, he fell an easy victim to
nlnnr1pr1vleantSi a v*llage, who murdered him in his resisting their attempts to
25th igj1^1' a whilst defending one of his companions.?The Times, November
+ Creasy's " Ottoman Turks," vol. i., p. 312.

that led to the last shelter of the defenders. Zriny felt that his
hour was come. He attired himself as if for a festival; a
diamond clasped his plume to his helmet; his falchion, with the
keys of the fortress and a purse full of choice ducats, hung from
his glittering baldrick. " He who lays me out," he exclaimed,
" shall he paid for his trouble ; the keys I surrender only with
my life I" The banner of the Empire was borne before him.
He descended to the outer court. The Turks were at the gate.
A mortar, heavily loaded with missiles, was brought to bear
upon the entrance. As the foremost Janissary raised his axe to
break in the door, the gates were flung open, and Zriny himself
fired the mortar. The deadly shower poured through the assail-
ants ; and amidst the smoke, din, and confusion of this unex-
pected carnage, Zriny sprang forward sword in hand, followed
by his devoted few. Six hundred Magyar sabres drank deeply
of Turkish blood on that fatal day. Zriny, fighting to the last,
fell pierced with two muslcet-balls through his body, and an
arrow-wound in his head. The Ottomans, with a shout of
" Allah" at his fall, pressed into the citadel, fired the place, and
began the plunder. The fire caught a train, purposely laid by
Zriny from the entrance to the magazine, which instantly ex-
ploded, and destroyed three thousand of the destroyers along
with the battlements and walls of the fortress. Solyman the
Magnificent, who had set himself down before Szigrette in full
expectation of success, had died during the siege. He lay stark
and cold in his tent, while the trumpets flourished aloud the
note of victory, and the flag of earthly pageantry waved in vain
above his senseless corpse. The world and its glories had closed
above the career of one who had shaken the powers of Christen-
dom to their centre, and who .had owned the obedience of all
the most celebrated cities of biblical and classical history, except
Rome, Syracuse, and Persepolis. The Tigris, the Tanais, the
Borysthenes, the Danube, the Hebrus, and the Ilyssus, had
rolled their waters within the shadow of the Horse-tails. But
a change had passed across the spirit of the dream; the pomp
was over, and both Zriny and Solyman were numbered with
the dead.*

The morning broke clear and bright over the plains of Hin-
dostan, the day after the first thrilling atrocities at Delhi, and
* The fall of Szigrette suggested to the mighty Byron the idea of his highly
^nimated poem, " The Siege of Corinth ?
" 'Tis fir'd !
Spire, vaults, the shrine, the spoil, the slain,
The turban'd victors, and the Christian band;
All that of living or dead remain,
Hurl'd on high with her shiver'd fane,
In one wild roar expir'd!"
the city of the Moguls outwardly appeared as serene as it had
done the day before. Nothing betokened the change that had
occurred within its walls ; and none, save a few wandering and
dispirited outcasts, guessed the heavy blow that had been struck
at our Anglo-Indian empire, the name and prestige of England.
" We started from Delhi," says one writer, " with five ladies and
four officers besides myself; but afterwards in our wanderings fell
in with two sergeants' wives and two little children, with two more
officers and a merchant; so altogether, on coming into Meerut,
we were about seventeen souls. Oh, great Heaven! to think
of the privations we endured, and the narrow escapes we had !
We used to ford streams at night, and then walk on slowly
in our dripping clothes, lying down to rest every half-hour; for
some of the ladies were wounded, and all so fatigued and worn
out they could scarcely move. Had we been by ourselves, we
should have made a dash for Meerut at once; but having these
unfortunate women with us, what could we do ? Sometimes we
heard the villagers combining to murder us, and the whole time
were in dread of being pursued and killed by the mutineers from
Delhi. At one time we were attacked by the villagers, and robbed
of everything we possessed : had we not had the ladies with us,
we would have fought for it, and sold our lives dearly, instead of
quietly giving up our arms as we did; for we had a few blunt
swords among us, with one double-barrelled gun." A lady, writing
of her husband, says?" He found it was all over with him, and so
he rode off, and got into a jungle, where he stayed a great part
of the day. A groom, who had got his mare at a village, tried
to betray him; so he rode off again. Only fancy how dreadful
it was for him, wandering about in the heat of the day, not
knowing where to go, and begging for a little water, or drinking
it out of the little streams, he was so thirsty." " As we were
getting into the boats/' writes a third, " we saw the Sepoys plun-
dering the Treasury. On reaching a place about three miles below
Fyzabad, we met some mutineers. There were 800 or 900 of
them. About 100 of them fired on us when we were 100 yards
off. We pushed off to the opposite bank of the Ganges, and
g?t on an island among some jliow fields. The mutineers got
into dingies and followed us. There were about thirty or forty
yards of water between us. The major was drowned. A fourth
writer states :?" There was a small deep river behind the house,
and beyond the river a jungle of cypress and brushwood. Some
escaped by the ford. I came up with a lady struggling to get on
with her little child in her arms?a girl two and a half years old-?
and her husband with her, carrying a boy about six months old.
1 took the child from her arms, and with the aid of a quarter-
master-sergeant, got it safe and sound, all three escaping un-
scathed through the fearful shower of bullets sent after us as we
crossed the river and hid ourselves in the friendly jungle. The
father and mother, with the baby, were killed."

" The Nana Sahib declared, 'We never deceive ; if we do, God
will judge.' The General said, ' If you intend to deceive me,
kill me at once; I have no arms.' The Nana replied, ' I will
not deceive you ; rely on us. I will supply you with food, &c.,
and convey you to Allahabad/ On this the General went inside
the entrenchment, and consulted with the soldiers. They
said, ' There's no reliance to be placed on natives?they
will deceive youa few said, ' Trust them ; it is better to do so.'
On this the General returned, and said, ' I agree to your terms.
See us away as far as Futtehpore ; thence we can get easily to
Allahabad/ The reply was, ' No, sir ; I will see you all safe to
Allahabad/ On this, twenty boats were ordered with covers to
them. When the Nana saw all was settled, he said, 'Don't let
the treasure be taken ; send that to me/ The General said,
' You may have the money ?' there were three lacs in cash at
this time. The Nana said, 'You breakfast on board the boats
at ten A.M. to-morrow, and dine on board, and leave the entrench-
ment clear by eleven A.m/ The General assented to this. They
were all ready, when a message from the Nana came, saying,
' The boats will not be ready to-day ; you must leave to-morrow ;
leave in the evening/ The General said, ' I wont leave at night,
as you may play us false/ The Nana said, 'Very well; leave
at four P.m/ On the following day, the Nana took away all the
treasure. At this time the delay again took place in their
departure; all the ladies and children were dressed and ready.
The General asked the Nana, ' Are all our servants to go with
us, or do you supply us with servants?' The reply was, 'Yes/
On the following day, though suspicions were entertained of the
faith of the Nanas party, still they hoped all was right. The
Nana sent on Sunday to say the servants were not to go, as the
ladies and women could look after themselves. On this being
heard, they were all alarmed. At seven A.M. the mutineers sur-
rounded the entrenchment, and all the Englishmen in their power;
the servants ran away and were cut down ; a few escaped; all
were alarmed. The rebels reached (?) the entrenchments, and
said, ' Come to the boats; all is ready/ Ladies and children
were sent on elephants, dhoolies, &c., and the men marched to
the river, and then embarked on the boats. When they all saw
food prepared and all comfortable, they were delighted. When
a few had gone on board, and others were waiting to embark on
the river-side, a gun opened on them with canister (this gun and
others had been masked); one boat took fire, and then another
gun opened, and four boats were fired ; on this, those who escaped
the fire jumped into the water. The Sepoys also fired muskets;
the Sowars entered the water on horseback, and cut numbers
down. Fifteen boatloads of English were massacred; one
hundred and eight women and children escaped this massacre,
but many of them were wounded. The Nana said, 'Don't kill
these; put them in prison/ The boat containing General
Wheeler and other ladies and gentlemen got off for twenty-two
miles, when they were seized by the Zemindars of Joagnuhar,
and had their hands tied behind them, and were taken back to
the Nana. Mrs. Read, Thomas Greenway, Mrs. Kirkpatrick, Mrs.
M'Kenzie, and Captain M'Kenzie, and Dr Harris, and several
Europeans, were among the party. The Nana was much pleased.
Owing to the General's old age, he said,' Loosen his arms.' Hoolar
Sing, kotwal of Cawnpore, said, ' Don't do so.' The Nana said,
' Take them to the guard, and let the others remain where they
are.' One Sepoy and Sowar killed each an European. Dr..
Harris was wounded with two balls, and then addressed the
rebels?' Shoot me, or kill me; my countrymen will revenge my
death before long.' Two Sowars then cut him down, and he
died."?The Times, October 16, 1857.

The treachery at Cawnpore is an instance of the Mohammedan
character towards friend and foe. After Selim the Terrible had
entered Cairo, in L517, without opposition, and the garrison which
lie placed in it had been slain to a man by the indomitable
Touman Bey, he endeavoured to retake it with some of his best
troops. A street fight ensued, but the Mamelukes retained
possession of the place. Selim then proclaimed an amnesty to such
?f the Mamelukes as would surrender. On the faith of this
promise, eight hundred of the chief Mamelukes surrendered
themselves, or were given up by the citizens. Selim had them
all beheaded, and then ordered a general massacre ^ of all the
inhabitants of Cairo. 50,000 human beings are said to have
perished in this atrocious butchery. One of the titles of the
Sultans is that of the " Man-slayer," to this day. ^ It is a canon
law of their policy to destroy their nearest kin on mounting
the throne a prerogative they have exercised to the full
without scruple or reserve. Amurath XV. is reckoned to have
Put to death 100,000 human beings in his short reign, from 1623
to 1640. He once ordered a party of dancing women to be
seized and drowned; and at another time he ordered the
batteries to open on a boat full of females passing along the
Jjosphorus, too near to the walls of the seraglio. It was his
iavourite maxim, that "vengeance grows grey, but not decrepit.
\ on Hammer gives a long list of the confidential officers put
to death by Solyman the Great; and it is even stated by Turkish
l onans, that he inveigled his own son into the royal pavilion
on purpose to have him bowstrung by surprise, and that, be-
coming impatient at the long-continued struggle between the
Mutes and his victim, he himself also looked in on the horrible
scene, and instigated them to the more speedy despatch of their
work. A similar story is related of Selim I., who witnessed
from an adjoining chamber the murder of his brothers, whom
he had kidnapped for that purpose. The massacre of the
Mamelukes at Cairo, in 1813, by Mehemet Ali, and that of the
Janissaries at Constantinople, by Mahmoud II., in 1826, were
both of them acts of the vilest treachery. So that the massacre
at Cawnpore has nothing extraordinary in it, but is in strict keep-
ing with the true spirit of the race.

Upwards of twelve centuries have elapsed since the contest
between the Crescent and the Cross first began its mortal and
obdurate strife. The years of the Hegira are fast running out;
the last sands of its hour-glass are almost drained away; and
yet the fatal four hundred years from the taking of Constantinople
have already passed their close, and the Turkish and Christian
prophecies respecting their awful accomplishment remain un-
fulfilled. The green flag of the Prophet waves above the Sublime
Porte, and the illustrious line of the Osmanlis presides at
Istamboul.* Severe as have been the Turkish reverses, both by
land and sea, for the last two hundred and seventy years, and
greatly as have been curtailed the frontiers of Turkey in Europe
in the course of that long period, the Ottoman Princes neverthe-
less continue to hold the key of Europe in their hands, and to
guard the passage of the Bosphorus with jealous pertinacity.
The spirit of Islamism breathes in the desecrated sanctuary of
St. Sophia, is proclaimed by the muezzin from the tops of their
loftiest minarets and mosques, and is exhibited in the sanguinary
and accursed tempers of the Mohammedan Sepoys or their mis-
creant chiefs, such as Nana Sahib. The hard struggle begun by
Charles Martel, at Tours, in 732, and by Leo the Isaurian with
his Greek fire, in 716, still goes on; and it has at length de-
volved on British valour to carry on the same deeds of arms in
India at the present day, as those which once so effectually
routed the Mohammedans before Vienna, in 1520; before the
little fortress of Malta, so gallantly defended by La Yallete, in
1565; and before the fleets.of Don John of Austria, at Lepanto,
in 1571. In this light, the re-capture of Delhi, stained as it has
* " Que diablefaire de Constantinople ?" said Joseph of Austria to Catherine of
[Russia, joking over their plot for the destruction of the Ottoman Empire, while at
Batchiserai, or at the Gulf of Atkiar, the modern Sebastopol, in 1787. "What
shall we do with those poor devils the Turks?" The royal joke is as good as ever;
for Constantinople is seventy years older than it was then, and, in spite of so many
Russian treaties to the contrary, the Turks are at this moment the faithful allies of
the Western Powers.

been with the blood of heroes, among whom is the distinguished
Nicholson, who fell in the assault, assumes a character of renown
far beyond that of the contest itself, and commensurate only with
the records of the Christian and civilized world. Other sieges may
have been more famous for their strategy and skill, but none more
important than this in a moral, a religious, and a political point
of view. It is a crisis in the course of events?a turning-point
in the order of affairs. Barbarism must not gain or hold the as-
cendant. The intelligence, the science, and the prowess of England,
as well as of Europe, must not succumb?no, not for an hour?to
the black races of mankind, the acknowledged ignorance, brutality,
and inferiority of the Asiatic hordes.

" A portion of our troops had escaladed the bastion walls close
to the gate ; others had scrambled up two large breaches in the
walls and bastion near the Treasury. The remainder had entered
at the gate itself, which had been blown open by one of our
officers. The latter was really the hazardous duty of the day,
and was most gallantly performed, though in broad daylight.
The explosion party consisted of Lieutenants Home and Salkeld,
of our corps, a few sappers, and a bugler of her Majesty's 52nd.
On their nearing the gate they found it slightly open, with a
number of muskets protruding at the opening. They were
received with a volley, which killed and wounded a number.
Still, however, they advanced, and fixed their powder bags on to
the gate. Sergeant Carmichael, of the Sappers, tried to light
the portfire attached to the bags, but was shot dead in the
attempt. After him Sergeant Burness, of the Sappers, tried, but
fell, pierced with three bullets. After Sergeant Burness, Salkeld
tried, but fell into the ditch, shot in the leg, which is broken, and
in the arm, which has been amputated. Sergeant Smith, of the
Sappers, tried next, and he and Home between them happily
succeeded without a wound. Seeing the portfire well a-light, the
whole party jumped into the ditch, and the enemy, little dreaming
?f what had been done, continued' firing till the explosion took
place, so you may fancy what effect it took. Twenty of the
mutineers strewed the road inside the gate, not one of whom
would it have been possible to recognise, and this was the first
sight that met my eyes at the gate. Little wonder that Donald
lefused to move; however, finally, he did, and got as far as the
centre of the main guard, beyond which nothing would urge
him. It Was perfect agony keeping my seat, and I would have
given worlds to dismount?but walking was out of the question,
it was anything but an agreeable fix to be in. I felt how per-
fectly useless 1 was, and being the only mounted man there in
the open space, fully accounted for the number of bullets whistling
past my ears. There was no help for it. so I had to make my
way back to camp as I best could, fully convinced of my own
folly. You may imagine I liad done neither leg nor ankle much
good by the trip, and I had not many opportunities of seeing
the remainder of the operations. We progressed slowly after
this for two days ; but having obtained possession of the magazine,
containing about 130 guns, there could no longer be much doubt
as to the result. The enemy, who had hitherto so stoutly resisted
us, was losing heart, though he had succeeded in beating us back
with loss and kept us at bay at two or three points. Daily and
nightly large numbers continued to leave the city till the 20th,
when we found ourselves in perfect possession, and the entire city
evacuated. Immediately on receiving news of the evacuation, I
started for the palace. You can have no conception of the scene
of confusion?Riflemen, Goorklias, Sikhs, and Punjabees quar-
relling over their plunder, and such plunder to quarrel about!
Old counterpanes, dirty blankets, tin and copper pots and pans,
Sepoys' red coats, baskets, papers, packets of tinsel, bottles
of rose water and otto of roses lying here, there, and everywhere,
and the whole place in a state of squalor and wretchedness passing
all description. On turning into the garden in front of Douglas's
stables I found myself alone. I cannot tell you what a scene of
desolation presented itself to my eyes. The garden had been an
encamping ground of the Sepoys, and everything bore witness to
its having been deserted in hot haste. The tents were still
standing, but it seemed as if everybody had taken his armful
out of the boxes, and, without caring for what might drop, had
made the best of his way out of the place. The stillness, too, after
the noise and riot that I had just quitted, was really appalling,
and I stood at the foot of the stairs stupified as if with a heated
atmosphere, and unable to move. I was roused by hearing three
cheers from the apartments above me. . . . We have captured
the King, his two sons and grandson?the three last (among
whom was Mirza Mogul Bey) were most deservedly shot before
they were brought into the city, where their bodies were exposed
in the Chandney Chouk."*?The Times, Nov. 24, 1857.

* Another account :?" The gallantry with which the explosion party, under
Lieutenants Home and Salkeld, performed the desperate duty of blowing up the
Cashmere-gate, in broad daylight, will, I feel sure, be held to justify me in making
special mention of it. The party was composed, in addition to the two officers
named, of the following :?Sergeants John Smith and A. B. Carmichael, and Cor-
poral Burgess, Sappers and Miners; Bugler Hawthorne, her Majesty's 52nd; 14
native Sappers and Miners, 10 Punjab ditto, musters covered by the fire of her
Majesty's 60th Rifles. The party advanced at the double towards the Cashmere-
gate. Lieutenant Home, with Sergeants Smith and Carmichael, and Havildar
Malior, all the Sappers leading and carrying the powder-bags, followed by Lieute-
nant Salkeld, Corporal Burgess, and a portion of the remainder of the party. The
advanced party reached the gateway unhurt, and found that part of the drawbridge
had been destroyed; but passing across the precarious footway supplied by the
remaining beams, they proceeded to lodge their powder-bags against the gate. The

THE ASYLUMS OF ITALY, GERMANY, AND FRANCE. 59
There can be no doubt as to the result. The personal feats of
arms are the firstfruits of eventual success. One British soldier
drives twenty Sepoys before him ; five hundred or five thousand
bayonets, under the victorious Havelock, utterly rout and disperse
as many tens of thousands of the enemy. Taught by ourselves,
the Sepoys are only good soldiers so long as they repeat the
lessons they have been taught. They have no power of them-
selves to do more than this. They are deficient in the first
principles of action, by which much is accomplished by a few
manoeuvres, and everything is worked out upon a well-digested
plan, altered and adapted on the spur of the moment to the
change of circumstances, instantly discerned by the ready eye of
genius, and thoroughly understood by the practised hand of
science. We are witnessing, upon a vast arena, the demonstra-
tion of the great theorem that knowledge is power, and that
personal and national ascendancy depend, not upon the amount
of brute force, but upon the wisdom, fortitude, and justice of the
people by whom they are displayed.
