On Insanity and Lunatic Asylums In Norway
===========================================
Aet. Ill
BY W. LAUDER LINDSAY, M.D., F.L.S., ETC.,
Physician-Superintendent of Murray's Royal Institution for the Insane, Perth.
A holiday tour in Norway during August last (1857) afforded
me an opportunity of visiting the best Norwegian asylums, and
of meeting and conversing with the first authorities on Insanity,,
the Lunacy Laws, the Treatment of the Insane, and the Construc-
tion and Management of Asylums, in that country. From the
fact that few of our British psychologists, or physicians generally,,
have visited, or are in the habit of visiting, Norway, and that still
fewer possess a knowledge of the Norwegian language and litera-
ture, much less is known in this country of the insane and asylums
of Norway than of most other European countries. Hence we
are apt to suppose that Norway?that Scandinavia generally?
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 247
is behind us?behind the age?in its fiscal and medical treatment
of its insane. But such is very far from being the case. Norway
has reason to be proud of her liberal and enlightened treatment
of her insane; and we in Britain may learn not a few useful
lessons by the study of her Lunacy Laws, and of her modern
asylums. The history of the treatment of the insane in Norway
is somewhat similar to that in our own country. There was a
period of cloud and darkness?of ignorance and prejudice?of
restraint and brutality : then followed a revolution?in Norway
dating from the Law of the 17th of August, 1848 ; and now the
sunshine has burst forth, with all its vivifying influences, and
liberality, and enlightenment, science and humanity are intro-
ducing the "moral system" and the law of kindness to the fullest
extent. The State Asylum of Norway, at Cliristiania, is but a
very few years old: it is worthy of the sagacity and liberality of
the Norwegians. It embodies all the most recent Continental
views on the management of the insane and the construction of
asylums; indeed, it may be regarded as a reflection, or concen-
tration, of the excellencies of the German asylums especially.
These facts or opinions lead me to believe that some account of
the treatment of insanity, and the construction and management
of asylums, in Norway, will not be unacceptable to British psy-
chologists. I shall first give a short history relative to the State
Asylum for Norway, and the City Asylum proper, both in Cliris-
tiania ; and shall thereafter mnke a few remarks on the Norwegian
Lunacy Laws, and on the statistics of insanity in Norway.
In describing the State Asylum at Gaustad, Cliristiania, I must
draw largely on the first Annual Beport of the institution,
admirably drawn up by Dr Sandberg, the Physician-Superin-
tendent.* It is a quarto pamphlet, of forty-three pages, with
numerous schedules and tables, and with plans of both floors of
the asylum. Being a first Annual Beport, it is unusually full,
containing a most interesting account of the history of the insti-
tution, its cost, the architectural and economical details, as well
as the ordinary routine of an Asylum Beport. It consists of two
sections; of these, the first is divided into the following sub-
sections or chapters:?a. Site; b. Ground-plan of building;
c. Water supply; d. Drains and sewers; c. Gas supply-
/. Pleasure-grounds and garden: while the second contains
chapters on a. Dietary ; b. Besidence of patients ; c. Forms of
disease ; d. Medical treatment; and e. Terminations of disease.
The documents appended to the Beport consist of a ground-plan,
* " Generalberetning fra Gaustad Sindssygeasyl, for Aaret 1856, ved Ole Sand-
berg, Direktor. Chnstiania : Trykt i det steenske Bogtrykkeri. 1857."
"General Leport of the Gaustad Lunatic Asylum, for the Year 1856, by Ole
Sandberg, Physician-Superintendent." (It bears date February, 1857-)
248 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
and plan of the second floor of tlie institution; statistics re-
garding the admissions, discharges, and deaths; amount and
value of work done by patients; schedule of forms of restraint;
and a full table of the new dietary regulations. I have sufficiently
indicated the nature of the contents of the Beport: to its pages
I must refer the reader for fuller details than I am able to give
here regarding the Norwegian State Asylum.
The State Asylum is an imposing palatial building, perched
conspicuously on an eminence at Gaustad, about three and a half
miles north-west of the town of Christiania, its site being one of
tlie finest parts of Akersdal. It stands at a considerably higher
elevation than Christiania. Its exposure is to the south ; and it
commands a magnificent prospect down the beautiful Christiania
Fjord. It could scarcely possess a more beautiful site: the
view surpasses that from any British asylum with which I am
acquainted. So prominent is its position, that it is one of the
first objects to arrest the attention of the traveller or tourist who
approaches Christiania by sea; and on this account it is gene-
rally noticed in works descriptive of Norwegian topography?
works which are now neither few nor far between, in consequence
of the numbers of tourists, possessed of the cacoethes scribendi,
who annually visit fair Norway. The building is evidently quite
new: the airing-courts and pleasure-grounds are only yet in
process of being properly laid out. The building itself is not
yet complete. I had the good fortune to be present at a meeting
of the " Storthing," or Norwegian Parliament, when a vote of
26,000 specie dollars* was granted for the completion of the
original design. The worthy Physician-Superintendent, Dr.
Sandberg, was present during the discussion, and evidently took
a very warm interest in the issue of the proceedings. In propor-
tion to its accommodation, this institution appears, on first sight,
a very costly one. It has already cost?for erecting the edifice
and constituting the establishment?upwards of 250,000 specie
dollars ; and, when finished, it will have cost upwards of 300,000
?equal to about 70,000Z.! This gives a present expense per
patient of 1200 to 1300 specie dollars, or between 2501, and
300i.; and a prospective expense of 1400 specie dollars, equal to
more than 300Z. a-head. Some English asylums have certainly
cost sums as large, or nearly so?from 200i. to 300Z. per head.
But that such a heavy expenditure is not absolutely necessary is
shown by the example of the new Montrose Royal Asylum?
which is allowed, by competent judges, to be a model institution,
so far as architectural arrangements are concerned, for the pauper
insane?and which is now being erected at a total cost of 501, per.
* Tlie Norwegian specie dollar is equal to about 4s. 6cZ. English; or, in other
words, 12. English is equal to about four and a half Norwegian dollars.
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 249
head, or 14,000i.for about 300 patients. The disproportion between
this cost and that of the Gaustad Asylum of Christiania is very-
striking; for, at present, the latter accommodates only about 160
or 170 patients, and, when completed, will not hold more than
250 ! In establishing a State Asylum which should be a model
for the whole country?a model from which future minor asylums,
in different parts of the country, will be built?the Norwegians
resolved?and, to a certain extent, rightly resolved?to spare no
expense in bringing the asylum up to the requirements of the
age?in introducing all the most modem improvements?in sup-
plying a full and efficient staff. But it admits of a reasonable
degree of doubt, whether they have not paid too dear for their
whistle ; and whether there has not been, for instance, in regard
to the arrangement of the wings of the building, a sacrifice of real
usefulness to theoretical advantages and imposing display. The
institution is probably on too extensive a scale for 250 patients :
its area is too expanded, causing a dissipation of time and energy
on the part of the officers. But the means of classifying the
inmates?of separating the noisy and dirty from the quiet and
orderly?are undoubtedly remarkably good. In building their
asylum, the cure and comfort of the patients has evidently been
the ruling and guiding idea; the expense has been a subsidiary
?a secondary question. Everything has been done to render
the establishment complete as an hospital for the treatment of
insanity ; everything introduced has been introduced with a view
to cure, mediately or indirectly?site, view, work, amusement,
furniture, &c. It may be useful, though not a little humiliating,
to contrast this tendency?rthis desire?this unselfish liberality
and enlightenment?with the theory, or at least the practice, of
certain ratepayers at home, who build asylums, like workhouses,
in the cheapest possible way, and without the remotest idea of,
or reference to, cure, or perhaps even comfort. A disagreeable
burden is cast upon their shoulders?that of maintaining their
insane fellow-creatures ; and they ease themselves thereof in a
way which may be satisfactory to their pockets, but can scarcely
be "so to their consciences?to their sense of duty and justice.
It is right to state heie that some of the architectural arrange-
ments of Gaustad Asylum do not meet with the approval of the
Superintendent, Bi. Saiidberg, who appeared to me a most intel-
ligent, practical man, of the German school of psychologists. I
know not to what extent medical men conversant with the
requirements of asylums were consulted in the construction of
this establishment; but from what I know of the Norwegians
generally, and of their mode of transacting business, I have no
doubt that their State Asylum is the result of a careful study of
the best models on the Continent of Europe, by architects and
250 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
medical experts conjointly. This is but as it should be: if there
be faults in construction, they arise not from ignorance, but from
errors in judgment. Had such a policy been pursued in certain
British asylums, we should not now have to deplore some gigantic,
expensive, and absurd blunders. There is, unfortunately, in
regard to the construction of asylums, too frequently a tendency
to trust everything to architects, who have never practically felt,
nor seen, the requirements of an hospital for the insane, and who
are naturally more apt to be guided by questions of finance?by
matters of mere appearance, or apparent neatness?than by the
adaptation of means to an end?that end beiug cure and comfort
of patients, not ? s. cl. A medical superintendent has nothing
to do with the designing or erecting of the building; he is not
appointed till the hospital is about to be opened?in time, in fact,
only to discover its imperfections without having it in his power to
remedy them. This subject is one of great importance to Scotland
at a time when the Scotch counties are about to build a series of
district pauper asylums, similar to those of England and Ireland.
I have no hesitation in affirming that the first step in establishing
an asylum should be the appointment of a medical superintendent,
who ought to be consulted as to site, expense, mode of con-
structing, heating, ventilating, water supply, laying out of
grounds, &c. The money expended in his salary during a year
or a couple of years prior to the opening of the institution would,
I feel assured, be ultimately and fully saved in the value of his
advice and superintendence, and in the better adaptability of the
establishment to the purposes for which it was founded. Most
of the older Scotch asylums, which were designed and built
entirely by architects, labour under irremediable defects in con-
struction; and only last summer, in Ireland, in some new
asylums, or parts of asylums, built by Government, I saw several
most expensive and grievous errors, which arose out of the simple
fact that no medical expert had ever been consulted regarding
such asylums, or departments thereof. Before leaving this sub-
ject, I may state that I found the Norwegians, generally, com-
plaining of the expensiveness of Gaustad; and there were serious
apprehensions that the Storthing would not give a grant of the
20,000 specie dollars necessary for the completion of the present
buildings. Hence, doubtless, the anxiety, and the presence, of
Dr Sandberg at the debate on the subject.
The building consists of four parallel wings, separated from
each other by commodious airing courts, and communicating by
covered archways and passages. They are also divided laterally
into two symmetrical series?male and female sides, or depart-
ments?by a central space, which contains the " Okonomibygning,"
or offices, &c. These wings are built somewhat alike, with the
exception of the fourth, or back wing, which has at right angles
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 251
to it a supplementary wing, devoted to dirty cases. They are
called respectively A, B, C, D, and E, and are set apart for the
following classes or kinds of patients A, for quiet patients of
the Letter ranks of life?for the inmates consist of an admixture
of pauper and private patients, precisely as in most of the existing
Scotch asylums; B, for quiet and orderly patieuts of the pauper
class ? C for the noisv and turbulent; 1>, tor the violent, excited,
and destructive; and E, for the dirty and degraded All the
win^s are of two stories, with the exception of the fourth or D, E,
wh?h -lion" with the porter's lodge, laundry, and kitchen, con-
sists of one only. The free, or outer, end of each of the three
front win?"s, A, B, and C, terminates in a couple of four-sided
compartments, having externally buttressed projections, with
windows resembling bow-windows; the one forms part of the
sitting-room, work-room, or parlour; the other is occupied by the
water-closet. The front wing, A, facing the south, and command-
ing the finest views, is devoted to quiet patients of the higher classes
(afdelinqeii for cle rolige Syge af den danncde Klasse). The
o-round floor contains, at the outer end of the corridor or gallery,
the parlour or association-room (samlingsvcerelse),?a large, cheer-
ful comfortable room, handsomely furnished, and commanding
magnificent views over the country intervening between Gaustad
and Christiania, of the town of Christiania, and down the Chris-
tiania Fiord. The furniture is quite of the style of ordinary
drawing-room or parlour furniture, including handsome ottomans;
while pictures deck the walls, flowers ornament the tables, and
books and newspapers are strewed about everywhere. The furniture
is tasteful and modern; the painting or papering of the walls is
new and fresh; the rooms have much of the aspect and feeling of
home ; and, indeed, everything at present appears to the greatest
advantage. Ten or twenty years will work a change in the cha-
racter of Gaustad, in all probability: the architectural dis-
advantages will have fully appeared ; the building will look some-
what old; the officers may be less enthusiastic and full of vigour;
the furniture will be the " worse of the wear ;" and the Norwegians
mav have learned to build less expensive and imposing asylums !
On the same floor are two single bed-rooms (cntkeltvarelser),
and five double-rooms or dormitories for two patients (dobbelt-
varelser). There is only one water-closet, and that one far from
commodious. I he corridor or gallery is too narrow?very different
from the spacious, handsome, light, airy corridors of some of
the recently built English asylums. On the second, or higher
story, there are a large association-room (forsamlings-sal),* with
a finer and more extensive view than that from the corresponding
* X do not know wliat distinction is drawn between "samlingsv?erelse' and
"forsamlings-sal," unless the former is an ordinary parlour, and the latter more
properly an assembly-room.
252 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
room on the ground floor, five single bed-rooms, three double
bed-rooms, and an attendant's room (tjenervcerelse). The second
Aving, B, is occupied by quiet patients of the poor or pauper class
(<afdelingen for rolige Syge af Almues klassen). The ground floor
contains, at the near end of the gallery, a dining-saloon (spise-
vcerelse), three dormitories (sovevcerelser), and a work-room at the
further end of the gallery, in the place occupied by the sitting-
room or parlour in the front wing, A, and of the same size and
form. The corridor and water-closet are of the same size as in
front wing. The second story contains a large association-room,
of the same size and position as in front wing, and five dormi-
tories. The third wing, C, is set apart for the turbulent and
noisy (afdelingen for urolige Syge). The ground floor contains
a large work and day-room at free end of gallery, of same size as
work-room in wing B, nine single bed-rooms, and corridor and
water-closet, as in last wing, B. The second story possesses four
dormitories (fcelles Sovevcerelse), one single bed-room, and an
association-room, at farther end of gallery, of same size and
position as in two front wings. The excited and destructive
cases occupy the fourth, or back wing ; and the dirty, the sub-wing
at right angles thereto, but connected therewith (afdelingen for
rasende og for urenlige Syge). There are here an association-
room (forsamlingsvcerelse), at the angle of junction of the two
wings, two watcli-rooms or attendants' rooms (vogtervcerelser), a
bath-room, water-closet, drying-room (torrevcsrelse), and thirteen
"cells" (celler) or single rooms, lit from above.
Between the male and female sides of the third wing is the
laundry (Vadskeri); and between the two halves of the second
wing stand the offices, known collectively as the " Okonomi-
bygning." This consists of two stories, and includes, on the
lower or ground floor, the offices of the superintendent and steward,
the medical library and consulting-room, the visitors' room, the
steward's residence, kitchen, larder, pantry, laundry, store-rooms,
and servants' rooms; and, on the second story, the chapel and
recreation-room, chaplains residence, and apartments belonging
to medical assistant, apothecary, housekeeper, and other officers.
These offices, &c., are connected directly by a gallery or passage
with the male and female sides of the second wing. The house-
steward s office is a roomy, comfortable, counting-room, in which
several cleiks ^\eie busied with the house books. There is a
great want of this department, and of such an officer, in many of our
British asylums. In too many cases is all, or great part, of the
steward s work devolved on the unfortunate superintendent, who
becomes, oris made to become, a mere drudge, a "Jack-of-all-
trades," and who cannot possibly properly discharge the medical
duties of his office when fagged and exhausted by the merest clerk's
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 253
work?by the attention necessary to the keeping in order several
dozens of ponderous and absurd books. The medical super-
intendent has here also a handsome and commodious parlour
adjoining the steward's office, as a consulting-room, where he can
conveniently confer with his subordinates 01 with visitors. This
room contains a good medical libraiy, supplied by the asylum?
a library embracing works, and all the periodicals, on insanity, in
every European language. I noticed the Journal of Psycho-
logical Medicine," occupying a prominent place on its shelves,
besides a variety of English works on insanity. The establishment
of such a library, for the benefit of the medical and other officers,
is worthy of imitation in this country. In too many cases the
supei'intendent cannot afford to purchase expensive foreign works
on insanity ; and directors of asylums seem either conveniently
ignorant that there is such a thing as a literature of insanity, or
they grudgingly decline placing it at the command of their officers.
Every superintendent ought to be ciu courant with asylum lite-
rature, and he ought to be stimulated and encouraged to do
something towards the advance of psychological medicine in
general, or of some department thereof in particular. This insti-
tution further possesses a very complete laboratory or surgery,
with all the recent introductions in the way either of drugs or
apparatus?thus showing how thoroughly the medical officers keep
themselves abreast of the progress of the age in regard to the
medical treatment of insanity. The kitchen and laundry ap-
peared to me to be models ; I do not remember ever to have
seen a finer kitchen. It is very spacious, exceedingly well lighted
and ventilated, kept scrupulously clean, and furnished with the
newest and most economical furnaces, boilers, kitchen-ranges, &c.
The chapel is divided into neat pews, on which the Bibles and
Prayer-books were laid out ready for use. The chaplain is resident,
and lie appears to act also as schoolmaster and to superin-
tend the intellectual pursuits of the inmates, under the direction
of the medical superintendent. I am not aware that there is
any such full union of duties in the person of the chaplain in
any of our British asylums. I know that in some English
asylums the chaplain acts also as schoolmaster; but this, even,
is found in comparatively few. Nevertheless, the combination is
a good one, and one that I should like to see introduced in
Britain to a fuller extent. In every asylum, it appears to me,
there should be airangements tor educating such of the patients as
stand in need thereof and will be benefited thereby, and for sti-
mulating, in proper cases, and cherishing, the literary tastes of
the better educated classes. My own experience teaches me
that much may safely be done in this direction. The present
and former chaplains of the institution with which I have the
254 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
honour to be officially connected, have both offered public testi-
mony to the advantages accruing from the introduction of the
educational element in asylums.* The inmates of Gaustad,
however, have neither lectures nor classes, as some of the
Scotch asylums have had for years, and with such good results
as to have encouraged others to follow their example. A bath-
house is connected with each half of the third wing, on either side
of the laundry, containing, if I remember aright, five baths, the
baths being of wood. There is a plentiful and never-failing
supply of water to all parts of the house, by means of an aque-
duct from the Frogner-elv, a small stream rising in the hills
behind, and passing near the asylum. The whole establishment
is also lighted with gas, which is conveyed in pipes from the
city.
Between the two halves of the front or first wing is the porter's
lodge,?a handsome little edifice, which commands, as in most
asylums, the principal access to the building. Between it and
the " Okonomibygning" is a spacious court, with a small circular
pond and a fountain in its centre, the latter being made to
play easily by turning a cock. Dr Sandberg was kind enough
to cause a display of this " water-work" in my presence and for
my benefit. Certainly this is an elegant ornament at a small ex-
pense : I would gladly see ponds, stocked with gold and other
fish, and ornamented with rockeries, as well as fountains, intro-
duced in the grounds of our British asylums?especially those
for the higher classes of patients?where there is an abundant
supply- of water from a higher elevation than the asylum or its
grounds. There are still a few points, good and bad, in or
about the building itself, to which 1 would briefly advert before
leaving this section of my subject.
The medical superintendent has a separate, handsome, com-
modious house, healthily exposed, and commanding as fine a
view, and in the same direction, as the asylum itself. This is a
point too often overlooked by the managers of asylums, in their
zeal for economy?I mean the provision of suitable accommo-
dation for the physician-superintendent and his family. Too often,
compulsory celibacy is enforced; lie is stowed away in two or
three miserable apartments in the asylum, perchance in its most
noisy and bustling locality, having neither time nor place that he
can call his own. This is not only cruel and unjust towards
the superintendent himself, but it is a false economy and
policy in regard to the management of the institution. If there
is a position in life in which the most irksome and harassing
routine duties should be alternated with every comfort and re-
* "Excelsior; or, Murray's Royal Asylum Literary Gazette," January, 1858
No. 4.?"Reports of our Inspectors of Schools."'
tttvatiC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 255
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIO aoi
laxation that life
asylum-superintendent. exhaustion,?none in which the
sacrifice1 of mentaf and bodily vigour to the shrine of duty is more
ui iuc superintendent lias not a corn-
apparent,moie cer ai . e(j Qay antl niglit in some of the
fortable home, 1 , more elegantly and pleasantly, apart-
asylum cells, or, to phi ase it moie o g j * officer of the
ments, he ? Bttle^J "sooner" "c^U'ta^
Sd phyS y unfit ft the arduous duties of his office; or if
he is forced to struggle on in consequence of the res angmtce
domi or otherwise, he becomes a mere machine-a nonentity,
, ' e energy, enthusiasm, and ambition?and goes bis daily,
weary round like a jaded horse in a mill! I do not say that
teuch is uniformly and infallibly the case; hut I do say that
such is infallibly the tendency, in the circumstances I have
sketched. In either view, the asylum is the loser; that is, whether
there are frequent changes in the staff?for changes are not
ilwavs for the better?or whether the superintendent becomes
superannuated in harness. Let us hope that the managers of the
new Scotch asylums will consult their own interests, as well as
the best interests both of their medical officers and of their
patients, by providing separate and adequate house accommodation
for their medical superintendents. The female wings of Gaustad
Asylum look east, while the male wings look west, the females
having therefore, decidedly the best of the view. The building,
when completed, the male and female wings being symmetrical, is
intended to accommodate the following number of patients
A 18 B 50, C 35, D and E 20 ; or, in all, 123 of each sex a
total of 240; in round numbers, as I have already stated, 250. Due
attention seems to have been paid to the provision of an ample
amount of breathing space for each patient in the bed-rooms, as
well as in the day-rooms. Some of the single rooms, at least, appear
to contain about 2700 cubic feet of air,?a large proportion in com-
parison with that existing in many British asylums. There is
comparatively much less space in the dormitories, however, 01 GO
cubic feet being allowed for a dormitory occupied by eight
patients?that is, about 770 cubic feet to each. Though the
practical carrying out of such an idea is necessarily expensive,
I think, where it can be done from an abundance of funds,
liberality and enlightenment on the part of the directors, or other-
wise, that each patient should not have less sleeping room than
1000 cubic feet of air. In the pauper gallery for quiet cases,
the dining saloon is so capacious as to be capable of accommo-
dating sixty persons; and all the work-rooms, parlours, and
association-rooms are comfortable, capacious, and well lighted
NO. X.?NEW SERIES. S
256 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
and ventilated. The windows generally open inwards; and in
their construction the architect does not appear to have been guided
by the absurd idea, unfortunately too prevalent among asylum
architects, that asylum windows must be guarded as strongly as
those of a prison, and that every patient, if he has opportunity, will
either precipitate himself suicidally therefrom, or effect his escape
thereby. The result is, that the windows are much more like
those of a private house than is usually the case in asvlums.
The accommodation provided for patients of the middle and
higher ranks is particularly good. The gentlemen have their
billiard-tables, and the ladies their pianos, as we have. It will
be observed that the proportion of single rooms to dormitory
accommodation is considerable ; dormitories, indeed, are com-
paratively few, and are intended only for the quiet and well-
behaved. This undoubtedly is one cause of the expensive-
ness of the asylum; but the arrangement appears to me a wise
one. Dormitory accommodation diminishes expense, and a cer-
tain extent of it is undoubtedly desirable in every asylum; but
it appears to me that its advantages are greatly overrated, and
that, so far as the proper treatment, with a view solely to cure,
of the patient is concerned, the importance of single rooms is
greatly overlooked in our British asylums. The seclusion-rooms, or
single rooms for the refractory and dirty, are well lighted from the
top, as they ought to be. But I have great objections to the placing,
in a corner of each room, a hybrid between a water-closet and night-
stool, the pan of which can be removed when desired by a grating
opening into the gallery. Nor do I like a gallery running along,
and externally to, the top of these rooms, commanding a view
from above of the actions of their inmates. This is but a clumsy
and expensive substitute for the old inspection plates. Neither
of these arrangements seemed to meet with the approval of Dr.
Sandberg. Double bed-rooms, or dormitories for two patients, do
not seem to be regarded in so objectionable a light here as they are
in England. They are supposed by the English superintendents to
encourage habits of sodomy and other vices ; but this objection
appears to me purely theoretical, at least so far as Scotland and
Norway are concerned. Some of the Scotch asylums have made
use of double bed-rooms for a long series of years with nothing
but the best results ; and so far from its being objectionable, the
arrangement is extremely salutary and advisable?for instance,
in the case of hysterical, timid girls, who are afraid to sleep
alone, or in rooms by themselves. I should certainly strongly
oppose the occupation by two persons of a bed-room properly large
enough only for one-?that is, containing only between 500 and
1000 cubic feet of air. But so far as my experience goes?and
I am glad to find it borne out by the practice of the Norwegian
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 257
State Asylum?it is as little objectionable for two to sleep in . a
dormitory as for six, or any larger numbei, to say the least of it.
The water-closets are on the self-acting principle?that is, a rush
of water occurs every time the door is opened. Dr Sandberg
seemed satisfied with the arrangement, which is certainly theore-
tically ingenious, but has been practically found, m many British
asylums, unserviceable to the extent that it is liable to get out of
order and to be made a bad use of by the patients, who some-
times take a malicious pleasure in running off all the water in the
cisterns connected with such water-closets. A more extended
experience may, and probably will, modify Dr Sandberg's opinion
of the usefulness of this description of water-closet, and may
drive him to be content with the old and apparently clumsy
system of plugs and flush-drains. The water-closets in this
asylum are, moreover, much too small and inconvenient, and
much too few,?both serious defects in a modern hospital for the
insane. The corridors, or galleries, also, are generally too narrow,
and not sufficiently cheerful, open, and well lighted. The gal-
leries and the inspection balconies have too much of a prison
appearance about them. The covered passages connecting the
different wings across the airing courts are most useful in bad
weather; they are suitably provided with seats. Similar arrange-
ments are to be seen in many of our British public schools and
hospitals, and are uniformly found of service.
Gaustad Asylum is chiefly intended for native Norwegians,
and for curable cases; but incurable cases are not excluded if
the medical superintendent states there is vacant room, and re-
commends their admission. Foreigners are admissible only when
the form of insanity in them is curable, or when their insanity
prevents their leaving the kingdom. They are admitted, how-
ever, only to the department for the middle and higher ranks, and
they are charged 20 per cent, more than natives. The rates of
board are regulated from time to time; but those chargeable for
patients of the better ranks are more fluctuating than those for
paupers, the pauper charges having been regulated by the Law of
the Storthing of 17th August, 1848. From the circumstance
that the institution has been but a comparatively short time in
existence, fixed rates of board can scarcely be said yet to have
been determined on; but they will probably, in the case of the
poorer classes, at least, be pitched as low as is consistent with
remuneration?profit being kept out of view as no element in the
question. The rates of board include all necessaries save clothing
There are several sources of revenue to the institution, the prin-
cipal being grants of money from the Storthing, the board of
patients, and the profit of labour. The form necessary for
admission closely resembles that followed in this country : there
s 2
258 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
must be produced to the superintendent?or director, as he is
called in Norway?a medical certificate of insanity, a bond for
payment of board, and a requisition or application for admission.
But the director has the power of waiving this ceremonial in
urgent cases, at his discretion.
The asylum staff is very ample, and, apparently, very efficient,
the medical details being confided to the director, assisted by a
sub-physician, and several internes or clinical pupils; the direc-
tor, further, having supreme control and a general superintendence
over all the officers of the establishment, and over all their actings
and intromissions. There is a very full and admirable code of
provisional regulations (forty-eight pages 8vo),* of which the fol-
lowing is the Table of Contents:?Chap. I. General Regulations
(Almindelige Bestemmelser). Chap. II. House Regulations
(Husorden). Chap. III. Special instructions : for A. Director
or Physician-Superintendent,?an officer who holds the same
position as the medical superintendent, or resident medical
officer, of the British asylums:?B. Assistant Medical Officer
(Reservelatgen):?C. Internes, or clinical assistants or clerks (Can-
didaterne):?D. House Steward (Forvalteren):?E. Treasurer or
Cashier (.Kasserercn):?F. Matron and Head Attendant (Matro-
nen og Ovcrvorgteren):?G. Attendants (Vogterne):?H. Head
Laundress (Oldfruen):?I. Housekeeper (Husholdersken):?K.
Engineer (Maskinisten):?L. Barber (.Barberen): ? M. Farm
Overseer (Avlskarlen):?N. Gardener (Gartneren):?O. Porter
(Portneren):?P. Night Watchers {Nattevogtcrnc):?Q. Cooks
(Kjokkenpigcrne):?R. Laundresses (Voskepigerne):?S. Mes-
sengers (Budeierne): ? T. Stoker (Fyrboderen):?U. House
Servant (Budet-Huskaiien):?V. Farm Servant (Gaardskarlen).
The foregoing enumeration is sufficient to indicate that the staff
is in some respects, if not in all, a model one; and in regard to its
completeness, it is certainly worthy of imitation in this country.
There may be an approximation to such a staff in some of our larger
asylums; but I am not aware of any asylum of similar size?ac-
commodating, at present, only between 1G0 and 170 patients?
with anything like so perfect a machinery for its due management.
Such a machinery, however, cannot be maintained unless at a great
expense; and this must be borne in mind in questions affecting
the cost of erecting and maintaining Gaustad Asylum.
The salary of the superintendent is, I believe, about 1G00 to
1800 specie dollars, or about 400Z. a-year English, with a hand-
some house, as I have already mentioned. This allowance is
certainly not too much: perhaps it may be increased when the
establishment possesses its complement of patients. He has the
* " Midlertidigt Reglement for Gaustad Sindssygeasyl. Approberet ved
Kongelig Resolution af 29de August, 1858."
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
259
control?as every superintendent ought undoubtedly to have
both of the medical and fiscal departments of the management.
All the officials are under his orders; and he has the privilege
and power of appointing all save the chaplain, medical assistant,
steward, and treasurer, whom he merely nominates. It will thus
be noticed that the matron is not placed on the same footing as
in this country; she occupies altogether a subordinate position.
The principle of having her appointed by, and entirely subordinate
to the medical superintendent, is certainly the right one. This
arrangement avoids the collision of conflicting powers and posi-
tions which not unfrequently occurs under other circumstances.
The superintendent or his substitutes give all necessary informa-
tion regarding the admission, &c., of patients, and grant all
requisite certificates; lie conducts all correspondence; keeps
certain registers, or "protocols," as they are called in Norway,
and draws up certain reports and statistics, conformably to the
law of 17th of August, 1848, sect. 5 and G. He gives clinical
instruction to his internes, or pupils?an excellent arrangement,
worthy of all imitation. Thanks to the regulations for admission
into the medical service of the East India Company, several of
our public asylums now give courses of clinical lectures on
insanity and its treatment?for example, Bethlehem and St.
Luke's in London, the Royal Asylums of Edinburgh and Aber-
deen, and the District Asylum at Belfast; but otherwise there
is little or no arrangement for clinical teaching. The opportunities
of hospitals for the insane are not duly made available, and the
consequence is, that comparatively few medical practitioners know
anything practically of the proper treatment of insanity, and of the
construction and management of hospitals for the insane. Every
asylum, in my opinion, ought to have, in proportion to its size,
one or more clinical assistants, who may be resident or not,
according to circumstances, but some of whom, I think, should
be resident, and others not, just like the internes and externes of
the Parisian hospitals?the resident and non-resident clerks of
our British general hospitals. They might be appointed for
limited periods, so as to ensure a succession of fresh, energetic,
and enthusiastic pupils and assistants. Such an arrangement
would possess many advantages. Every asylum would become a
psychological school, and would send forth medical practitioners
conversant with a department of medicine of which they are at pre-
sentdeplorably ignorant?psychological medicine; the pupils would
act as assistants to the superintendent, who would be thus relieved
of a vast amount of drudgery in the writing out of cases, drawing
up of statistics, compounding of drugs, and in minor surgical ope-
rations, &c.; while the presence of pupils, and the existence of
other similar hospital-schools, would stimulate liim to keep him-
260 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
self au courant with tlie progress of psychological and medical
science, and to use his best efforts to maintain the reputation of
his particular asylum or school, or to outdistance his compeers in
a friendly competition. The arrangement would not be a costly
one; no difficulty would be experienced in getting candidates for
these appointments ; students of medicine would eagerly offer
their services in exchange for the opportunities offered, especially
in asylums of superior reputation, or in the larger or university
towns. At least once a month the superintendent of Gaustad
Asylum calls together a council, consisting of the chaplain,
assistant-physician, steward, and treasurer, and such of the sub-
ordinate officers as he sees fit, for the purposes of conference and
instruction. This must afford him a good opportunity of ex-
plaining his views, which views are much more likely to be carried
fully into effect if they are intelligently understood than other-
wise. His other duties and powers are so similar to those of
asylum-superintendents in this country, that they need not here
be enumerated.
The assistant-physician is appointed for three years; he is
removable on three months' notice, and he cannot leave without
giving three months'intimation. He is invested with plenipo-
tentiary powers in the absence of the superintendent. He receives
and examines new cases, determining to what part of the house
they are to be sent, &c.,?subject, however, to the approval of the
superintendent. He specially supervises all subordinate officers;
performs post mortems and simple surgical operations; keeps
certain books; and assists the superintendent, if required, in cor-
respondence, the drawing up of reports and returns, in chemical
investigations, and otherwise. The surgery is under his charge,
with the drugs, re-agents, apparatus, and surgical instruments.
He acts as librarian, is conservator of the scientific and literary
library, and draws up the catalogue. He sees specially that the
internes, matron, and head-attendant discharge their respective
duties.
Three " internes," or clinical pupils, are appointed by the super-
intendent as assistant medical officers. They hold office for one
year; and the appointments are so arranged, that only one falls
to leave or resign his office at a time. They are subject to the
superintendent and assistant-physician; they accompany them in
their daily visits to the galleries,?just as the clinical clerk follows
his physician or surgeon in walking the wards of a general
hospital,?carry out their medical instructions, keep journals of
the cases, write prescriptions to dictation, do the bandaging,
assist in minor surgical operations, and superintend and instruct
the attendants in bandaging, the application of blisters, and
similar operations. They likewise assist in making out registers
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 261
of patients, lists of medicines, statistics of disease, &c. Tliey
have exercises in psychological medicine prescribed to them by
the director or liis assistant. After the daily medical visit, one
of the internes is placed in charge foi the day, and it becomes
his duty to look after the giving out of medicines and surgical
appliances, to order supplies of medicine from town, and to see
that the medicines are properly distributed, and the prescriptions
or directions of the superintendent and assistant-physician duly
carried into effect. In urgent cases, in the absence of the
superior medical officers, the interne in charge for the day acta
as their deputy, and does what he considers necessary. He is
precluded leaving the institution during his day of charge, unless
either the assistant-physician or another interne take his place.
This secures that a medical officer is always to be found in the
institution?another admirable arrangement, worthy of being fol-
lowed in this country, and an additional advantage springing from
the appointment of clinical assistants. An interne may obtain
leave of absence for a day from the assistant-physician; but, if he
desire a longer holiday allowance, he must apply to the super-
intendent.
The house-steward is an officer of considerable importance;
and his appointment, as well as that of a resident treasurer,
relieves the superintendent of an immense amount of most
irksome mechanical drudgery, which would otherwise, in great
measure, dissipate time that is more worthily and profitably em-
ployed. There is no doubt that the work laid upon the shoulders
of many of our asylum superintendents in this country should
properly be distributed among three officers?superintendent,
treasurer, and clerk. His talents and skill should not be mis-
applied, his energies unprofitably dissipated, and the natural
order of things reversed, as at present.. The steward has imme-
diately under his jurisdiction the matron, he ad-attend ant,
laundresses, housekeeper, attendants, farm overseer, engineer,
gardener, porter, night-watch, and other servants of whatever kind.
The treasurer, like the steward, is appointed by the Depart-
ment for the Interior (Departcment etfor clet Indre), on nomina-
tion by the superintendent, and he is bound to give 1 500 specie
dollars security. Besides fulfilling the proper duties of a trea-
surer, he acts as bookkeeper and secretary, and checks to a
?certain extent, the ste^aid. He lias an office in the institution,
the business hours being 9 a.m. till 2 p.m. He does not neces-
sarily reside in the building, but is allowed, if lie prefer, to live
somewhere in the vicinity.
The machinist or engineer has charge of the apparatus for
water and gas supply, for heating, and also of the sewers; and
lie does any smith-work required about the house. When the
262 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
asylum possesses a smith's forge, as it contemplates doing, this
?will also be placed under his jurisdiction. He is directly under
the control of the steward, as are also the gardener and farm
overseer. There are both a male and female night-watch ; hut I
am not aware how far this arrangement has been found to answer.
The proportion of attendants to patients is as 1 to 6 or 8. This
is a large and favourable proportion in comparison with that to
be found in some of our older asylums, especially, where the pro-
portion falls so low as 1 in 10, 15, or even 20. This large
proportion, of course, adds materially to the cost of maintaining
the establishment, and is another item of the expense of con-
struction and management to which I have already more than
once alluded.
Let us now return to Dr Sandberg's First Annual Report, and
cull therefrom some particulars regarding the statistics of the
institution, and the treatment?dietetic, medical, and moral?of
its inmates. The statistical tables, with which the Report is abun-
dantly furnished, are based on a classification or division of the
inmates into pauper patients, or those paid for by parishes or
districts, and private patients, or those paid for by private friends.
This division is, to a certain extent, a useful one; it is now being
introduced into the statistical reports or tables of the Scotch
asylums. The total number of patients under treatment during
the year 1856 was 219?132 belonging to the pauper class, 70
males and 5G females; and 87 to the private class, 50 males and 37
females. The following were the native districts of these patients:?
Akcrshus Amt ...... 44
Jarlsbergs Amt 25
Christiania 18
Bratsberg Amt 18
Hedemarkens Amt 22
Nedenajs Amt ....... 12
Smaalenenes Amt 10
Budskeruds Amt 12
Christians Amt 9
Frederikskald 3
Laurvig 3
Aalesund 1
Arendal     1
Christiansaud . 1
Roraas   . 1
Romsdals Amt 2
Throndlijem 2
Irederiksstad
Grimstad 1
Lister and Mandals Amt ... 4
Sarpsborg 3
Skien   . 1
Kongsberg 2
Drammen 6
Bergen 2
Nordre Bergenhus Amt . . . , 2
Nordlands Amt ,1
Soon 1
Kragero 2
Svelvig 1
Brevig .. f ...... 1
Elekkefjord 3
Christiansund 1
Kobbervig 1
Stavanger 1
The ages of those under treatment were
Under 20 years 11
Between 20 and 30 . , . , .71
30 and 40 64
40 and 50 36
Between 50 and 60 31
60 and 70 4
70 and 80 2
OX INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 263
The duration of tlie disease, or of the last attack thereof, prior
to admission, was:
M. F.
Under ^ year . . . . 31 ... 29
Prom to 1 year . . 22 ... 19
? 1 ? 1? ? ? ? 11 ... 9
li ? 2 ? . . 7 ... 2
2 ? 3 ?
3 ,, 4 ?
4 ? 5 ? . ? 3
18 ... 4
9 ... 8
M. F.
From 5 to 6 years . . . 4 ... 2
6 ? 7 ? . , . 2 ... 1
}) 7 ? 8 ? . , . 4 ... 3
? ? ? 9 ,, . . . 4 ... 2
9 ? 10 ? ... 3 ... 1
55 10 5J 15 J, . , , 3 ... 5
55 15 ? 20 ? ... 3 ... 2
In regard to relapses, or multiple attacks, 14 males and 10
females had had 1 previous attack; 8 males and 2 females had
had 2 ; 2 males and 1 female, 4; and 5 males and 7 females
several. '
The causes of insanity in the 219 patients under treatment
were as follows:?
M. F.
Hereditary 17 ... 16
Onanism 26 ... 4
Disappointments in love . 13 ... 10
Intemperance and intoxica-
tion  19 ... 3
Domestic sorrows . . . 5 ... 17
Religious scruples . . . 9 ... 5
Yexation (sergrelse) . . 11 ... 2
Fright 3 ... 7
Syphilis,andinercnrialization 10 ... 1
O v er-exertion (o veranstracn-
gelse) 9 ... 0
Pregnancy and parturition. 0 ... 9
Destitution and its cares
(najringssorger) . . . 3 ... 3
Bodily ill-usage . . . . 2 ... 2
Lesion of head .... 3 ... 1
M. F.
Typhus ....... 1 ... 3
Imprisonment 3 ... 0
Disorders of digestive system
(fordoiclsesbesvser) . . . 2 ... 1
Apoplexy 2 ... 0
Blood-letting 2 ... 0
Remorse of conscience. . . 2 ... 2
Uterine diseases 0 ... 2
Home-sickness 0 ... 2
Illicit intercourse (besvan-
gring) 0 ... 2
Disease of brain 0 ... 2
Phthisis (tuberkulose) . . . 0 ... 2
Jealousy 1 ... 0
Measles 1 ... 0
Bronchitis 0 ... 1
Pneumonia 0 ... 1
Dr Sandberg divides causes into psychical and physical; hut
he apparently finds the same difficulty that we in Britain do in
discovering special causes, or causes at all, or in determining
that, in any given case, the cause belongs purely to the one
category or to the other. Hereditary transmissibility is well
illustrated by the next Table, which shows in what relatives
insanity had previously developed itself:?
M. F.
Great-grandfather (oldefader)* 1 ... 0
Great-grandmother (oldemoder) 2 ... 0
* As showing the composition and etymology of Norwegian words, and their
general resemblance to the English?or rather the Scotch?I have given in the
above Table the Norsk words for the persons or relational terms therein expressed.
Those who are etymologically inclined, or who are fond of the philosophy of
language, will find some most interesting studies in the Scandinavian languages;
for Instance, in the Icelandic, or original Norsk, in the Norwegian of to-day, which
is a modification of the Danish, and in the Danish itself. I had the pleasure of a
most interesting discussion on the analogies of the Norwegian and Scotch languages
264 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
M. F.
Paternal grandfather (farfader) 4 ... 1
Paternal grandmother (farmoder) 2 ... 1
Maternal grandmother (mormoder) 4 ... 4
Father (fader) 9 ... 2
Mother (moder) 13 ... 12
One or more brothers (brodre) 7 ...12
One or more sisters (sostre) 4 ... 5
Paternal uncle (farbroder) 4 ... 2
Maternal uucle (morbroder) 4 ... 4
Paternal aunt (faster) 6 ... 3
Maternal aunt (moster) 5 ... 4:
More distant relatives 11 ...10
The influence of the mother in transmitting the predisposition
to insanity to her offspring is here abundantly evident.
The admissions during the year appear to have amounted to
157?92 males and 65 females. In regard to admissions, the
superintendent seems to have much more real power than with
us. No sheriff, justice of the peace, clergyman, or elder stands
between him and the applicant for admission. He has certainly
to do with a " Control Commission," of which more anon. The
method of procedure, I conceive, approaches much nearer sim-
plicity, and consequently efficaciousness, than either the present
or the past Scotch system. The form of insanity in the patients
admitted was:?
M. F. Total.
Melancholia 37 ... 34   71
Mania . . .   26 ... 17   43
Stupidite 4 ... 0   4
Delirium tremens 2 ... 0   2
Dementia 17 ... 13   30
Idiotism (acquired) 1 ... 0   1
Epilepsy with mania 0 ... 1   1
General paralysis .   3 ... 0   3
The prevalent form of insanity appears, therefore, to be melan-
cholia ; the sexes are nearly equally affected, the males slightly
predominating. It constitutes nearly one-half of the whole cases
admitted, and is more than equal to both mania and dementia
conjoined. So far as I could learn, melancholia seems to be also
the most common form of insanity throughout Norway. This
has been attributed?with what justice I know not?to the facts
that the population is thinly scattered, that the people live at
great distances apart?isolated, as it were?greatly shut out from
intercourse with the world, surrounded by gloomy mountains,
and by what was called by a young Norwegian, whom I once
with two of the most distinguished linguists and philologists in Norway?the cele-
brated Professor P. A. Munch, author of " Det Norske Folks Historie," and Pro-
fessor C. K. Unger, both of the University of Christiania, the former Professor of
History, the latter of Modern Languages.
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 265
encountered on the summit of Ben Nevis, " wild nature." Mania
ranks next in order of importance. The sexes aie affected
unequally?26 males to 17 females, nearly double. Dementia
follows. Here, again, the sexes are nearly equally affected ; the
males, however, again predominating. 33ut, in estimating the
relative frequency with which the sexes were affected, it is neces-
sary to hear in mind that a much larger proportion of men was
admitted than women?92 to 65. The numbers given above
relate to the absolute admissions, not to their comparative fre-
quency as to sex. General paralysis occurs in 3 cases, all males.
This is in conformity with our experience in this country. Deli-
rium tremens occurs in 2 males. It does not appear whether
these cases were admitted by mistake, or whether delirium tremens
is regarded in Norway as a form of insanity. I see no reason
why, to a certain extent, it should not be so considered, and
rendered liable to all the disabilities of insanity. Medical jurists
will find a difficulty in establishing any valid difference between
delirium tremens and insanity, unless that, in the former case,
the paroxysm or attack is generally of much shorter duration.
In classifying the forms of insanity, Dr Sandberg recognises
primary and secondary forms. The former are marked either by
mental depression or exaltation, and they may be either simple
or complicated. His typical or primary forms are melancholia
and mania. A very common complication of the primary forms
is stupor: hence we have melancholia with stupor, or stupidite?
a well-marked form of insanity. The secondary forms are cha-
racterized either by confusion of ideas (forvirring) or by dulness
of intellect (slovhed). They include dementia (the " walmsinn,"
" verriicktlieit," and " verivirrheit" of the German psychologists)
and idiocy, with their complications, among which are epilepsy
and general paralysis. In regard to the proportion in which the
two great classes of patients?pauper and private?were affected
with the chief forms of insanity?
Pauper cases. Private cases.
Melancholia occurred iu 30   41
Mania ?  29   M
Dementia ?  21   9
The discharges during the year amount to 05?less than one-
half the admissions. But it was to be expected that the latter
should largely preponderate over the former in a new institution.
The cured, lelieved, and improved stood in the following pro-
portions :?
, Pauper. Private. Total.
Cured      13   29
Improved   g 7
Uncured   !!!!!! 17 !!!.'!. 29
Total .65
266 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
The recoveries are thus 29, in relation to G5 discharges, 157
admissions, or 219 patients under treatment during the year. Of
29 recoveries, 18 were females and 11 males. The recoveries
occurred at the following ages :?
M. F.
"Under 20 years 4 ... 0
Between 20 and 30 5 ... 2
? 30 ? 40 1 ... G
? 40 ? 50 3 ... 0
? 50 ? 60 2 ... 2
The duration of insanity in the same cases was:?
M. F.
Under ? year 6 ... 6
Between \ and 1 5 ... 3
? 1 ? 2 2 ... 1
Three years or upwards 1 ... 0
In connexion with the subject of discharges, it is necessary
here to mention that no patient is allowed to remain in the
asylum longer than two years, as a general rule; but excep-
tions may be made by the superintendent, if the interests either
of the patient or of the institution seem to require them. The
deaths were 6, 5 males and 1 female, or 4 pauper and 2 private
cases?a sufficiently small mortality.*
One of the most important subjects in connexion with the
treatment of the patients in this asylum is that of the dietary
regulations. I append hereto a table and accompanying expla-
nations, not merely for the purpose of showing that the patients,
and especially the pauper patients, are very well cared for as to
food, but also with a view to indicate the nature of the Norwe-
gian articles of diet as contrasted with our own. Some of these
are peculiar to Norway, or common to it with other countries of
Northern Europe, but little known in England, though one of
them at least is comparatively familiar in Scotland. The one in
question is the national dish, " Grod," which is equivalent to the
Scotch porridge; it forms the bulk of the food of the peasantry, and
a remarkably good food it is. The native Norwegians generally
use water-grod, made of oat or barley-meal and water, and supped
with milk; but for strangers, if they consent to make it at all?
for they regard it as unfit for the fastidious palate of the English
tourist?they make it with milk or cream, flavouring it with carra-
way, and doing it up with oil, &c. I preferred infinitely the
plain water-grod, and I found it frequently a most satisfactory
meal?where, it must be confessed, nothing else was sometimes to
be had;?after a days journey on foot or horseback on the bleak
* Full tables of the admissions, discharges, deaths, &c., will be found in one
of the schedules appended to Dr Sandberg's Report, entitled, " Extract afGaustad
Sindssygeasyls Personalprotocol for Aaret 1856."
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NOWAY. 267
Norwegian Fields. Rye bread is another national article of diet-
?\ui\\eDidu ijei j, l f (U vjoor Norwegian. In the towns,
the staple home- avec ^ ^ad, though it is greatly dearer;
white or wheaten bread may be nau, o b J
hut in the interior, nothing m the ?liaP ^ ? }
except rye bread and various forms^ o^ ^
oatmeal cakes, made of o< unacnuaintprl with it
The rve bread has, to the stranger as yet unacquainted with it,
?ne lye uil/u ' rpnnis;ve aspect; it is very dark, like the
a most forbi C1 o quartans heavy, moist, and sour. The natives
MaCfk ifslr and S! a"?Sd makeyit so intentionally; and they
bake very large quantities at a time-sufficient to last over weeks
or months, as the case may he. It vanes greatly in character in
different parts of the country and m different families some
making it sweeter, lighter, and drier than others, according to
taste Many of the sport-loving Britons who, every summer,
frequent the Norwegian Elvs to fish the salmon, or the Norwegian
Fields to shoot the reindeer or bear, get rye bread baked spe-
cially for themselves, sufficiently sweet to be palatable. I had
some difficulty in resigning wheaten bread on leaving Christiania
for the interior; but, after sundry disagreeable gastric symptoms,
I soon became fond of it, or rather the stomach exhibited a tole-
rance of it for the days and weeks during which it became necessary
to subsist mainly on this fare. Previous acquaintance with it in
Germany rendered this less difficult than might otherwise have been
the case In the latter country I have seen it so coarse that horses
and men fed equally upon it. Yet a third dietetic peculiarity
of the Norwegians is their cheese, particularly their ged-ost,
or goafs-milk cheese?for theyare great cheese-makers and cheese-
eaters, and have an infinity of kinds. This is very sweet, and to
my taste,nauseous; in Norway, however, it is evidently regarded
as a great delicacy. But, to return to the dietary of the Gaustad
Asylum I am bound to confess that it appears to me remarkably
good I speak particularly of the pauper, or lowest, scale of
dietary. That for the higher classes is as ample and varied as it
could be in a private home; while that for the paupers is infi-
nitely better. For if we contrast the asylum dietary with the
ordinary food of the poorest classes of Norwegians, especially
those in remote country districts, living far from supplies
from towns, and subsisting almost entirely throughout the year
on rye bread, grod, and milk, with cheese and butter, seldom
tasting animal food, there is great reason to commend the libe-
rality ?of the managers of Gaustad. These gentlemen evidently
regard insanity as a disease dependent on, or connected with,
impaired nutrition, and requiring, therefore, for its proper treat-
ment, as a basis for all medical or moral means of cure, a diet
both good in quality and full in quantity. Every day the patients
268 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
have coffee or tea, bread and butter, for breakfast: the proportions
being f lod?the Danish " Lod" being equal to our ^ oz.?coffee-
beans, or ^ lod tea, f lod Havannali sugar, and ^ peegel?a psegel
being equal to about ? pint English?of milk, 16 lod rye bread,
and 1^ lod butter. The higher classes have also a portion of
white or wheaten bread (livedebrod). At dinner, again, there is
considerable variety of meat and fish, fresh and salt, with soups
and vegetables of different kinds. The dietary is certainly both
more ample and more varied than that of most of our district or
pauper asylums in this country. The error, if error it be, in our
asylums is rather in the form of too great sameness than of too
small allowance; but the one is sometimes as productive of serious
effects as the other evil. I know not what dietary regulations may
be established in the new Scotch asylums; but it is to be hoped
the General Board of Lunacy for Scotland will not be content with
a minimum standard. The patients in Gaustad Asylum have
three regular meals?breakfast, dinner, and supper; but all who
work, or otherwise deserve or require them, have an " eftermid-
dagsmad," or afternoon lunch, between dinner and supper, and a
" mellemmiddagsmad," or forenoon lunch, between breakfast and
dinner; and as the majority of the patients work, there are vir-
tually four meals daily in winter, and five in summer. The hours
for meals are as follows:?
Breakfast ... 6 a.m. in summer.
? . . . 7^ ? in winter.
Dinner . ... 12 noon for pauper patients.
? ... 1 p.m. for private or higher class patients.
Supper ... 7 ? in winter.
? . . . 8 ? in summer.
Eftermiddagsmad . 4 ? for workers.
The record of the industrial department (arbeidvirksomhed) is
very interesting and satisfactory, and shows the authorities of the
Christiania State Asylum to be fully alive to the importance of
occupation?of useful and productive labour?both as a means
of cure and as a source of profit. But the Norwegians go farther
than we do in regard to the prescribing of occupation or labour
for their patients. Work with them is rendered compulsory (I
presume the regulation refers chiefly to the pauper classes), and
the indolent and refractory are punished?even with restraint or
seclusion, as it would appear. This restraint or seclusion is
recommended to be as short and as mild as possible; but, query,
to what extent is it at all necessary or judicious ? Most
authorities agree as to the advisability, or at least harmlessness,
of holding out rewards to the insane for good conduct and
industry; but the subject of punishment is one, to say the least
of it, which is usually avoided as a difficult and delicate one. I
do not intend here to open up the question; but I am bound to
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 269
Table showing the Dietary Regulations of the State Asylum of
Noncay at Christiania.*
Days of the
Week.
Daily
Sunday. .
Monday
Tuesday ?
"Wednesday
Thursday .
Friday . .
Saturday .
Tuesday & Friday
Other days . .
Daily ....
Daily ....
Dietary for better Classes.
(Bedre Forpleining.)
1. Morning (Breakfast).
Patients have tea, bread and butter,
with cheese, or some substitute.
Attendants have coffee, bread and
butter, with cheese, or some sub-
stitute.
2. Mid-day (Dinner).
Boast meat and pudding.
Sago soup and stockfish (klipflsk).
Fresh meat with horseradish sauce,
and meat soup, with rice.
Fresh fish and rice pudding (risvel-
ling).
Peas, salt meat, and bacon, with
stewed greens or potatoes.
Beef-steak and sago-pudding (sago-
velling).
Beer-soup (ollebrod), herring, and
3. Evening (Supper).
Porridge (grod) and milk.
Tea, bread and butter, with meat, &c.
Afternoon Lunchf (Efter-
middag).
Half portion of butter, bread, and
coffee.
Forenoon Lunch+ (Mellem-
middag).
Half portion of butter and bread.
Ordinary Diet for Pauper Classes,
("impel Forpleining.)
1. Morning (Breakfast).
Patients have tea, butter, and bread.
Attendants have coffee, butter, and
bread.
2. Mid-day (Dinner).
Fresh meat and meat soup.
Milk broth (melkevelling, or melk-
suppe) and stockfish.
Fresh meat and meat soup.
Fresh fish and fish soup.
Peas, salt meat, and pork.
" Menagesuppe" and " Lapskous,"
Beer-soup and herring.
3. Evening (Supper).
Sunday and Thursday, tea, butter,
and bread.
Porridge (grod) and milk.
Afternoon Lunch-Y (Efter-
middag.)
Half portion of butter, bread, and
cofiee.
Forenoon Lunch-f (Mellem-
middag).
Half portion of butter and bread.
1 ation of this table, it will be necessary to give some parti-
* In connexion with, and in exP15?a' . , therein named. Comparatively full details as to
culars regarding the Norwegian or .yams tions 0f materials used, will be found in one of
the composition of these dishes, and at the prop^ ^ ^ fortiden gja;ldende Spise-regle-
the tables appended to Dr Sandberg
ment for Gaustad Smdssygeasyl. <( , Dani3h weight equal to our \ oz
The weights ot solids are given per ? -p t.? . j)anlah measure equal to somewhat more
The liquid measure generally used is tne ,
than our quart. . t gcotch "porridge," or " stirabout." It is generally
" Grod" is a national dish, equivalen ^ but j3 sometimes also eaten with oil,
made either of oat or barleymeal, with water or m ,
spices, cream, &o. (< . freed of s;nexvs and bones, are allowed per patient.
About 6 oz. or 12 lod otires 'meat gr0ats, greens, &c.: " Lapskous contains 4 oz. of
Meat soup contains, per p ? -g syrup, gravy, &c.: Fish soup (fiske-suppe) contains
meat: " Menagesuppe Beer soup (ollebrod) is made of beer, milk, barleymeal, and syrup,
barleymeal, Heer and grated rye-bread accordi^ to'the Danish
according to Dr S:aniib> g P or Gryns-grod, according to the Dictionary, is simply
Dictionary of
^uS^beer,6 and supSrf '"'5?^" is barley-groats : ? Byg-suppe" 'is barley-
broth : ".^P?3^. highwranksShave potatoes at certain times in addition to, or in lieu
The private patient,ot the f a arativel scarce etable in Norway.
They^ave^scTrefined^ugar to aome of their dishes, e.g., to coffee, instead of raw or coarse
sugar, and cream instead ot milk brea(j consists of 12 lods of rye bread, or 6 of wheaten
V Thr' f todsOfformerand4 of latter, with 2 lods. of butter. On Sundays, festival days, and
Sme other occaSTher^ eltras-
Liuitonco uviu^uuirer, umit, eggo, ?nu renned sugar; sauce for roast meat, of
butter and wheat flour; and horseradish sauce, of horseradish, wheat flour, butter, coarse sugar, &c.
t Are supernumerary meals, only giyen to the workers and such other patients as the super-
intendent prescribes them for.
270 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
express my "belief that, though the printed regulations of Gaustad
Asylum contain clauses to the above effect, they are not, to the
full extent, acted upon; for I presume, in regard to the imposi-
tion of restraint or seclusion, Dr Sandherg possesses and exer-
cises a humane and wise discretion. I quote from the Regulations
of the Asylum the clauses to which I refer, as the testimony of
Norwegian psychologists on the subject of compulsory work, and
the punishment of the indolent and refractory :?
" Enhver Syg maa beredvilligen deltage i de Arbeider, som Asylefc til
hans eget Bedste fordrer af ham, vsere sig paa Marken, i Haverne, i
Anlreggeneeller hvor det maatte ansees hensigtsmsessigt."
" Uvillige og gjnstridige Syge ville paalseggo Bestyrelsen den.
tunge Pliget at anvende Tvangstroie, Indespserren i Enevaerelse," &c.
" Men disse Tvangsmidlers Anvendelse skal vsere saa kortvarig og
lempelig som muligt."*
But, though compelled to work, the patients are not compelled
to work for nothing. The superintendent possesses the power,
at his discretion, of giving rewards to the industrious, either in
the form of small necessaries or gifts, or as sums of money
when the patient leaves the institution. The placing to the
credit of patients of the value of their labour; the laying up of their
earnings during their residence, as it were, in a savings'-bank;
and the handing over to them, directly or indirectly, on their
leaving, of the accumulated sum, or the balance thereof?for it is
but fair that the patient should defray, in whole or in part, the cost
of his maintenance and treatment?seem to me to constitute an
admirable arrangement. The poor artisan or labourer is thus pro-
vided with a sum sufficient to start him afresh and satisfactorily
in the world, or to keep him comfortably until he succeed in ob-
taining suitable employment. This principle is acknowledged in
the Reserve Funds of some English asylums, from which grants
of money are made to deserving cases on their leaving the asylum
to resume the struggle of life. But it is a principle which should
be uniformly acted upon; if it is good in one asylum, it is, or
would be, equally serviceable in another. It is, indeed, a new
development of the principle of life insurance, and a development
to which I would urgently direct the attention of the authorities
of our lunatic asylums. Such a provision would lessen the
pangs of confinement to many an industrious tradesman, who
would experience great satisfaction in the assurance that he was
supporting himself, or largely contributing to his own support?a
burden neither upon friends nor parish. Removal from an asylum
is frequently a curse instead of a blessing ; it is a step from com-
parative affluence, ease, and comfort, to misery and beggary ; and
every superintendent of an asylum can readily recall to memory
* " Midlertidigt Eeglement for Gaustad Sindssyge-asyl," p. 5, sect. vii.
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NOIOTAY. 271
illustrations and cases corroborative of this statement. I know no
moreworthy objectof the chanty of the lich than such leseive funds
attached to our large public asylums. It may appear hard and un-
just to compel patients to work; but, that compulsory work-where
of course, voluntary work cannot be snbst tnted-.n the case ol
rrpnerallv a direct benefit to patient and asylum
alike'Ihave no hesitation in asserting. I had occasion to try the
-?f l nf pi v Four powerful men in the prime of life?all cases
eXr of acute or paroxysmal mania, and all both destructive and
violent?bad for a considerable period caused much trouble and
evoense by breaking windows, teanng up clothes and destroying
the walks and walls of the airing courts. An attendant was engaged
specially to superintend these men, who had a court allocated to
themselves for exercise. Still the violence and destructiveness
continued ; no kind of dresses was found strong enough to resist
their mischievous propensities; one man tore up, with apparent
ease the stoutest canvas and moleskin, as well as locked hoots.
I now resolved to direct their physical force into some useful
channel and I accordingly set the four men, undercharge of their
attendant, to pump-work. They were engaged in this hard, hut
regular,mechanical employment from 9 A.M.till?pastl2; and again
from 2 to 4 or 5 p.m. daily. The result was almost immediate
and satisfactory, consisting in comparative quietude, good belia-
viour, improved sleep and appetite. The experiment continues to
work'well after an interval of several months. In such cases,
independently of the good done to the patients, I doubt not that
the asylum would ultimately be no loser, inasmuch as against
the wa^es and keep of an attendant are to be placed, as per con-
tras the enormous amount and considerable \ alue of clothes
destroyed and windows broken. The kind of work engaged
in by the patients of Gaustad appears to be chiefly the follow-
ing ;?Cutting firewood, felling trees, gathering or teasing hair,
household work, field and agricultural work, shoemaking,
carpentry, mason work, bookkeeping, wool work,?gathering,
carding,"and spinning of wool, stocking-knitting, and needlework.
While the men are chiefly employed in out-door labour, field and
garden work, cutting timber and splitting firewood, or in
in-door handicrafts, the females are engaged in cooking, house-
hold work, wool work, needlework ? in making or mending
stockings, shirts, jackets, trowsers, coats, petticoats, night-
dresses, under-clothing, handkerchiefs, window-blinds, &c. More
women seem engaged in wool work than in any other single
department of female handicraft?upwards of ten daily?while
only four are occupied in household work, and three in sewing.
The quantity of work done by the females may be estimated by
the following list:
NO. X.?NEW SERIES T
272 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
15 Pairs men's boots.
74 Pairs women's boots.
CG Pairs men's shoes.
12 Pairs women's shoes.
207 Pairs stockings.
127 Men's shirts.
CO Chemises.
48 Pairs trousers.
20 Jackets.
39 Petticoats.
30 Coats.
84 Night-caps.
18 Night-dresses.
]09 Window-blinds.
121 Handkerchiefs.
The women would thus appear to do a considerable amount of
tailoring. Full statistical tables are given in Dr Sandberg's
Report, the accuracy of which is vouched for by a " Control Com-
mission," consisting of three persons, who act as auditors of
accounts. The males are chiefly employed felling timber and
cutting it up into battens, or firewood: a large amount of
birch, pine, and other woods has thus been hewn and cut up
during the year. This is no more than we should expect in a
timber-producing country like Norway. Agricultural or garden
work stands next in order of importance; the spring and harvest
seasons appear to be by far the busiest to this section of the
workers. I saw many patients engaged in reclaiming waste
lands and laying out airing courts, for the grounds belonging to
the asylum are as yet in a comparatively wild and uncultivated
state. Shoemaking is an important handicraft: in this depart-
ment the patients have the benefit of the supervision of a shoe-
maker and his apprentices. Carpentry is a sister trade of equal
importance; all the garden and agricultural implements are made
and repaired in the carpenter's shop, and all the ordinary house
jobbing done by the wrights or joiners. A few of the males were
engaged in special occupations: one man, during my visit, was
painting the wTalls of some of the parlours and corridors most
tastefully. In connexion with the hours of labour, I may here
mention that the patients go to bed at half-past nine p.m. in
summer, and at half-past eight in winter?rather later, in both
cases, than in most British asylums, where a common source of
complaint is the hardship of being compelled to go to bed in
summer by daylight {e.g., at eight p.m.) .
I must now approach, with all due caution and respect, a sub-
ject which is in great measure tabooed or passed over in solemn
silence in most of our British Asylum Reports?I mean the sub-
ject of restraint and seclusion. In a table appended to Dr.
Sandberg's Report, we find a description of the nature of the
restraint and seclusion employed in the Christiania State Asylum,
their duration, and the necessity or causes for their employment.*
* "Extract af Gaustad Sindssyge-asyls Behandlingsprotokol for Aaret 1856
1. Symptoms, or conditions, on account of which restraint was rendered neces-
sary (sygdoms-symptom som har foranlediget Tvangs Anvendelse).
2. Number of times on which restraint was had recourse to (antal af Gange som
Syge have vceret underkastede Tvang).
3. Form of restraint (Tvangsmidlets Besliaffenlied).
4. Average duration of restraint (gjennemsnitstid hvori Tvang cr anvendt i de
forskjellige Tilfcdde).
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 273
It is at least nianlv and frank to publish openly such a state-
ment it shows unmistakeably that the Norwegians are not
victims to the hobby that all restraint-it matters not in
\ cruel, mischievous, ancl unnecessary,
what circums an ^ many asylum superintendents in this
There are Pef ^'face of S well-lmown amiable and pliilan-
country 10, 1 crotchety, idea regarding the utter inadmis-
sSty'oftiie procedure or mode of treatment which is designated
bvthat objectionable and ugly term restraint would venture to
oubhsh such tables, or to defend their bold and independent
Practice A reaction, however, appears slowly hut surely to
be takin0- place among those hest conversant with the subject
among practical men, asylum superintendents?who begin
to see fhe absurdity and fallacy of the supposed distinction
between mechanical and personal restraint, and who find that
cases will occur, notwithstanding the authority of certain very
distinguished psychologists, necessitating some form of mecha-
nical restraint, and, finding this, they act according to their con-
victions. It is surely monstrously absurd to call the application
of a glove or belt " mechanical restraint," and to frown at seclu-
sion as something horrible; while restraint by two or three
attendants, who cannot possibly be expected to do more than
human nature can?keep their tempers, under every amount and
kind of irritation or provocation,?a restraint which implies, as
every superintendent full well knows, black eyes, broken ribs,
the most bitter antipathies, the most deadly struggles, the most
inordinate excitement,?is denominated " moral suasion," or is
called some equally pretty name ! There can be no doubt, I think,
that restraint by persons is in many cases infinitely worse than
restraint bv things; and I must confess that a suspicion attaches,
in my own mind, to any system or any asylum professing to
have no recourse whatever to " restraint." Undoubtedly, in all
asylums it will be found in some form, so long as insanity and
human nature remain what they are; or it will be supplanted by
some equivalent mode of treatment. I have tried this system of
supplying numerous attendants to destructive and violent pa-
tients, and I have frequently found it wanting. A superintendent
must, of course, take attendants as they are, not as they ought to
be. But, lest I should be misunderstood, it is necessary to
state here that I have never had recourse to mechanical re-
straint in the sense in which the term is generally understood.
Nevertheless, I can conceive cases to occur requiring it;
and I should certainly not be deterred, if they did occur
in my practice, by any dogmas or dominant ideas on the sub-
ject of non-restraint, from treating such cases by mechanical
or personal restraint, or otherwise, as I should see fit. The replies
T 2
274 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
of tlie English and Irish superintendents, to the Lunacy Com-
missioners of their respective countries, on this subject, are most
manly and independent; but they show a remarkable discrepancy
of opinion between the governing body, the theorists?and the
governed, the practical men. I do not indulge in these remarks
with a view to defend the use, in the Christiania State Asylum, of
restraint or seclusion?far from it; for I am not in a position to
say whether the restraint imposed was necessary at all, and, if so,
whether it was of a proper kind and duration. I saw, during my
visit, only one person under restraint, and that merely extended
to the arms, so as to prevent any injury to a dislocated
shoulder-joint, which had been set on the previous day. The
general impression produced on my mind by what I saw was, that
the superintendent was a most humane, judicious, experienced
physician, who might safely be entrusted with the physical and
moral, as well as medical, treatment of his patients. The symp-
toms, or conditions, on account of which restraint was prescribed
in Gaustad, were the following:?Violence (voldsomhed), bruta-
lity (brutalitet), obstinacy (opscetighed), impertinence (aartighed),
destructive tendency (odelczggelselyst), dirty habits (urcnlighed),
self-mutilation (selvbeslcadigelse), suicidal attempts (selvmord-
forsdg), fugitive tendency (undvigningslyst), onanism (onani),
and restlessness (uro).* The forms of seclusion and restraint
employed are?Seclusion (indespcerring), the restraint-jacket,
strait-waistcoat or camisole (tvangstroje), the restraint-chair
(tvangsstol), and the handcuffs (Jiaandbojler). The duration
varies greatly ; some patients were secluded or restrained day
and night, others by night only ; some for sixteen hours at a
time, others for fifty-five consecutive nights. The jacket was
worn from one to fifteen days and nights (I give round numbers
only), and " the chair" was occupied for from sixteen hours to three
days and nights. It certainly would appear as if the mantle of
the past had fallen on the Christiania State Asylum in regard to
restraint and seclusion ; but I have already said enough, I think, to
indicate that the superintendent and the directors must not be
judged hastily or harshly in regard to this department of their treat-
ment or management. Dr Sandberg himself declares that he
expects restraint and seclusion to be gradually lessened in pro-
portion as the staff of attendants is increased, and as better ex-
amples are set before new-comers by patients long resident.
Such a declaration tends to show that he regards restraint and
seclusion as mitigable evils, and that he intends diminishing
them to a minimum amount or degree.
I come now to speak of the medical treatment of the patients.
* I give the Norwegian words, lest they should not be fully or correctly repre-
sented by my translation or interpretation thereof.
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 275
As the causes of insanity are psychical and physical, so does Dr.
Sandberg divide the treatment into psychical and physical. He
has evidently great confidence in the virtues of change of scene,
removal from sources of irritation, abundance of fresh air, out-of-
door exercise and occupation, fine view, good keep, and regular
habits. But he has great faith, in addition, in bathing, as well
as in opium, belladonna, digitalis, liyoscyamus, and other drugs.
Opium appears to be his sheet-anchor in melancholia, where the
circulation is languid, with a dry bluish skin, and rigid muscles.
He uses it further in what many will be inclined to regard as heroic '
doses: lie begins with 1 grain morning and evening, and goes
up to 8 grains twice a day; not, however, in any case exceeding
the latter dose. Sometimes he gives a grain every fourth, eighth,
or tenth day only. Males are opiatised more fully than females,
taking sometimes 4 to 8 grains twice per day, or on an average
2 to 7 grains morning and evening; while females begin at 1
grain, and gradually go up to 7, the average being 5 grains.
Doses such as this were given in 24 cases?II males and 13
females. No dangerous efiects ever accrued, though headaches,
nausea, and vomiting are specified as among the accidental effects
of opium in individuals who appeared peculiarly susceptible to
its action. The question oi the tolerance by the system of opium
in cases of mental disease, or in various severe physical diseases,
was recently agitated in connexion with the death of Mr. Augustus
Stafford, M.P.; and on other occasions, also, most curious and
surprising evidence has been collected of the large quantities of
opium, in some of its forms, that can be borne under certain cir-
cumstances of idiosyncrasy or disease. In many cases of mania,
for example, ordinary doses of opium or of laudanum produce no
effect. Several grains of opium or drachms of laudanum may be
given with impunity; and persons become so habituated to its
use, and so unsusceptible of its influence, that they can drink
laudanum by the ounce, or even pint, as they would drink beer
or wine! As adjuncts to opium, Dr Sandberg uses, in some
cases, the cold shower-bath or the warm-bath; the latter where
the skin is cold or bluish. I cite a single and ordinary case of
melancholia, as illustrative of the opium plan of treatment. It
had been treated with infusion of digitalis, extract of stramonium,
and subsequently o grains of opium daily, prior to admission'.
On 9th ol July, the patient began to take opium in doses of 1
grain morning and evening; on 19th, the dose was increased to 2
giains twice a day , on 29th, to 3 grains; on August 7, to 5 grains;
on 12th, an emetic powder; on 13th, continue opium, 5 grains,
morning and evening; on IGtli, 6 grains; on 28th, reduce to 5
grains; on September 7th, 4 grains; on October 1st, 3 grains;
and on the 13th, discontinue the opium. Here is a patient
276 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
taking opium for three months, almost daily, sometimes in doses
of 12 grains per day?a mode of treatment of doubtful usefulness
in such a case. Instead of opium itself, morphia was used?appa-
rently the alkaloid itself, not its salts?in some 17 cases, 7 males
and 10 females. This is exclusive of cases in which it was given
as an ordinary and mere soporific. The average dose on com-
mencement was I- grain morning and evening; subsequently,
three times a day; and it was gradually increased to ^ grain three
times a day. Prolonged warm-baths, with a stream of cold water
on the head, appear to stand in the same relation to mania that
opium does to melancholia, in the Gaustad Asylum. The plan
is precisely that now carried out successfully, and on the large
scale, at the Royal Edinburgh Asylum, and other British asylums,
the body of the patient, with the exception of the head, being
immersed in warm water for some hours, while a stream of cold
water constantly trickles over the head from a pipe suspended
over it. This plan was had recourse to in 27 patients, 17 males
and 10 females. It would appear from these statistics that, while
severe cases of melancholia occurred chiefly among females,
severe cases of mania were found chiefly among males. The
duration of the bath system varied from one to eight hours per
day, and consecutively; and as an adjuvant?a calmative?tartar
emetic alone, or in conjunction with extract, belladonnse, was
sometimes employed. Seclusion in a darkened chamber seems
also commonly resorted to in acute maniacal cases. Various
forms of hydropathic treatment seem common in insanity in
Norway, both within and without the Gaustad Asylum. Thus I
find cases of stupidite (the acute dementia of some authors, and the
melancholia, with stupor, of others) and of dementia treated with the
warm or tepid-batb, and with the " Regndusch " and " Grcifen-
bergerdusch," * in the open air. In addition to the medicaments or
appliances I have named, Bavarian beer as a tonic; infus. digitalis
as a sedative or calmative of the heart's action, when it is tumultu-
ous ; decoct, rhamni frang., ol. ricini, potass, bitart., flor. sulphur.,
infus. valerian., and various other drugs, appear to have a pro-
minent place in the asylum pharmacopoeia. Sulphate of copper
was used in 4 males?cases of maniacal paroxysm ; digitalis, with
or without nitre, in 3 males and 1 female; quinine and decoct,
chinee acidum, in 2 males and 1 female; camphor, in 2 males and
3 females, cases of erotomania, in doses of 1 to 4 grains three
times a day. As tonics and emmenagogues, pills of rhubarb and
ext. conti, pil. tonico-nervin, tinct. mur. ferri, infus. rlieorum, &c.,
were employed; and, in other special indications, atropin, fibrill.
rad. artemisise vulg. solut., saccharated iodide of iron, iodide of
* The Norwegian "tvangsdusch" seems to be our old douche proper, used
more for purposes of punishment and terror than as a tonic !
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 277
potassium, electuar. anthelmint., emulsio assafoet., liquor anti-
spasmodic, &c. Derivation by purgation was effected by decoct,
rhamni frang., solut. salis anglici, ext. rhei comp., &c. Counter-
irritation was applied in the form of antimonial (tartar emetic)
ointment (stibiatsalve) and of vesicatives to head or nape of neck.
The spontaneous derivation or counter-irritation effected by boils
and carbuncles was sometimes most salutary. A great portion of
Dr Sandberg's valuable Report consists of most interesting
details of individual cases of the various forms of insanity, accord-
ing to the classification, which he recognises, with their symptom-
atology, pathology, and treatment; but for these I must refer the
reader to the Report itself.-'-"
Of a far different character, in regard, at least, to site, con-
struction, and general arrangements, is the Christiania City
Asylum at Mangelsgaarden, buried as it is in one of the town
thoroughfares. I was accompanied in my visit both by the con-
sulting and resident physicians, Drs. Winge and Kaiser; but I
take the information I have to give regarding it chiefly from a
most interesting pamphlet by the former gentleman,?a reprint
from the "Norwegian Journal of Medicine,"?which pamphlet
consists, in great measure, of a series of cases, with commentaries
as to the psychical phenomena and medical treatment.f Like the
Gaustad Asylum, this institution appears to date from the law of
the Storthing regarding lunacy and lunatic asylums, dated 17tli
August, 1848 : a law and a date which seem to have constituted
an era in the history of insanity and asylums in Norway. From
this law will undoubtedly date still further changes in the number
and character of Norwegian asylums. So soon as the cautious
and shrewd Norwegians see the practical working of the present
expensively constructed and organized State Asylum, and thereby
* I would strongly advise all intending medical visitors to Norway and its
asylums to " rub up" their German or French if they are not acquainted with
Norwegian. I found many of the best-educated classes in Norway?professors in
the University, and the merchants and citizens of Christiania?ignorant of the
English language. German is the foreign language chiefly spoken by the educated
Norwegians ; next to it stands French; while English is only beginning to be
generally cultivated as a language. Dr Sandberg, for instance, does not speak
English ; but he spoke to me fluently in German. Dr Winge, Physician-in-
Chief, and Dr Kaiser, Assistant or Eesident Physician of the Christiania City
Asylum, however, both speak English comparatively well, especially the latter.
To thoroughly enjoy and appreciate a tour in Norway, and to derive material advan*
tage therefiom, it is extremely advisable, if not absolutely necessary, that the
traveller should know something of either the Norwegian or Danish languages.
The latter is comparatively easy of acquisition, and there is no difficulty in pro-
curing grammars, dictionaries, and other linguistic aids. If he do not do this, his
tour will either be a series of misadventures and disagreeables, or he must place
himself m the hands of guides or couriers?both an expensive and irksome pro-
cedure.
?j- " Beretning oni Christiania Sindssyge-asyls Virksomlied i Aarene 1850?1856.
AfP. Winge, (Jverlcege, (Copieaf Norsk Magazin for Lcegevidenskaben.) Chris-*
tiania. 1857."
278 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
discover its demerits as well as recognise its merits, others,
on a smaller and less pretentious scale, will probably be built in
different parts of the country. For if the necessity for numerous
small district asylums is keenly felt in Scotland, which is com-
paratively well furnished with water, if not land, conveyance, it
must be felt still more seriously in a primitive country like
Norway, where land conveyance, in particular, is extremely slow
and imperfect.
The Christiania City Asylum resembles externally some of our
older Scotch poor-houses. It is separated from the public road
or street only by a dingy court, with an appearance not at all
prepossessing. Nor are the internal architectural arrangements
specially commendable. The most, however, has evidently been
made, by the intelligent physicians, of the accommodation and
materials at their disposal; the general principles of management
or treatment being precisely those to be found in operation at
Gaustad, and which I have already detailed. The building was
originally a custom-house or poor-house, or was devoted to some
such public use: it was partly converted into an asylum in 1849,
and entirely so in 1851. It accommodates only CO patients, 30 of
either sex. It is intended mainly for paupers; but private patients
are admissible if there is room, and the cases are considered
otherwise suitable. All the larger or principal rooms look to the
south and east; but there is no view, so far as I remember, from
any of the lower windows?at least, except brick walls and blocks
of houses ! The rooms, of whatever size, have a height of 5 ells
?that is, 10 feet, the Norwegian ell being equal to about 2 feet
English. There is on the male side of the house a wing or
department for the quiet and cleanly, and another for the violent
and dirty. A similar arrangement exists on the female side; but
the building does not pretend to symmetry, nor to architectural
facilities for classification. The male wing for the quiet and
cleanly contains a large parlour {forsamlingsvarelse); a large
dormitory (sovesal), fitted up with 11 or 12 beds, and a smaller
one with 7 or 8 beds; a dining-room (spisestuc) ; and workshops
for carpentry, turning, basketmaking, shoemaking, and other
useful handicrafts. The male wing for the violent and dirty
contains 8 bed-rooms, each 8 ells deep, or 10 feet, o ells broad,
and 5 high. In some of them the windows are guarded by a row
of palisades, at a distance of lj ells, or 8 feet. These rooms
struck me as being dark, damp, and dingy; and the same ob-
jectionable arrangement exists as at Gaustad in regard to night-
stools in a corner of the room. They are furnished, as are also
the bath-rooms, with floors of asplialte about | inch deep. The
male side of the house also possesses attendauts'-rooms, ward-
robe-rooms or store-rooms for clothes, and bath-rooms, with ante-
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 279
chambers for dressing and undressing, and otlier conveniences.
The bath-rooms are very neatly and comfortably furnished, and
fitted up with plunge and shower-baths; but they are incon-
veniently small and dark. The water-closets likewise possess the
latter objection. The corridors are narrow and dark, the single
rooms small and cell-like; the airing courts contracted and gloomy,
with little vegetation; and altogether there is a poor-house aspect
and feeling about the place. These, however, are all faults
inseparable from the reconstruction or adaptation of an old-
fashioned house, and for which the medical officers are nowise
responsible.
The female wing for the quiet and cleanly has a large associa-
tion-room (Jorsamlingssal), where the patients busy themselves
in needlework and other suitable occupations during the day; a
large dormitory (sovesal) with 14, and another with 10 beds; and
a roomy kitchen, which serves also as a dining-parlour. The use
thus made of the kitchen has the advantage that the patients
themselves superintend the cooking of their meals, and the wash-
ing and placing of their dishes ; and hence, an arrangement
that has undoubtedly been necessitated by want of room, is really
productive of the best results, in so far as homely habits are
engendered and profitable occupations taught. The kitchen,
however, is sunk a few feet below the ground, and the entrance is
by sunk steps. This is a bad arrangement, and is only defensible
on the score of the age of the building and its originally bad
construction. The female department for the violent and dirty
contains G commodious single rooms,?I detest the word " cells,"
although the Norwegians themselves employ the term " celle-
vcerelscr,"?lighted from the roof (by skylights), with rooms for
attendants, and wardrobe-rooms, as on the male side. The whole
establishment is lighted with gas, and seems sufficiently well
supplied with water. From the small size of the whole building,
and the compactness of the rooms, the inmates have much of a
family character in their habits and occupations. Indeed, such
an arrangement is a comparatively close approximation to the
colony system of Gheel,?the cottage mode of treatment of some
English and Scotch asylums. It is doubtful, without actual
experiment, to what extent this system of treatment can he
carried out in this country, modified, as it necessarilv would be,
according to the class and kind of patients, the rates of board,
the site of the colony, and its proximity to towns. But I am
firmly of opinion that the principle on which such system is based
is the proper one, though I must own to seeing many obstacles
in the way of having it practically carried out at present in this
country. One great obstacle is, at the outstart, its expensiveness;
and this is a terrible bugbear and barrier to progress in the eyes
280 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
of ratepayers; there is little prospect, therefore, of any such
plan being voluntarily carried out extensively or fairly in purely
pauper asylums. Economy is in favour of large and compact
asylums, which are said, or supposed, to be the cheapest means
of providing, according to Government regulations, for the insane.
Humanity and science recommend small asylums, as certainly
affording the best chances of cure and comfort; and on the
Lunacy Commissioners is forced the difficult and delicate task of
reconciling parties holding such opposite views, and of indicating
some middle course satisfactory to both.
The staff of this asylum appears lamentably meagre. On the
male side, there are a head-attendant and 2 ordinary attendants;
and on the female side, a matron and 2 female attendants. The
following Table shows the statistics of the institution in regard to
the admissions and discharges during the six years preceding
1857:?
Table showing the Admissions and Discharges in the Christiania City
Asylum (at Mangelsgaarden), between 1850 and 185G.
Year. Admissions.
M. F.
Discharges.
Cured.
M. F
Improved.
M. I F.
Unim-
proved.
M.
F.
Dead.
M.
F.
Remaining in 1849
Admitted in 1850
? . 1851
? 1852
,, 1853
? 1854
? 1855
1856
22
33
27
20
29
12
12
14
20
27
21
20
18
16
Total .
169 ! 127 i 53 46
25
19
30
19 29
18
Remained under treatment at close of year 1856, 57 patients?
32 men and 25 women.
Of the total number of 290 patients under treatment between
1850 and 1850, there were?
Cured 99, or about 33| per cent.
Improved . . . . 44, ? 17
Unimproved ... 49, 5 17
Dead 47, " 17 i
The dietary regulations, like those of Gaustad, are sanctioned
by the " Control Commission," or Lunacy Board; but they differ
somewhat from those of that asylum in detail. I have presented
them in a tabular form. For full diet, a charge of 17 skillings is
made for each patient per day?that is, about 8%d. English.
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 281
Table showing the Dietary Regulations in the Christiania City Asylum (Mangelsgaarden).*
Sunday.
Monday.
Tuesday.
"Wednesday.
Thursday.
Friday.
Saturday.
1. "Morning (Breakfast).
i- quart tea, \ oz. sugar,
\ lb. bread, and ^ oz.
butter.
1 quart meat soup, with
peas, groats, and pota-
toes ; 4 oz. salt beef, and
\ lb. bread: or 1 quart
meat soup, with groats
orvegetables; 4 oz. fresh
beef, and ? lb. bread.
As on Sunday.
1 quart ollebrod, 1 pint
lapskous, and | lb. bread.
As on Sunday.
As on Sunday.
2. Mid-day {Dinner).
1 quart gryn-
grod and 1 pint
sweet beer: or
f quart milk,
lb. bread, and
5 oz. butter.
1 quart meat
soup, with groats
and vegetables ;
4 oz. fresh beef,
and J lb. bread.
As on
Sunday.
As on
Tuesday.
As on Sunday.
1 quart milk
broth, with bar-
ley groats; 1
portion salt fish
or fresh fish,
and jib. bread.+
As on Sunday.
1 quart ollebrod,
and either 1 pint
lapskous and ? lb.
bread, or | lb.
bread, | oz. but-
ter, and 1 portion
salt herring.
3. Afternoon Lunch (JEftermiddag).
lb. bread and butter. I As on Sunday. | As on Sunday. I As on Sunday. 1 As on I As on Sunday. I As on Sunday.
J lb. bread, \ oz. butter,
and 1 pint beer.
| quart gryn-grod and 1
pint beer, with A oz. sugar
and | quart milk: or, in
option of Superintendent,
an allowance of butter and
bread, or milk and bread.
4. Evening {Supper).
As on Monday. ' As on Sunday.
Sunday.
As on
Monday.
As on Monday.
As on Monday.
For explanation of the terms used in the foregoing Table, and of the composition of the dishes, &c., see Table of the Dietary in the State
Asylum at Gaustad, p. 269 of this paper.
* Milk, barley-broth (byg-suppe), white bread, and tobacco, are regarded as luxuries or extras, for which an additional charge is made.
+ To fish diet on Fridays, potatoes if in stock ; in which case, the allowance of bread is diminished to one-half.
282 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
Kelapses occurred once in 1G cases, twice in 3. They hap-
pened in 2 cases after an interval of 2 months subsequent to
discharge; in 2 after G months; in 1 after 7 months; and in 2 after
10 months; while, in the remainder, the interval was from 1 to 3f
years after apparent recovery and discharge from the asylum.
Here, as at Gaustad, the importance of occupation is fully
recognised, and a large proportion of the patients is engaged in
useful labour. The kinds of work chiefly engaged in are as
follows :?Basket-work and wicker-work (kurvbinderarbeide),
carpentry or joiners'-work (snedkerarbeide), tailor-work (skrced-
derarbeide), shoemaking (skomagerarbeide), glovemaking (hands-
kemagerarbeide), wool-teasing, &c. (iddplukning), carding and spin-
ning wool (karding og spinding), knitting and ribbon-weaving
(strikning og baandvvcening), sewing (sum), and household-work,
&c. (liuustjeneste og udvendigt arbeide). Dr Winge does not
hesitate to avow the use of restraint and seclusion, with a view
to prevent patients hurting either themselves or others, or destroy-
ing the property of the asylum. Not only is the strait-jacket used
as a means of treatment, but seclusion, with or without the cold
shower-bath, is resorted to as a means of correction or punish-
ment. I quote the paragraph in Dr Winge's pamphlet relating
to restraint and punishment, as one of some importance, showing
the different light in which both are regarded in Norway, as com-
pared with this country:?
" Hvad Tvangsmidlernes Beskaffenhed og Anvendelse angaaer, da
indskraenkes Brugen af dem til at den Syge, saavidt muligt, hindres fra
at tilfoie sig selv, andre Personer, eller Asylets Eiendom nogen Skade.
De bestaae i Afsondring i Enevyerelse og Anvendelse af Tvangstroie.
Som Correctionsmiddel anvendes undertiden Enevserelse, undertiden,
og i Almindelighed da med udmserket Virkning, et koldt Styrtebad."*
In the same pamphlet, Dr Winge divides mental diseases into
the following classes :?
A. Those induced by, or depending upon, a primary derangement of
the nervous system :?
a. Depending on a primary lesion of brain, (p. 12.)
b. Depending on a primary lesion of spinal cord. (p. 32.)
c. Depending on a primary lesion of eccentric nerve-system.
(p. 39.)
B. Those induced by, or depending upon, a primary derangement of
the circulation or blood, (p. 43.)
C. Those induced by, or depending upon, a primary derangement of
the sexual system, (p. 50.)
D. Those induced by, or depending upon, a primary derangement of
the digestive apparatus, (p. 03.)
* " Beretning om Christiania Sindssygeasyls Virksomhefl i Aarene 1850?-
1856," p. 8.
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 283
A section at the end of Dr Winge's paper is devoted to the
medical treatment of the cases in the Christiania City Asylum.
He has evidently great faith in medicinal treatment; and he uses
some powerful remedies with no sparing hand. From opium he
has frequently seen the most rapid and remarkable effects, when
given in large doses. He considers it as indicated in cases of
great cerebral irritation, or inordinate nervous excitement, or
where precordial pains, sleeplessness, and other distressing symp-
toms exist. It is sometimes used in the form of powder, with
sugar, in one or several doses per day. He generally begins
with 1-3 grains morning and evening, increasing the dose by 1
grain every fourth or fifth day, until it reaches 6-8 grains, or
even 14 grains, when it is gradually diminished every third or
fourth day, until the patient is again taking only 1 grain at a
time. He declares the fear to be a groundless one, that con-
stipation, poisoning, &c., will infallibly follow such large doses
of opium. He lias seen vomiting induced by medium doses?4
to 5 grains; but this symptom has disappeared on increasing or
diminishing the dose, according to circumstances. He has never
seen any subsequent dangerous depression attributable to opium.
It is given cautiously, and in small doses, if at all, where there
is a torpidity of system, a tendency to stagnation in the portal
system, disease of heart, cliest, or abdomen, or symptoms of
general paralysis. It is sometimes combined with iron, quinine,
and other tonics. Dr "Winge does not regard cerebral congestion
or mental depression as contra-indications; for he has seen the
greatest benefit from its use in both these cases. Instead of
small doses of opium, where stronger narcotism is contra-
indicated?where depression exists with hypochondria and weak
pulse ? acetate of morphia is sometimes used, either in the
evening in doses of I to 1 grain, or 2 or 3 times a day in smaller
doses. In cases of organic disease of the heart, or of increased
or tumultuous action thereof, especially where a sub-inflammatory
or exudative process is supposed to be going on in the meninges,
digitalis is given. The form of administration is acetum digitalis,
in doses of 10-30 drops, 3 or 4 times a day; or as infusion (gr.
xv.?to Bviii.), 1 tablespoonful every 2, 3, or 4 hours. Infus.
digitalis with borax is also recommended as a good emmenagogue.
Conia has been used in some cases to reduce a rapid pulse, to
diminish increased action of the heart, or to subdue cardiac
irritation:?gr. i., dissolved in 5ii- aq. fl. naphse, of which 3-8
drops were given 3 or 4 times a day. Dr Winge's experience of
this remedy is, he says, too limited to enable him to give any
decisive opinion as to its merits. Stramonium has been used
with success in cases of hallucination of hearing, either in the
form of pill?2-10 gr. of extract, stramonii per day, in one dose
284 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
nt bedtime, or in smaller quantities morning and evening,?or in
that of solution in water. Under its use, Dr Winge has several
times seen dilatation of the pupil and impairment of vision.
Haschiscli, or extract, cannabis indicse, is frequently used in
melancholia accompanied by stupor, or an adynamic state of
system. It is given in small doses?gr. |-2, once or twice a
day, and always in the form of pill, on account of its taste. Its
effect is generally most exhilarating and enlivening. Oxide of
zinc (flores zinci) is occasionally used in convulsive affections,
with or without small doses of opium. Valerianate of zinc has
been employed in acute cases, where nervous phenomena were
prominent, and the patient was noisy and excited. After its use,
opium has sometimes been found more efficacious. The difficult
subject of bleeding in insanity is slightly touched upon. It has
been resorted to in a few exceptional cases; and a moderate
bleeding is stated to be useful in incipient meningitis, where
there is absolute plethora, or an engorgement of the vessels of the
brain. Cases therefore occur in which it is decidedly indicated.
But it is not generally recommended; on the contrary, Dr.
Winge denounces it as usually most hurtful?often inducing
collapse, or an incurable form of insanity. For producing deriva-
tion of blood from the head, and to promote menstruation,
Junod's boot is spoken of in a commendatory way. Dr Winge
has never seen secondary cerebral congestion, or dangerous re-
action?cerebral or local?result from its use. It is usually
applied to one limb at a time; so that if it be placed on the right
leg or arm to-day, it is applied to the left to-morrow; or it may
be applied on the same day, for a short time, first to the one limb
and then to the other. Sometimes, however, it was borne so
well by the patient, that it could be applied to both extremities
at once. Warm and tepid baths are commended as not only in
themselves good, tending to produce sleep, subdue erethism, and
restore and increase the action of the skin, but as most useful in
assisting the action of medicinal remedies. The prolonged warm-
bath, zvith cold douche to the head, is likewise extensively em-
ployed, after the manner of Gaustad. Many of the foregoing
remedies, medicinal or otherwise, have been tried experimentally
only, and for comparatively short periods; but their bare enume-
ration suffices to indicate the enterprising and enlightened spirit
which guides the practice of the psychologists of Norway.
Let us now briefly glance at the lunacy laws of Norway, the
Government machinery for the treatment of the insane and the
regulation of asylums; and thereafter let us consider the statistics
of insanity in Norway, according to the census of 1845, with a
view specially to ascertain the extent to which proper accommo-
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 285
elation?that is, public asylum accommodation?lias been provided
for her insane population. The law of the Storthing?which is also
the impei'ial law, having received the imperial fiat or imprimatur?
relating to lunacy, is a modest 4t0 pamphlet of some five pages,
bearing the signature of Oscar, Iving of Norway and Sweden,
and dated at Malmo, 17tli August, 1848.* It consists of but
five short, concise chapters, divided into twenty-one sections. The
preamble narrates that " Vi Oscar af Guds Raade Konge til Norge
og Sverige, de Gothers og Venders," proclaim by these presents that
we have had laid before us the statute or decree of the Storthing,f
of the 11th of July of this year (1848); and the Royal proclama-
tion winds up by adopting and confirming, like as we do Kereby
adopt and confirm, this statute or decree henceforth as the ?a,w of
the land. The first chapter is devoted to the subject of the
regulations anent the construction and management of asylums
(om Sindssygeasylers Ojprettelse og Bestyrelse). There are eight sec-
tions, which I cannot, of course, here embody at full length,?nor
is this necessary. Section 1 provides that all asylums must be
authorized by Royal sanction; and, with a view hereto, it requires
that there should be submitted to Government full plans of the
buildings and grounds of all proposed asylums, with estimates
thereanent. The petitioners must exhibit the details of their
scheme of management, including, for instance, the list of officers,
and their proportion to the number of patients; the pauper
dietary, the industrial resources, the means of social recreation,
of classification, of restraint, the provisions for cleanliness, &c.
It enacts that an asylum must have no connexion with other in-
stitutions of any kind, that the site must be salubrious, the pro-
vision for occupation and exercise abundant, and that there shall
be a due separation of the sexes, and a proper classification of the
patients, according to the phase or form of insanity or otherwise.
Section 2 relates to the licensing or authorization of private asy-
lums. Section 3 refers to the medical officers of asylums, who must
be duly qualified by law. Section 4 admonishes to social harmony
in asylums, and advises constant employment; recommends that
the application of seclusion and mechanical restraint should be
as seldom as possible?only when absolutely necessary ; enacts
that there shall be no corporal punishment (legemlig Revselse
maa iJcke finde Sted). Section 5 enacts that in every asylum be
kept a " Personal Protocol," or register of patients, which will
"Lov om Sindssyges Behandling og Forpleining."
+ The "Storthing," or Norwegian Parliament, meets every three years; it con-
sists of the " Lagthing," or Upper House, and the " Odelsthing," or Common
House. Measures passed by it require the Royal sanction before they can become
law, unless they pass through both divisions of the house in three successive
Storthings.
286 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
contain the full names of eacli patient, with his or her age, birth-
place, and occupation, as well as the name of the party at whose
instance or request he or she was admitted; and a "Behandlings
Protocol," or register of treatment, which shall contain the name
of every patient placed in seclusion or under mechanical restraint,
with the grounds for such treatment and its duration, and shall
also exhibit the number of patients daily employed, with the
nature of such occupation. The "Personal Protocol" shall
further contain, within eight days after the admission of each
patient, an account of his or her physical and mental state ; the
date of deaths, with the causes thereof; the date of discharges or
removals, with the names of the persons at whose instance such
removals or discharges have taken place ; the grounds or causes
thereof; the condition of the patient on removal; and, so far as
possible, his or her future residence. The protocols or registers
?which the reader will at once recognise to be almost identical
with the asylum registers in this country?are ordered to be laid
before, or exhibited to, the Commissioners of Control (Gontrolcom -
missairerne), or Commissioners in Lunacy, as wre call them in this
country, at every visit, by whom they will be examined, and
thereafter subscribed with any remarks regarding the entries
which they deem it necessary or advisable to make. Section G
provides that the superintendent or physician to every asylum
shall, every three months, send extracts from the protocols men-
tioned in the preceding section, with a copy of the remarks of the
Commissioners therein, as well as an Annual Report of the general
condition of the establishment under his charge, to the Board of
Control (Controlcommission). Section 7 enacts that control
over each asylum be vested in a body of Commissioners, who
must reside in the neighbourhood, so as to be at all times acces-
sible ; this board to consist of three members, of whom one
must be a qualified medical man, appointed by the King. A
special code of instructions is drawn up by Government for their
guidance.* Every asylum may, in addition, be inspected by any
person specially appointed for that purpose by the King, at
such times and in such manner as he, the King, sees fit. Sec-
tion 8 relates to the period when the act or law comes into
operation.
Chapter II. relates to the admission of patients (om Sindssyges
Optagelse i Asyler). Section 9 empowers the superintendent or
physician of each asylum to inquire into the advisability or
* " Instrux for Controlcomnrissioner i Overeenstemmelse med Lov om Sinds-
syges Beliandling og Forpleining af 17de August, 1848."
"Instructions for the Commissioners of Control, in accordance with the Law of
17th August, 1848, relating to the Maintenance and Treatment of the Insane."
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 287
necessity of admitting each applicant, either on the ground of
his own mental state, or for the safety and security of the public,
and to decide thereanent, it being provided that in case of such
applicant or his representatives being dissatisfied with the deci-
sion of such superintendent or physician, he or they may appeal
to, and must abide by, the deliverance of the Board of Control.
Section ] 0 defines the duty of the police in regard to insane
persons committing breaches of the public peace, or who have no
relatives or parties responsible for their conduct or maintenance.
Section 11 provides that a report of each admission, extracted
from the " Personal Protocol" before referred to, along with an
account of the patient's condition, be sent to the Board of
Control within forty-eight hours after such admission. The board
shall, immediately in cases of complaint or under unusual cir-
cumstances of any kind, or, in ordinary cases, at their next visit
to the asylum, institute such inquiries as will enable them to
decide whether the patient is a fit subject for confinement or
not.
Chapter III. relates to the discharge of patients (om Sindssyges
UcltrcBclelse af Asyler). Section 12 sanctions the discharge, by
the superintendent or physician, of recovered cases. Section 13.
The discharge of patients uncured (improved only, or unimproved)
is to a certain extent at the option of their relatives or guardians?
that is, provided they have not been placed in the asylum at the in-
stance of the legal authorities, or the removal proposed is not,
in the opinion of the superintendent or physician, fraught with
danger either to the patient or to the public?in which latter
cases the decision of the Board of Control is final and binding.
Section 14. Discharges and deaths of all patients are to be re-
ported, along with an account of the condition of each patient at
the time of such discharge or death, by the superintendent or phy-
sician, both to the Board of Control and to the relatives or guar-
dians,?to the former within forty-eight hours, and to the latter as.
soon as possible after such event.
Chapter IY. relates to patients living in or with their own
families, or in private houses or asylums (om Sindssyge der forblive
lios deres Familie, eller udsczttes i privat Forpleining). Section J o
renders it compulsory to report without delay, to a qualified
medical man, either directly or through the clergymen of the
parish or district, every case of insanity, or supposed insanity,
said medical man being in such event called upon forthwith to
examine and report as to the nature of the case, the expediency
and form of confinement, &c. Section 10 renders it obligatory
to place all violent patients in asylums. It is the duty of
medical men to report to the legal authorities all cases of doubtful
NO. X.?NEW SERIES. U
288 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
insanity which may come to their knowledge in private practice.
Section 17 places harmless insane paupers, who, from the nature
of their insanity, do not require special treatment or confinement
on the footing of ordinary paupers in regard to maintenance, &c.'
Section 18 obliges medical men to report at the end of every
year to the " Medicinal-bestyrelse"?apparently a sort of supreme
national medical board?the names and condition of their insane
patients.
Chapter V. consists of general regulations (almindelige Bestem-
melser). Section 19 relates to the source of payment of board
for paupers, and the allocation of the expense of their mainte-
nance in asylums. The sum is to be assessed on the native dis-
trict or birthplace in certain events. Section 20 enacts that no
insane patient be kept along with criminals. Section 21 esta-
blishes fines and punishment for neglect or infringement of any
of the foregoing laws or regulations, with withdrawal of licence
in the case of private asylums or houses, &c.
It is scarcely necessary to call attention to the stringent ten-
dency of the enactments of the Norwegian Law of Lunacy of
1848 ; but it may not be amiss to refer specially, as a contrast
to the bulky, confusing, contradictory, and most unsatisfactory
lunacy laws of England and Scotland, to its extreme shortness
conciseness, and simplicity. In connexion with the Norwegian
law, as briefly here expounded, I have yet to advert to the powers
of the Board of Control, as given in their special code of instruc-
tions from Government already quoted. The Commissioners of
Control are entrusted with the supervision of the treatment of the
patients, and the economy of the establishment, in all asylums.
They lay down both general rules applicable to all asylums
tind special rules for individual establishments. They visit each
asylum twice a month, investigating all matters falling within
their jurisdiction; but they may visit, or any individual member
of the Board of Control may visit, whenever they or he shall see
fit or necessary ; they may examine particularly into the nature and
amount of work done by patients, of their social pleasures and
creature comforts, into the kind, frequency, and duration of re-
straint, the nature of the dietary, the condition of instruction and
religion, the due classification of patients, &c. They receive and
inquire into all complaints from patients or attendants, and thev
determine the kind and amount of punishment for offences
They also receive and inquire into complaints or statements
in reference both to the admission and discharge of patients ? in
cases of differences of opinion between the superintendents or
physicians of asylums, and the relatives or guardians of patients;
or in cases of appeal against the decision or procedure of such
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 289
medical officers. They make entries in the asylum registers of
all matters falling under their observation which may seem to
them calling for, or worthy of, record. They must account for
all instances of absence from duty on their own part, and make a
marking of the causes thereof in the asylum registers. Their
powers and privileges appear to be otherwise very similar to
those of our Commissioners in Lunacy in this country, except
that they are more special and minute. I think I have said
enough to prove that the Norwegians are by no means behind
ourselves in respect of a liberal, humane, and enlightened treat-
ment of their insane.
I must now draw my remarks to a close, by a few considerations
on the statistics of insanity in Norway ; and here I have to
acknowledge my obligations to the several publications of Pro-
fessor Hoist, of the University of Chvistiania, on this subject, as
well as to that gentleman individually, for much valuable in-
formation regarding the insane and asylums in Norway, com-
municated in the course of conversation. He has published the
statistics of insanity as gathered from three several censuses
of Norway?viz., those of 1825-6, 1835, and 1845.*
The latest statistics to which I have had access are those
founded on the census of 1845, as contained in a paper published
by Professor Hoist in the "Norwegian Journal of Medicine,"
and kindly given me for the purpose of reference by the Professor
himself.t In order to ensure accurate information, I give his
own tables and remarks unaltered, except so far as translation is
concerned. His paper includes the blind, deaf and dumb, and
leprous; but with these we have here nothing to do, and I have
accordingly omitted all notice of them.
* His investigations will be found in?
1. " Gersons and Julius' Magazin d. auslandischen Literatur d. gesammten
Heilkunde. 1828. July?August, s. 10?23."
2. "Annales d'hygiene publique et de M&l?cine legale." Paris. 1830. Tom. iv.
a. 332?359.
3. " Allg. Zeitschrift f. Psychiatrie und psych.-gerichtl. Medicin. 4 Band. 1847.
a. 479?487."
In his statistics, deduced from the first two censuses, those of 1825-6 and 1835,
he adopts the classification of the forms of insanity employed by Pinel and Esquirol
?viz., a division into the great types of mania, melancholia (monomania), demen-
tia, and idiocy.
f "Sindssyge, Blinde, Dovstumme og Spedalske i Norge den 31 Dec., 1845.
Yed Prof. Dr Frederik Hoist, Aftrykt fra Norsk Magazin for Lsegevidenskaben,
Y. Bd. 1851."
"Statistics of the Insane, Blind, Deaf and Dumb, and Leprous in Norway,
according to the Census of 31st December, 1845."
U 2
290 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
I.-?Table showing the Number of Insane in Towns in Norway, according to the Census of olst December, 1845.
Names of Towns.
Furious.*
M. F.
Total.
Fatuous.t
Congenital.
M.
Subsequent
to Birtli.
H.
F.
Congenital and
Acquired.
M.
F. Total.
Furious and Fatuous.
M.
F.
Total.
Population.
Males. Females.
Total.
Proportion of
Insane
to Population.
Christiania
Drobak
Hvidsteen
Holen
Soon
Moss
Sarpsborg
Frederiksstad...
Frederikshald...
Lillehammer ...
Drammen
Holmsboe
Svelvigen
Kongsberg
Holmestrand ...
Aasgaard strand
Tiinsberg
Sandefjord
Laurvig
Skien
Porsgrund
Brevig
Stathelle
Langesund
Krageroe
Osteriisoer
TVedestrand ...
20
2
12
21
5
1
11
4
13
1
3
4
15
1
*3
*4
*8
2
4
1
*2
9
24
3
1
3
1
"4
12
26
1
2
11
1
11
6
7
2
2
1
5
3
5
16,109
675
41
100
189
1,927
653
1,393
2,788
354
3,910
148
559
1,996
817
216
1,041
336
1,886
1,740
1,043
730
160
304
1,286
942
226
15,594
675
59
99
207
2,096
672
1,323
3,222
341
4,466
145
642
2,140
891
228
1,204
428
2,126
1,937
1,171
725
159
323
1,454
1.0 66
236
31,703
1,350
100
199
396
4,023
1,325
2,716
5,790
695
8,376
293
1,201
4,136
1,708
444
2,245
794
4,012
3,677
2,214
1,455
319
627
1:1321
1:450
1:100
1:132
1:4023
1:679
1:482-5
1:322-2
1:293
1:600-5
1:376
1:280-6
1:794
1:364-7
1:613
1:316-3
1:727-5
1:159-5
1:627
2,740 i 1:548
2,008 i 1:669-3
462 ! 1:92-4
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 291
Table I.?continued.
Names of Towns.
Arendal
Grimstad
Lillesand
Christianssand
Mandal
Farsund
Flekkefjord ...
Soggendal
Egersund
Stavanger
Bergen
Aalesund
Molde
Christianssund
Throndhjem ...
Levanger
Bodoe
Tromsoe
Hammerfest ...
V ardoe
Vadsoe
Total
Furious.*
F. Total.
61
10
53
10
1
2
2
34
114
Fatuous.!
Congenital.
42
34
Subsequent
to Birth.
11
60
F.
1
12
10
Congenital and
Acquired.
M.
1
6
3
2
1
*1
9
17
1
12
8
1
"i
2
2
1
"i
14
16
2
1
7
75 102 109 211 163
Total.
1
1
10
5
4
2
2
23
33
2
2
19
Furious anil Fatuous.
M.
1
7
4
2
2
"i
13
20
1
2
1
36
13
2
2
1
"i
15
21
1
2
1
17
162
Total.
10
1
1
20
6
4
3
2
28
41
2
4
2
53
1,645
379
291
3,962
1,041
488
705
167
587
4,158
11,016
565
557
1,498
6,954
268
121
973
532
113
211
Population.
Males. Females. Total,
325 77,930
1,917
427
280
4,387
1,263
607
905
181
644
4,488
12,513
592
626
1,665
7,824
390
137
1,038
395
80
177
83,945
3,562
806
571
8,349
2,304
1,095
1,610
348
1,231
8,646
23,529
1,157
1,183
3,163
14,778
758
258
2,011
927
193
388
161,875
Proportion of
Insane
to Population.
1:356-2
1:806
1:571
1:447-4
1:384
]:273-7
1:536-6
1:615-5
1:308-8
1:573-9
1:578-5
1:295-7
1:1581-5
1:278-8
1:402-2
1:309
1:388
1:498-1
* The word used by Professor Hoist is Rasende (Gale), which includes mania, monomania, and melancholia of Pinel and Esquirol. He
defines the term to apply to those having a general disturbance or excitation of the cerebral functions, associated with violence, &c.
+ The word used is Fjanter?cases marked by a weakness, or deficiency in the development, of the cerebral functions. He makes two sub-
divisions : congenital cases (idiocy), and acquired, or subsequent to birth, (dementia).
292 ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
II.? Table showing the Number of Insane in Country Districts, or Counties, in Norway, according to the Census of
31 st of December, 1845.
Names of Districts.
Agershuus Amt*
Smaalehnenes .
Hedemarkens
Christians . .
Buskeruds . .
Jarlsbergs and Laurvigs
Bratsbergs . .
Nedenass and Raabyg
delaugets . .
Listers and Mandals
Stavangers . . .
South Bergenhuus .
North Bergenhuus .
Bomsdals . . .
South Throndhjems
North Throndhjems
Nordlands . . .
Finmarkens . . .
Total
Towns. . .
Whole kingdom
Furious (Rascnde),
M. F. Total
427
61
462
53
515
65
37
49
87
74
43
72
47
65
56
74
48
47
44
41
26
14
889
114
1003
Fatuous (Fjanter).
Congenital.
M.
69
42
89
103
81
44
48
63
55
59
68
60
49
52
58
43
14
997
42
1039
74
54
82
119
76
34
42
53
43
46
61
63
46
67
69
42
19
990
34
1024
Subsequent
to Birth.
M. F.
462
60
522
627
75
702
Congenital and
Acquired.
M.
96
63
128
129
113
66
75
87
93
87
101
77
74
92
83
69
26
1459
102
1561
F. Total.
120
87
128
165
138
68
75
72
94
82
104
106
76
94
100
66
42
216
150
256
294
251
134
150
159
187
169
205
183
150
186
183
135
68
1617 3076
109! 211
1726 3287
Furious and Fatuous.
M.
133
80
152
176
143
88
111
106
119
119
142
95
94
112
99
83
34
1886
163
2049
F. Total.
148
107
153
205
182
89
111
100
133
106
137
136
103
118
125
78
48
2079
162
2241
281
]87
305
381
325
177
222
206
252
225
279
231
197
230
224
161
82
3965
325
4290
37,713
29,710
42,441
49,899
34,984
26,074
30,148
23,078
23,803
33,884
46,012
38,176
37,240
36,765
32,267
31,974
20,142
Population.
Males. Females.
574,310
77,930
652,240
37,971
30,058
44,677
52,136
36,129
26,592
31,711
23,445
24,757
34,101
47,448
39,802
38,571
37,786
33,545
33,280
20,277
592,286
83,945
676,231
Total.
75,684
59,768
87,118
102,035
71,113
52,666
61,859
46,523
48,560
67,985
93,460
77,978
70.811
75,551
65.812
65,254
40,412
1,166,596
161,875
1,328,471
Propor-
tion of
Insane to
Popula-
tion.
1:269-3
1:339-2
1:288-8
1:267-7
1:218-8
1:296-9
1:278-6
1:225-8
1:192-7
1:302-1
1:335
1:337-5
1:384-9
1:324-1
1:293-8
1:405-3
1:492-9
1:294-2
1:498-1
1:309-7
* 4.mt is the largest civil division of the country, and may be considered equivalent to our county. Each Amt is presided over by a
Government or Revenue Officer, who may be regarded as sipiilar tp our Sheriff,
ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY. 293
III.?The following Table shows the Number of the Insane in the aggregate Towns
of Norway, during the Years 1825-6, 1835, and 1845, respectively.
1. Furious ("Mania ")
(Rasende) I Monomania j
? _ , (Subsequent to birth (de-">
2 Fatuous S mentia) ..... j
(Fjanter) (_ prom birth (idiocy) . . .
Total
1845.
M.
163
F.
Total,
114
135
76
1835.
M. F. Total
176
34
118
80
61
83
342
1825-6.
M. F. Total.
IY.?The following Table shows the Number of the Insane in the aggregate
Country Districts of Norway, during the Tears 1825-6, 1835, and 1845,
1. Furious < Mania ")
(Rasende) X Monomania) ' ' '
2. Fatuous
(Fjanter) |From birth (idiocy) .
Total
1845.
M.
427
462
997
1886
F.
462
627
990
2079
Total.
1089
1987
3965
1835.
M. F. Total
f 306
(.269
1637
299
286
233
779
1597
605
555
459
1615
3234
1825-6.
M. F. Total
796
445
311
287
637
Y.?The following Table is made up of the two previous ones, and exhibits the
Number of the Insane in the aggregate Towns and Country Districts of
Norway?that is, in the whole Kingdom?during the Years 1825-6,1835,
and 1845, respectively.
1. Furious ("Mania ")
(Rasende) 1 Monomania J " ' *
2. Fatuous ("Subsequent to birth7
(Fjanter) ?< (dementia) . . .5
(.From birth (idiocy ).
Total
M. F. Total,
522
1039
515
702
1024
2241
1003
1224
2062
4290
1835.
M. F. Total.
("363
(.304
261
885
1813
360
331
259
813
1763
723
635
3576
M.
270
198
168
369
1005
242
178
173
311
904
Total,
512
376
341
YI.?Table showing the proportion of the Insane to the General Population
of Norway, during the Years 1825-6, 1835, and 1845, respectively.
1. in towns . . . .
2. In country districts
3'. Whole kingdom .
1845.
M. F. Total,
1:478-1
1:304-5
1:318-9
1:518-2
1:284-9
1:301-3
1:498-1
1:294-2
1:309-7
1835.
M.
1:349-2
1:320
1:3229
F. Total.
1:406 9
1:339-3
1:345-7
1:377-2
1:329-6
1:334-1
M.
1:449-4
1:5166
1:508-5
1825-6.
Total.
1:5539
1-.603-6
1:597-5
1:498-7
1:557-8
1:550-7
294i ON INSANITY AND LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN NORWAY.
VII.?There is a remarkable cliange in tlie number of insane
during the two decennial periods from 1825 to 18-35, and from
1835 to 1845, as the subjoined Table shows :?
1. In towns . , . .
2. In country districts .
3. Whole kingdom . .
1835-15,
Increased
or
diminished
absolutely.
Proportion per cent,
of increase
or diminution.
Without
relation
to the
Popula-
tion,
- 17 -5?
+ 731 I +22-6-
+ 714 +199-
In pro-
portion
to the
Popula-
tion.
?21'3"
+ 12 -
+ 7-9-
1825-35.
Increased
absolutely.
+ 113
+ 1551
+ 1667
Per cent, increased.
Without
relation
to the
Popula-
tion.
+ 49'3?
+ 92-5-
+ 87-3-
In pro-
portion
to the
Popula-
tion.
+37-S
+ 69
+ 64-S
The number has, on the whole, increased during both decennial periods; but there is a
diminution in the proportion of cases from towns.
VIII.?The increase has been greater during both decennial
periods than the relative increase of the population :?
In 1835-45. In 1825-35.
In towns the increase lias been . . . 25-5g
In country districts 9*5-   13-9-
In whole kingdom 11*2-   13*6-
Whereas during the first decennium an increase occurred
among all classes of the insane, during the second it has been in
the classes of dementia and idiocy; the number of cases of mania
and melancholia (rasende) having considerably diminished,
thus:?
In 1835-45. In 1825-35.
1. Furious (Rasende) ^ MelanCioiia ~ 201? { + 09?
2. Fatuous (Fjanter) j fd??'Ia ; | J "ill + 150-
IX.?It will be noticed, from the foregoing Tables, that there
is a much smaller proportion of insane in the towns than in the
country, being in the former 1:498*1, and in the latter 1:294*2 ;
hence it might be supposed that the causes of insanity are more
rife in the latter. In Holen, Sarpsborg, Lillehammer, Holme-
strand, Aasgaardstrand, Soggendal, Levanger, Bodoe, and Vardoe,
which are all thinly-peopled seaport or market towns,?Sarpsborg
and Holmestrand, however, having respectively upwards of 1300
and 1700 inhabitants,?and which have an aggregate population
of 5928, there are no insane persons. In the country districts, or
amts, the number was greatest in Christians, Listers and Mandals,
Buskeruds, Nedenoes and Raabygdelaugets amts?being respec-
tively 1:137*1, 1:192*7, 1:218*8, and 1:225*8; least in Nord-
lands and Finmarkens amts?being respectively 1:405*3 and
1:493.
CHARLOTTE BRONTE?A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY 295
From these Tables it would appear tliat the insane popula-
tion of Norway is about 5000. In 1825-6, it was 1909 ; in
1835, 3576; and in 1845, 4290. At this rate of increase, 5000
is not too large a number to set down against the year 1857, a
period of twelve years having elapsed since the date of the latest
census upon which my calculations are based. In truth, it must
be far below the real number, but it is sufficiently accurate for
my present purpose. We have already seen, on the other hand,
that Gaustad has present accommodation for between 160 and
170 patients, and prospective accommodation for 250?say 250 ;
and that the Mangelsgaarden Asylum cannot admit above 60.
The other Norwegian asylums are?one in Opslo, a suburb, or
part of Christiania, with room for 30 or 40 patients, in round
numbers ; one in Bergen, for 70 or 80 ; one in Throndjhem, for 60
or 70 ; one in Stavanger, for 8 or 10?all on the west coast?and
one in Christiansand, for 30 or 40.* Now, if we take the maximum
numbers given above as representing the actual accommodation
provided at present in Norway for her insane population, we
will find the total to be 550, which, being deducted from 5000,
the supposed total number of insane persons in Norway at the
present date, leaves the enormous balance of 4450 apparently
inadequately provided for, or not provided for at all! Much,
therefore, still remains to be achieved in Norway in regard to
proper provision for her insane; but with her liberality, and
modern views on the treatment of insanity, and the construction
and management of asylums, I have no fear as to the ultimate
result.
/ y
* My informant was Professor Hoist, if I remember aright: the numbers are
merely approximative, and not actual numbers.
