Body and Mind
==============

THE JOURNAL
OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND
MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
JANUARY 1, 1858.
, /
Art. I.

IT. is a curious and interesting study to trace the variety of
opinions which have been held concerning the respective exis-
tence^ and the mutual relations of the Body and the Intellectual
-principle?opinions which have, in turn, taken up every position
between the absolute non-existence of Mind, save as a form
or function of Matter, on the one hand ; and, on the other, the
merely phenomenal existence of Matter dependent upon the ?
variations of a sentient or thinking immaterial existence, the
Mind. It was only at a comparatively late period in the world's
history that Mind obtained from philosophy its formal recog-
nition as a distinct entity ; as something superadded to, and
distinct from, Matter ; closely united, yet not allied ; dependent
for its manifestation, but independent in essence. In these
latter days, when Mind and Matter are the watchwords equally
?f domestic discussion, of rival though friendly schools of philo-
sophy, and of fierce sectarian controversy, it is difficult for us to
realize to ourselves the state of the schools in which the laws of
human nature were taught as a great whole. Yet so it was ; it
was with man as with the universe at large?he must be one
and undivided. As the first attempts at the formation of
systems of cosmogony were too vast in their designs to do less
lan account on one theory for the whole cosmical phenomena,
ie formation of the universe was ascribed to one principle, as
^ ' at?ms, attraction and repulsion, fire, harmony, numbers,
? i'. u?te being taken of the ever progressive workings of the
lllcu ^1 forces continually in operation throughout nature, or
g^nical results of the conditional existence of matter,
prise ?th t ^ case *n ^ie macrocosm> we need feel little sur-
ture sli a iri m\crocosm, man's superficially homogeneous na-
*rn t!U reinain long unanalysed; still less, when we consider

what an utterly inexplicable phenomenon is involved in its
analysis into a material mass, and an immaterial active principle;
no less than that something invisible, impalpable, indetectible by
any accessible means of investigation, must take possession of a
mass of inert matter,anddo with itwhatever mayseem good unto it.
Bather may we wonder at the boldness and originality of con-
ception which led Anaxagoras, in the fifth century before the
Christian era, to proclaim, in the face of all the incomprehensible
theories of the earth and man, that a Supreme Intelligence, or Mind,
was the cause of all those phenomena hitherto attributed to Fate,
Chance, or some other shadow of a name; and that man was a
compound being, consisting of a body and a spirit. It is true
that the bubbling, seething, restless, explosive mind must have
made itself felt to many, in constantly asserting its supremacy
over matter ; the difficulty of accounting for these things seems
to have been obviated by considering the soul as consisting of
finer atoms than the body; and no distinct enunciation of a
separate principle was attained to. All liononr, then, to Anax-
agoras, worthily surnamed by his contemporaries, vovg, or Intel-
ligence. Wild and impossible as were his notions of natural
causation; eclipsed as was his glory by that of his great pupil
and successor, Socrates ; yet to him belongs the almost matchless
merit of announcing, amidst a heathen world, and without the
light of any external revelation, the primitive conception of a
One Omnipotent Creative Cause.*

From this time forward, the \pv>(Ti,f or anima, which had
* Socrates appears to have been dissatisfied with Anaxagoras, because he could
not fully apply his own conception to the practical explanation of nature's mysteries.
In the Phaedo, speaking to Ccebes, he says?" Having once heard a person reading
from a book written by Anaxagoras, which said that it is Intelligence that sets in
order and is the cause of all things, I was delighted with this cause, and it appeared
to me to be in a manner well that Intelligence should be the cause of all things."
He then proceeds to state how he expected that the author would be able
to explain all phenomena according to this intelligence, by considering how it
would be best for such and such things to exist, seeing that so they must be best if
thus ordered; also, "That he would instruct me whether the earth is round or
flat, and would explain the cause and necessity of its being so," &c. " I was in
like manner prepared to ask respecting the sun and moon and stars, with respect
to their velocities, &c.; in what way it is better for them both to act and be affected
as they are." .... "From this wonderful hope I was speedily thrown down,
when, as I advanced and read over his works, I meet with a man who makes no
use of intelligence, nor assigns any cause for the ordering of all things, but makes
the causes to consist of air, ether, and water, and many other things equally absurd."
In this manner Anaxagoras appears to have been in advance of Socrates, though
he could not fully wield his own idea.

*f- A contemporary writer makes the following remarks illustrative of this
subject:?"We'do a certain Greek word the honour to translate it soul; but
it is in fact equally applicable to the vegetative life of a cabbage, to the animal
life of a sheep, and to the spiritual life of an apostle. An ordinary Greek
thought his body just as much of the essence of his humanity as his spirit,
and bodily just as important as spiritual perfection. If St. Paul's thorn in
hitherto appeared to be almost equally applicable to man and
the brutes, and even to vegetables, had a more specific sig-
nificance ; and man's compound nature became almost impercep-
tibly a recognised dogma of philosophy.

It is often the case, in the earliest endeavours after truth,
that the practical advantages are by no means commensurate
with the actual progress made in knowledge. Under the early
errors as to man's nature, the body was carefully trained along
with the mind; both were treated as fellow-workers in one cause.
The Academe, the Lyceum, and the Cynosarges were schools for
the body as well as the mind?there the wrestler, the discobolus,
and the philosopher met for common purposes.

Under the advanced views, the body became gradually neglected '
and despised, though this result was naturally of tardy growth.
Slowly, however and certainly, the supremacy of mind was
acknowledged ; a powerful impulse was also given in the same
direction by the diffusion of Christianity, and especially by the
gorgeous visions of a glorious immortality which were opened to
the astonished minds of men awaking from a long Pagan night.
Body and mind were thenceforth held, by philosopher and Chris-
tian, to have separate and antagonistic interests. To the former,
the body was a clog, an impediment to the acquisition of know-
ledge?a something perpetually interfering, by its pains, its
sorrows, and its imperfections, with the clear views of truth
which he supposed the unencumbered soul would obtain?con-
stantly distracting the attention by its material relations and
requirements?ever of the earth, earthy?tending to its own
source, binding and dragging the soul along with it.* To the
latter, the Christian, the body was sin incarnate, the source
of all evil and temptation, the barrier between the soul and
heaven.

Epictetus may well illustrate the views of the philosopher.
When severely treated by his master, Epaphroditus, under the
most intense agony he smiled, and told him that he would break
his leg with twisting it. This actually did occur, but without dis-
turbing his equanimity. On being questioned as to the cause of
the flesh was a visible deformity, a Greek educator would have thought it better for
im to be put to death as soon as he was born, than to live a burden and a disgrace
? 13 community and to himself. Plato himself would have regarded it as an
W^l*6 ^'e art medicine to cherish the flickering flame of life in a Pascal or a
to pm ^pictetus summed up all that was most startling and paradoxical
a tL a^an ear wllen he said, in his own lines on himself?' I was a slave, a cripple,
&gar and a favourite of the gods.' "?Saturday Review, Nov. 7, 1857.
*
T .... Noxia corpora tardant,
lerrenique hebetant artus, moribundaque membra.
xlinc metuunt, cupiuntque, dolent, gaudentque, nec auras
uspiciunt, clausse tenebris et carcere cseco.
B 2
4 BODY V. MIND.
this astonishing composure, he merely replied that the body was
" external."*
In the early centuries of the Christian era, the body seemed
to be ever of less and less estimation. There is something even
amusing in the excess of contempt in which it was held, and
the abuse heaped upon it. A prison-house, a cage, a weary
load of mortality?these were, by comparison, complimentary
terms. Gregory Nyssen calls it 6a/xT)g Ipyacrrripiov " a fuliginous
ill-savoured shop, a prison, an ill-savoured sink," as the words are
translated by an old divine. It is "a lump of flesh which moul-
dereth away and draweth near to corruption whilst we speak of
it." St. Augustine defines the two natures thus, " Domine, duo
creasti; alterum prope te, alteram prope nihil." At the best,
the body was considered a workshop for the soul, ek tov awfxaTog
th] \pvxn <l>i\oTrovr)(Tai. The torments of the body were so utterly
despised, as scarcely to be considered personal matters :?
Tormenta, carcer, ungulse,
Stridensque flammis lamina,
Atque ipsa pcenarum ultima,
Mors.
In fine, the body was considered the source of all evil, and, as
such, worthy of no consideration. The Platonists, as St. Augus-
tine says, " hold that these our mortal members do produce the
effects of fear, desire, joy, and sorrow, in our bodies ; from which
four perturbations (as Tully calls them) or passions, the whole
inundation of man's enormities have their source and spring."-}*
The Manicheans put the climax to these reproaches cast upon
the body. They maintained that the body was so evil that its
creation cannot be ascribed to the same author as that of the
soul. Farindon says, " The Manichee, observing that war which
is betwixt it (the body) and the soul, alloweth it no better maker
than the devil;" and Ludovicus Yives, to the same effect, says,
" They held all flesh the work of the devil, not of God, and there-
fore they forbad their hearers to kill any creatures, lest they
should offend the Prince of Darkness, whence they said all flesh
had originated." In their opinion, the great object of the govern-
ment of the god of light was to deliver the captive souls of men
from their corporeal prisons. But one thing remained to be done
after this, and that was reserved for the philosophers of our own
era?viz., to deny the body any existence whatever, save as a
* The small estimation in which the body was often held is not obscurely inti-
mated by the question and address of .ZEneas to his father, who had spoken of
souls returning to their bodies :?
O pater, anne aliquas ad ccelum hinc ire putandum est
Sublimes animas, iteruuique ad tarda reverti
Corpora ? quse lucis miseris tam dira cupido ?
+ Translation by Ludovicus Yives.
BODY V. MIND. 0
phase, quality, or affection of the mind. This annihilation, how-
ever, it only shared in common with matter in general; in short,
with all external nature.
Thus was an antagonism, a division of interests, instituted
between the material and the immaterial elements of mans
nature?one which, in various forms, in accordance with the
spirit of the times, has been propagated even until the present:
now one and now the other being held in paramount esteem,
in accordance with the demands necessary to be made Upon
their functions. Here, brain has been had in honour; there,
thews and sinews. But the present is essentially an iron and
a practical age; both strong limbs and thoughtful minds are
in requisition; and the spirit of the age is in nothing more
manifest than in the multiform attempts, by the spread of
rational education, and the increased attention to the sanitary
condition of the masses, to balance the interests of these two
hitherto conflicting elements. But according to the infinite
varieties of mind, and the different aspects in which these at-
tempts are viewed, there must ever be differences of opinion as
to the extent and nature of the remedies applied to existing evils.
Notes of alarm are sounded, and responded to; parties are
formed; watchwords are in every mouth; discussions, perhaps
somewhat acrimonious, take place; finally, out of evil comes
good, for the sense of the community is ascertained, and the evil
is modified, if not eradicated.

Such is the case at present. Mr. Gladstone, at the conclusion
of an address to the members of the Liverpool Collegiate Institu-
tion, made some allusion to the antagonism of which we have
been speaking:?

"There still remains," he says, "in some quarters a vulgar notion
that there is a natural antagonism between corporeal and mental excel-
lence. I trust that corporal education will never be forgotten; that
the pursuit of manly sports will always receive the countenance and
encouragement, not only of the boys who engage in thern^ but of the
masters who are responsible for the welfare of those boys.
Mr. Gladstone, denying the reality of the antagonism, illus-
trates his position by the case of General Havelock, who, when
at the Charter-house, was one of the quietest of the quiet, " who
used to stand looking on whilst others played, and whose general
meditative manner procured for him the name of 1 Philosopher,
subsequently diminished to < Old Phlos'"?yet who is now " dis-
tinguishing himself by a temper, a courage, an activity, a zeal, a
consistency, and a dogged and dauntless resolution, equal at least
to that of any man that England has produced this century.
ibis casual allusion of Mr. Gladstone's gave rise to a power-
fully-written but somewhat alarming essay upon the dangers of
mental pressure, from our leading journal, which has caused much
discussion pro and con. As this essay embraces the entire case
for the prosecution?that is, the whole of the allegations brought
by Body against Mind?we shall quote it in great part, as a pre-
liminary to an examination of the question in some detail as to
the effect of mental labour upon bodily health, in relation to age,
temperament, and other circumstances of perhaps equal import-
ance with either of these :?

" It was a great point in ancient philosophy, the value it attached
to the body and the proper training of it, the preservation of its health,
strength, and all its proper powers. Ancient philosophy did not despise
the body, did not regard it as a mere husk or outside of human nature,
or treat it as a despicable and absolutely vile thing; it regarded the
body as a true part of human nature, deserving of proper deference, for
the failure of which it was sure to retaliate fearfully upon the whole
man. Hence the gymnastics of the Greeks, which were not only
fostered by the boxers and wrestlers, the drill-sergeants and corporals
of that day, but went on under the solemn sanction of sages. There
is a distinction between the tone of ancient and modern thought on
this subject, and the ancient has certainly an advantage over the modern
on this particular point?at least, over the modern before the latest
improvements. It has been too much the fashion with us to decry
the body, to talk it down, to speak scornfully of it in every possible
way, to be always comparing it with the mind for the sole purpose of
showing how vile and worthless it is in comparison?a mode of speaking
which, even if it is true abstractedly, may be indulged in such a degree
as to involve a practical untruth. Our didactic books have been full
of the praises of midnight oil, all our oracles of learning have been
vehement in favour of unsparing study, and the mind has been sub-
jected to the most acute stimulants, while the body has been left to
take care of itself as it can. Of course, the great mass of our school
and university youth takes the law into its own hands under these
circumstances, and adopts very effective measures against being goaded
to suicidal study, but a certain proportion have responded to the whip,
and responded but too eagerly.

" These have been the tactics, we say, of our modern masters of the
schools and encouragers of learning?an unsparing use of the goad, a
merciless appeal to student ambition and emulation, as if it was
impossible to stir up these motives too deeply. But how onesided is
a discipline which applies this powerful, sharp, and penetrating stimulus
to the mind, while it leaves the body to itself, or rather, what is worse,
suppresses and flings aside the claims of the body, which has to fare
as it can under the exclusive and oppressive dominion of its rival!
How partial is such a system, and superficial because partial! After
all our sublime abuse of the body, a body man has, and that body is
part of himself, and if he is not fair to it, he himself will be the sufferer.
The whole man, we say, will be the sufferer?not the corporeal manonly, but the intellectual man as well. Particular capacities may
receive even a monstrous development by the ust, vf an exclusive stimu-
lus, but the reason and judgment of the man as a whole must be injured
if one integral part of him is diseased. If the body is thoroughly out
of condition, the mind will suffer; it may show a morbid enlargement
of one or other facultv of it, but the directing principle?that which
alone can apply any faculty or knowledge to a good purpose, can regu-
late its use and check its extravagances?is weakened and reduced.
How miserable is the spectacle of morbid learning, with its buried
hoards, and its voracious, insatiable appetite for acquisition, united with
the judgment of a  child! Such study does, in short, leave men chil-
dren with remarkable memories and acquisitive powers, who know as
much history, philosophy, and poetry as would make a learned man,
but who are not a bit the nearer being men in consequence, because
they simply know by rote what they know.?they do not understand
their own knowledge. This is to a considerable extent the case with
all morbid learning, where the general intelligence has not been culti-
vated,?which general intelligence depends on the soundness and health
of the whole man, body and mind too. The picture of a Kirke White
dying at the age of 21 of nocturnal study, wet towels round heated
temples, want of sleep, want of exercise, want of air, want of every-
thing which Nature intended for the body, is not only melancholy
because it is connected with an early death; it is melancholy also 011
account of the certain effect which would have followed such a course
unchecked if he had lived. We see, when we look down the vista of
such a life, an enfeebled and a prostrated man, very fit to be made a lion
of, like a clever child, and to be patted on the head by patrons and
patronesses of genius, but without the proper intellect and judgment
of a man. How sad even is the spectacle of that giant of German
learning, Neander, lying his whole length on the floor among his books,
absorbing recondite matter till the stupor of repletion comes over him,
forgetful of time and place, not knowing where he is, on the earth or
in the moon, led like a child by his sister to his lecture-room when the
lecture hour came, and led away home again when it is over! Is 111s
humanity, we ask, as Providence designed us to be ? Is it legitimate,
rational human nature ? It can hardly be called so. m.

" We must not let the mind feed itself by the rum of the body lhe
mind has no right to this indulgence, this dissipation, and whole-length,
abandonment to its cravings, any more than the body has to sensual
indulgence. This mental dram, the noxious stimulant which produces
this overgrowth of mind, is as contrary to nature as the coarser stimu-
lant which unduly excites the body. The mind should be a good,
+wS' healthJ feeder, but not a glutton. We have no right to despise
e ody, or to speak of it only and exclusively as something which is
vile m comparison with the mind. This language will lead astray. It
ardent, ambitious student youth neglect health, and abandon
V^s ^.? the process of acquisition at the cost of body, and u 1-
j.* ? " (, too. Do not use too unsparingly the motive of ambi-
and "\ !ln^r with youth. It is a motive which is perfectly honest
natural W3thin proper limits, but when pushed to excess it produces
8 BODY V. MIND.
a feeble, sickly, unmanly growth of character; it creates that whole
"brood of fantastic theorists, sentimentalists, and speculators which, in
art, science, and theology alike, are the seducers and the corruptors of
mankind."?Times, Oct. 28th, 1857.

The case, though certainly the extreme case, of the injury that
extreme and misdirected application of the mind may do to the
body, is here fairly stated; the illustrations, however, are not fortu-
nate. Kirke White, from his earliest infancy, was of so delicate a
constitution as to be unfit (as was supposed) for any active occupa-
tion. The question may naturally arise?Would so active and
irritable a mind, united to so feeble a frame, have lacked opportunity
under any circumstances of rapidly wearing out both itself and its
earthly tenement ? The wasting fever of such a mind is not to
be allayed by any restrictions as to hours of study, rest, or gene-
ral hygiene. Neander was simply a recluse?a solitary student;
nothing worse seems proved or alleged. That he was so absorbed
in his favourite pursuits as to be not very conversant with ordi-
nary every-day matters, and even to be a child in many respects,
in no respect distinguishes him from thousands of other men
whose whole existence is bound up in concerns of much less
moment. He lived to a ripe old age, in the enjoyment of mode-
rate health, and all his intellectual faculties, we believe, to the
very close of his life.

Setting aside the illustrations, there are some most important
allegations, either distinctly expressed or implied, concerning the
prominence now given to intellectual pursuits, to the neglect and
injury of the bodily health. They amount to this:?
(1.) That mental labour, when approaching to extreme, has
an unfavourable influence upon both the health and the cha-
racter, ruining the former, and rendering the latter "feeble,
sickly, and unmanly " and' that this is especially the case with
young persons.
(2.) That in our educational systems generally, the body is
neglected, and, at its expense, the mind urged beyond its normal
powers.
(3.) That in our universities, in particular, the standard of
requirements for the obtaining of an honourable or high position
is too high.

With the third proposition we are disposed to agree under
certain restrictions and limitations; as no doubt many young
men, originally of feeble and degenerate constitution, ignorant of
any physiological laws, and careless of all hygiene, do break down
both in body and mind under the somewhat severe requirements
of the curriculum, and a mistaken idea of the true method of
mental application with a view to economy. To this subject we
shall return shortly.

A writer in the Saturday Review has alluded to the second
proposition in terms with which we cannot but agree ?
" We are glad that so distinguished an educator as Dr Kennedy has
said a word to allay any undue apprehension that may have been
excited as to the neglect of physical development at schools. One
would suppose people had never seen the playing-fields of Eton, Harrow,
Winchester, or Rugby alive with cricket or football, or the Thames at
Windsor on a summer's evening. Those who think that boys at an
English public school do not feel respect for distinction in games as
well as distinction in Greek and Latin, or that the masters of English
public schools do not encourage this feeling, must bo ignorant of
English schoolboy life. Go to a cricket match at any of the public
schools, and look round the ground. You will soon see whether the
masters stand aloof from the amusements of the boys?whether to
them the physical excellence of their pupils is a matter of indifference
or aversion?and whether they grudge every moment which is given
to the invigoration of the body and taken from the overstraining of
the mind. Some boys there are?as there are some men?who, in
spite of all encouragement, and even goading, will not take much part
in the sports of their fellows. Sometimes this arises from extreme
physical weakness, which mav be outgrown in time, but which cannot
be cured by force. Sometimes it arises from temperament. Generally
it is an unhappy temperament, but occasionally?as in the instance
cited by Mr. Gladstone and now before our eyes?it is that tempera-
ment of deep thoughtfulness which seems the one indispensable con-
dition of all kinds of greatness. Saving these exceptions?which no
system will reduce to uniformity, any more than it will make the colour
of all boys' hair the same?we should say the education of English
boys at good schools always includes a fair amount of bodily exercise,
and that the masters desire and take care that it should do so. Indeed,
if we had to name that which in modern times most corresponds to the
ancient Greek system of bodily and mental training, we should name
the classics and cricket of an English public school."

The first proposition, however, contains the entire pith of the
question which is the immediate object of our investigation ] and
we propose to inquire what are, from physiological considerations,
the probable effects of mental labour upon the bodily health ;
what are the actually observed effects; upon what ages, tempera-
ments, &c., these effects are most marked ; what circumstances
are. calculated to influence for good or for evil the reciprocal
actions of mind and body ; and, finally, whether the earnest, or
Gven severe, exercise of the mind may not, both directly and
in irectly, be attended by results of a conservative nature,
en lxely opposed to the views above quoted.
is scarcely necessary to allude even slightly to the proofs*
one 31rn'le }T?lS.are in brief derived from the facts, that the brain proper is the
S' hich increases from the fish to man in proportion to the intelligence ,
that the brain is the material organ (and the only one) through
which the mind acts, and communicates with the external world
?this is generally acknowledged. It is less understood that
the brain, as an organ, is subject to precisely the same laws,
chemical, dynamic, and automatic, as other organs and tissues,
though physiology teaches this fact as strongly as any other.
Thus it is readily granted that the action of a muscle tends to
the increase of the circulation in its tissue, and, if long continued,
to the hypertrophy or increase of its substance. The same
phenomenon takes place in the passive tissues, as the skin, bones,
tendons, and ligaments; whenever often-repeated pressure or
tension is exercised upon these, their substance is developed in
proportion to the requirements of the case.

It is also not disputed that every action of the body is attended
by the phenomena of nutrition, including the decomposition of
some of the old tissue, and the supply of its place by new parti-
cles ; and that the evidences of such decomposition in the blood
and the excretions are in exact ratio to the energy and conti-
nuity of such actions. But although the laws of nutrition are in
as active operation in the brain as in any part of the system, we
find it at first difficult to realize the fact so well established by
irrefragable physiological evidence, that these acts of nutrition are
in their essence the necessary conditions of every act of intelli-
gence, perception, or volition; that, " like all other tissues actively
concerned in the vital operations, nervous matter is subject to a
waste or disintegration, which bears an exact proportion to the
activity of its operations; or, in other words, that every act of the
nervous system involves the death and decay of a certain amount
of nervous matter, the replacement of which will be requisite in
order to maintain the system in a state fit for action in short,
that every idea, every emotion, every act of volition, and every
perception, however passive or fleeting, is necessarily attended by
a waste and decay of a certain portion of the brain tissue. The
author just quoted continues thus :?"In the healthy state of the
body, when the exertion of the nervous system by day does not
exceed that which the repose of the night may compensate, it is
maintained in a condition which fits it for moderate constant
exercise ; but unusual demands upon its powers?whether by the
that any part of the nervous system except the brain, or any other organ of the
body, may be seriously injured, if not destroyed, and this without any lesion of in-
telligence ; but that all injury to the cerebrum is followed by some lesion of intelli-:
geuce, perception, or volition. Though the brain alone is capable of manifesting
the operations of mind, yet it is not by any means universally held that the " mental
principle" resides solely in the brain. " It is possible," says Muller, " for the mind
to act and receive impressions by means of .one organ of determinate structure, and
yet be present generally throughout the body."?Vol. ii. p. 817.
long-continued and severe exercise of the intellect, by excitement
of the emotions, or by the combination of both in that state of
anxiety which the circumstances of mans condition too fre-
quently induce?produce an unusual waste, which requires for
the restoration of its powers a prolonged repose."

It is certainly inexplicable how matter and mind can act and
re-act one upon the other; the mystery is acknowledged by all
to be insolvable, and will probably ever remain so ; the co-ordi-
nate phenomena, however, are open to investigation, and it is
clearly ascertained that to certain mental conditions a certain
state of the material organ is attached ; and for certain mental
acts, certain chemical changes in this organ are requisite.
We have stated above, that the brain is subject not only to the
same chemical laws of change as the other organs, but to the
same automatic influences. In the same manner that certain
muscular actions, at first painful, difficult, and complex, become
perfectly easy, and are performed almost (if not altogether) with-
out attention after long practice and frequent repetition: so
processes of thought, which originally induce painful sensations,
and confusion in the mind or brain,* become, by repetition,
familiar and simple, and are attended by no pain at the time,
nor any inconvenience subsequently. And thus the most complex
operations of the mind, calculations involving the most intricate
processes, and analyses of the utmost difficulty, are at last per-
formed with an ease, and almost unconsciousness, rivalling the
extempore performances of the most finished artiste on a musical
instrument. It is of importance, in passing, to mark this. We
pass on now to notice briefly the various modes in which mind
and body affect one another, in order to illustrate the dynamism
o* the former, and its subjection in many respects to material
laws.

A due supply of arterial blood is requisite for the proper action
fhe mind. Loss of consciousness follows the abstraction of this
Mind or Brain.?In a physiological point of view, these terms may be used
^ynonytnously. The brain is material; the mind is, we conceive, immaterial; yet
-j-- and can know nothing abstractedly of mind, apart from its manifesta-
vert'hl ^ ma^er^al organ, it is convenient occasionally to use these as con-
conn t tenus, especially when concerned with laws of action which appear to be
moreec e(r ,w^h> if not dependent upon, material changes. Yet nothing can be
upon than this, that however dependent mind may be for its manifestations
sumptivemat^a* orSail> ^ is essentially different in nature. Were there no pre-
would be Cvitl?nce ?f this from the phenomena of memory, imagination, &c., it
of the minrl - a^undantly by the frequent instances of the persistent integrity
Anquetil, wh t^le utter decay of the bodily organs. "My friends," said
behold a man'd ? aPProaching end was announced to him by his physicians, " you
is indeed an ?f We !" On this expression M. Lordat remarks? "It
vidual; a proof of+y,?^ ? e duplicity of the dynamism in one and the same mdi-
inseparable and union of two active causes simultaneously created, hitherto
' e survivor of which is the biographer of the other."

stimulus. The quality of the blood circulating through the brain
also influences the development of ideas?if it be deficient in
oxygen, delirium of course follows. " The digestion of food in-
troduces a quantity of imperfectly assimilated material into the
circulation; until this new material has undergone the necessary
changes, and while certain matters, altogether unfit for nutrition,
are mingled with it, it is not adapted to excite those states of the
brain which are necessary for the proper manifestation of mind ;
and as it is conveyed to that organ by the circulation, it produces
an injurious change in it, and impedes or disturbs the mental
functions. Hence the indisposition to mental labour experienced
by some persons after meals."* The same effects are produced,
in a more marked degree, by wine, spirituous liquids, narcotics,
and the presence of bile or urea in the blood. The organic affec-
tions of the brain necessarily and obviously modify the mental
conditions, not only by destroying the efficiency of a certain
portion of the tissue, but by interfering with the due performance
of the organic changes in the other parts.

All this is sufficiently comprehensible, that the organ being
deranged, it is no longer capable of performing accurately the
behests of the mind. It is much less so, how the derangement
of the immaterial essence can affect the organic structure; yet the
fact is indisputable. The simplest illustration may be drawn
from an occurrence not unfrequent in ordinary experience. A
person in perfect health receives a letter containing, perhaps,
some fatal news; he drops down, smitten with apoplexy; and
after death it is found that the cerebral tissue is torn by an
effusion of blood into its substance. Joyous emotion may pro-
duce the same or analogous results. A young Frenchman
received a complimentary letter from the Directory; he was
struck motionless, and his head immediately became affected in
a manner from which he never recovered.

The paleness of skin, and weakness of the circulation accom-
panying the depressing emotions ; blushing, and other determi-
nations of blood ; excitement of the arterial action, under the
influence of anger and the allied passions?all illustrate powerfully
and sufficiently the dynamism of mind.

The effect of mental action is forcibly portrayed in Virgil's
description of the Pythoness under inspiration :?
" Her colour changed; her face was not the same,
And hollow groans from her deep spirit came.
Her hair stood up ; convulsive rage possessed
Her trembling limbs, and heaved her labouring breast.
Greater than human kind she seemed to look,
And with an accent more than mortal spoke;

Her staring eyes with sparkling fury roll,
When all the god came rushing on her soul.
At length her fury fell; her foaming ceased,
And ebbing in her soul, the god decreased."
Enough has now been adduced to show the powerful influence
which states of mind have upon the body; we must now inquire
more particularly what are the probable and the observed effects
of continued mental labour upon the physical constitution.
In accordance with the physiological principles already enun-
ciated, the first effect of laborious thought will be an increase
in the circulation through the brain, and a more active perform-
ance of the nutritive functions in that organ, consisting of decay
and replacement of particles. Until the brain becomes accustomed
to this increased activity of function, it is to be expected that it
will be attended with certain unpleasant consequences, as head-
ache and confusion?just as a person who has fatigued one set of
muscles by hours of exercise, will feel pain and stiffness in these
muscles until, by frequent repetition, the same actions are per-
formed for even a greater length of time with perfect ease, and
without any ill consequences resulting. Rest, then, will (it is to
be expected on a priori considerations) restore the integrity of
the cerebral tissue ; and frequent repetition of the same mental
gymnastics will render easy and pleasurable what was before so
difficult and painful. But it may be objected that the brain is a
very delicate organ, and much more liable to suffer from over
use than the coarser texture of the muscles. This may be true ;
yet it must be remembered that the brain is to be considered as
perfectly adapted to the performance of its functions?thought,
perception, volition, &c.?as the muscles are to the performance of
their varied motions; and if the texture of the one be so much
stronger than that of the other, the mechanical injuries to which
is liable are infinitely multiplied.

Pursuing the same expectant reasoning, we shall be prepared
to meet with a modification of the tissue of the brain from con-
tinued excited nutrition; and owing to the peculiar mechanical
conditions of this organ, it can only be, as a general rule, mani-
fested by an increased firmness of texture. Under long-continued
application to one class of subjects, we believe the form of the
head may be altered even in the adult.* Functionally, we must, of
course expect a continually increasing facility and aptitude in all
sorts of mental work; whilst from the concentration of the
nervous energy upon thought, the tendency to active exertion
of severll'v^ writer has had two casts taken of his own head at the interval
which hp hnf\T3,A ur*ng which time he was entirely devoted to artistic pursuits,
in the derplrm? ?^eti *ate *n The contrast between the two is very striking
P ent of certain parts of the forehead and parietal regions.
will naturally become more and more limited. And here we
may consider that we meet with the root of the various evils
which have been so constantly attributed to mind labour. Not
what is done, but what is neglected, seems to be the fons et origo
mcdorum. The weary eye, the cramped limb, the demands of
the body?all are neglected, from the all-absorbing nature of the
pursuit, and a train of evils must necessarily result, which are
naturally enough, but perhaps too readily, laid to the account of
mental labour, but which result with equal frequency from all
sedentary occupations whatever.

In young persons, the mode of response to stimulus and re-
quirements on the part of the system is somewhat different, both
in nature and extent, from that observed in adults. In early
life, and up to the margin of manhood, a great part of the
energy of the vital functions is devoted to the direct nutrition
and consolidation of the bodily organs. The tissues are soft
and yielding, and are capable of being very much modified
by external agency. If a strain of unusual force be applied,
the result is not necessarily, as in the adult, fatigue, which
may be readily relieved by rest; but- the organ yields, and
its efficiency is impaired. Thus the heart over-excited in a
child, will become dilated?the bone on which unnatural
pressure is exerted, bends?the ligament often or long
stretched, yields and becomes relaxed. Now, the brain being
subject to precisely the same laws as other organs, as to
nutrition, we shall expect to find here also a difference in
its response to the calls made upon its action. Long-con-
tinued exercise of the mental functions will be attended, as
in the adult, by increased circulation and activity of the
nutritive functions of the brain ; but there is this difference,
that the brain tissue here is soft and yielding, and instead
of offering the normal resistance to the abnormal afflux of
blood, it yields to the pressure, the vessels become enlarged,
perhaps permanently, and congestion is the result?pro-
ductive not only of serious consequences for the time being,
but, by the very fact of its occurrence, inducing an ever-
increasing liability to its recurrence. Then perhaps the
overcharged vessels make an attempt to relieve themselves by
pouring out some of their fluid contents, and effusion into
the ventricles or on the surface of the brain is the conse-
quence. It is easy to conceive, from these considerations,
what is the lesson which physiology would teach us in re-
ference to the consequences which may be predicated from
intense application in the young. These consequences will be
still more marked and serious, if the attention be confined
exclusively to one class of ideas; if one faculty be. cul-
tivated and urged forward, to the exclusion or neglect of the
others.

The testimony of writers on the subject of the effects of
mental labour upon the body, is singularly unanimous; none
seem to doubt its dire results, especially if commenced young,
if pursued long and constantly, and if directed too exclusively
to a restricted range of ideas. Dr George Moore, who has
entered deeply into these inquiries, makes the following
observations: ?

" The brain of a child, however forward, is totally unfit for that
intellectual exertion to which many fond parents either force or excite
it. Fatal disease is thus frequently induced ; and where death does
not follow, idiocy, or at least such confusion of faculty ensues, that the
moral perception is obscured, and the sensitive child becomes a man of
hardened vice, or of insane self-will

" As the emulative success of classical education is generally depen-
dent on an excessive determination of mind, for the purpose of rapidly
loading the memory, it is, of course, attended, for the most part, with
a correspondent risk to the nervous system of aspirants after academic
honours. Mentally speaking, those who bear the palm in severe uni-
versities are often destroyed by the effort necessary to obtain the
distinction. Like phosphorescent insects, their brilliance lasts but a
little while, and is at its height when on the point of being extin-
guished for ever. The laurel crown is commonly for the dead, if not
corporeally, yet spiritually ; and those who attain the highest honours
of their Alma Maters, are generally diseased men.* Having reached
the object of their aim, bv concentrating their energies in one object,
an intellectual palsy too often succeeds, and their bodies partake of the
trembling feebleness 1

" The strongest brain will fail under the continuance of intense
thought. All persons who have been accustomed to close stud}r, will
remember the utter and indescribable confusion that comes over the
mind when the will has wearied the brain

" The modern system of education appears to he altogether un-
christian; undoubtedly it contributes much to swell the fearful list of
diseases, for it is founded on an unhealthy emulation, which ruins many
* When the mind has been long and actively engaged?if we may use the term,
overwrought?a great dislike which is sometimes permanent and invincible may be
observed to mental labour of the same nature. We were at a large and celebrated
classical school along with several boys distinguished for application, and ranking
high in the estimation of an eminent master, by whom they were tasked to the
utmost; yet none of them have, to my knowledge, made any figure in life either as
scholars or men of business. In the medical profession, we have known students
w ? signally exerted themselves while they were making ready to be examined for a
tli6 11 deg.ree> hut, so far from evincing continued pleasure in scientific pursuits,
in wh^Wk"106 Regenerated into mere traders. In a justly-celebrated university,
,? 10 , . ? examination for a Fellowship requires a length and closeness of appli-
w ick is sufficient to impair the power of most minds, it has been observed
lo-Trnfn?^ ? i i- ^?ws after their election have lost all their original relish for
1 ? a'71| become men of little performance, although originally of great
P r, Ckeyne, on Partial Derangement of the Mind.

both in body and in soul, while it qualifies none the better either for
business, knowledge, usefulness, or enjoyment, but rather, together with
the influence of the money valuation of intellect, causes the most
heroic spirits of the age to hang upon public opinion and the state
of the market

"We know that determination must vastly excite the brain when
the student or the statesman is induced, by desire for doubtful distinc-
tion, to spend his days and nights in the distractions of alternate hopes
and fears. Under the strain of these conflicting passions how many a
mighty mind sinks into insanity, amidst the mj'sterious darkness of
which some demon whispers close to the ear, ' No hope, no aim, no use
in life?the knife is now before you

These are frightful accusations against study and the present
system of education; yet we quote them at length, because they
are but the echo and resume of the charges which have been
entered against such pursuits, both before and since Festus
accused Paul of being mad through much learning. Both amongst
ancients and moderns it has been the practice to accuse study, as
one of the most frequent causes of madness. Fernelius and
Arculanus enumerate " study, contemplation, and continual medi-
tation," as especially tending to mania; "of all men," says
Lemnius, "scholars are most subject to it;" and Rhasis adds,
" Et illi qui sunt subtilis ingenii, et multas prsemeditationis, de
facili incidunt in melancholiam." Origanus says, " contemplatio
cerebrum exsiccat et extinguit calorem naturalem, unde cerebrum
* We need make no apology for quoting entire the following passage from the
Scarificator :?"There is that which destroys more fatally than continued physical
exertion. The tendency that over brain work has to destroy the intellect has been
long observed. Southey died in darkness from over toil. Walter Scott?he who
Ano-lo-Saxonised the language of Europe, and made a literature?broke down near
sixty, and went to his grave with a soft head. 'Tis but the other month a young
Scotchman died in London, worn out," his mind a blank from literary toil. And
who can doubt it1? Angus B. Reach?a clever, witty fellow he was?might have
laughed much longer, and made others laugh too, if he had only taken half care of
himself!?

' From Marlborough's eyes the tears of dotage flow,
And Swift expires a driveller and a show'?
A soul in ruins?those mysterious, appalling afflictions, laying desolate and waste
' minds that could wander through eternity,' have made us pause and wonder at
the awful dispensations of an All-wise Providence, and for a moment doubt their
justness. The continued tear and wear, the constant demand for more, more, more,
sets the cerebral mass ' on fire.' ' My brain is burning?I can bear life no longer!'
said the author of the Old Bed Sandstone, and shortly ceased to exist. Strange,
some said, how Providence should have allowed such a man to pass away from
earth in such a manner ; but when we consider the subject philosophically, there is
nothing mysterious in it, however much we may regret the circumstance. Provi-
dence acts by general, not by special laws. Hugh Miller was, intellectually, a
giant, and, physically, possessed a frame of iron; but he violated the laws which
govern health?he demanded more work from his brain than it could well perform?
it reeled and staggered, but it reeled and staggered in vain. He pulled away, alnd
lashed it into fury, and he perished to gratify his genius and his ambition !"
frigidum et siccum evadit quod est melancholicum. Accedit ad
hoc, quod natura in contemplatione, cerebro prorsus cordique
mtenta, stomachum heparque destituit, unde ex alimentis male
coctis, sanguis crassus et niger efficitur, dum nimio otio membro-
rum superflui vapores non exhalant." In this, spite of its anti-
quated physiology, there is much sound sense, still indicating in
reference to the subject at issue, that it is the omissions, not the
commissions, that are the chief sources'of evil. Macliiavel, how-
ever, holds the direct influence of study in weakening the body,
dulling the spirit, and abating the strength and courage. Quaint
old Burton relates that " a certain Goth, when his countrymen
came into Greece, and would have burned all their books, he
cried but against it, by no means they should do it, c leave them
that plague, which in time will consume all their vigour and
martial spirits/" Descuret, in his " Medicina delle Passioni/*
speaks of the results of the study mania (mania dello studio) as
loss of memory, epilepsy, catalepsy, madness, sudden and prema-
ture death; saying that " lo studio, cibo dell'anima, esige per
parte nostra grande sobrieta, se vogliamo che non si trasformi in
veleno, la cui azione midiciale non e meno funesta al morale che
al fisico." Few writers now venture to speak of study with St.
Augustine as "scientia scientiarum, omni melle dulcior, omni
pane suavior, omni vino hilarior " or with another old worthy,.
" Studia senectutem oblectant, adolescentiam alunt, secundas res
ornant, adversis perfugium et solatium prsebent, domi delectant,"
&c., and yet both these had tried it to an extent not often reached
in these modern times. To return to modern writers; Muller
states as the physiological effect of excessive exercise of the mind,
that it " diminishes the activity of the nutritive processes we
find him remarking however, shortly afterwards, that " the culture
?f the mind by observation and varied attainments has an enno-
bling influence on the corporeal frame, and particularly on the
lineaments of the face."

Tissot brings an enormous list of accusations against the
over application of the mind, with many interesting illustrative
cases. A. young gentleman had given himself up to metaphysical
pursuits, which he pursued with ardour, notwithstanding that he
telt his health failing. At last he fell into such a condition, that
aPPeared to see nothing, hear nothing, and spoke not a word
?y tne space of a year. He says that he has seen " very pro-
L mismg children, who have been forced to study so constantly by
severe masters, that they have become epileptic during the rest
o eir lives." On this subject Sir H. Holland says, "In the
course o my practice I have seen some striking and melancholy
ins ances of the exhaustion of the youthful mind by this over-
/ cxercise o its faculties. In two of them, unattended by any
paralytic affection, or other obvious bodily disorder than a
certain sluggishness in the natural functions, the torpor of mind
approached almost to imbecility. Yet here there had been before
acute intellect, with great sensibility; but these qualities forced
by emulation into excess of exercise without due intervals of
respite, and with habitual deficiency of sleep."

Galen mentions a grammarian who was seized with an epileptic
fit when teaching or thinking intently; and Hoffman mentions a
young man who had a momentary fit, whenever his mind or his
memory was overloaded. Petrarch suffered in a similar manner.
The evils charged further by M. Tissot upon intense study are
gout, premature baldness and grey hairs, phantasms, delirium,
mania; " tumours, aneurisms, inflammations, scirrhosities, ulcers,
dropsies, headaches, drowsiness, convulsions, lethargy, apoplexies,
and the want of sleep," besides many other secondary results.
But it is time to leave this enumeration of evils, and to inquire
with what amount of justice they are attributed to mental work,
?under what counts of the indictment mind must plead guilty
?whether there are any, and what, extenuating circumstances?
to what the verdict of not guilty, or at least not proven must
be returned?and whether there may be found some remedy of
easy application for the evils which confessedly exist, however
caused.

"VVe will commence with an examination into the circumstances
connected with education in early life, suppose up to the age of
15. It is not to be denied, and we have already given in our
adhesion to the opinion, that intense study in early life is likely
to be very hurtful in its consequences ; and the practice of forcing
and urging the faculties of children into premature development
cannot be too strongly and earnestly deprecated. Yet we believe
that this practice is by no means so common as has been repre-
sented.*

That children are overworked occasionally is notorious; but
for this there are other causes in operation besides either force or
the principle of emulation. The recent publication of the regu-
lations of the University of Oxford " Concerning the examination
of those who are not members of the University," may fairly be
supposed to furnish an average standard of the requirements of
* The writer is intimately connected with one large establishment where up-
wards of two hundred youths from eight to twenty years of age are educated; the
inducements to study and to excel are strong and valuable, but the discipline is mild
andjudicious. During ten years of careful observation, he can recal but three or
four instances of any injury resulting from severe mental application: none in
which more than a temporary cessation from study has been requisite; and with
one exception, all occurring in subjects where there was every reason to suspect a
morbidly excitable organization. The exception was that of a naturally very dull
boy, with a strong desire to overcome difficulties, which, in fact, were only such
to him.

education for boys under fifteen and young men under eighteen;
and a perusal of these will at once show that boys of average capa-
city need exert no extraordinary pressure in preparation. Reading,
writing from dictation, parsing, short composition, and the first
four rules of arithmetic are the substance of the first five articles :
the sixth and seventh comprise a very elementary knowledge of
geography, and English history. Eight subjects are then given
for selection; the candidate must be examined in one at least,
and not in more than four, to be chosen by himself. Latin,
Greek, French, and German are the first four subjects, in each of
which the exercise is simply the translation and. parsing of a
passage in one of the most elementary school books, and in all
but Greek, the translation of an English passage into the others.
The fifth is mathematics, including the first two books of Euclid,
arithmetic, and simple equations. Sixth, elementary mechanics.
Seventh, chemistry. Eighth, botany and zoology. In all this
there is nothing very oppressive, even if required from boys of
thirteen rather than fifteen ; but of course the curriculum of many
of our schools is very much more comprehensive than this ; and
in them we meet not unfrequently with over-tasked brains, and
the consecutive train of evils. But how has this been brought
about ? Is it necessarily by compulsion, or the goad of emulation ?
or may there not be a much deeper source of the evil ?
Two boys, brothers, enter a large school, are placed on the
same form, and are subject to the same regulations, the same
tasks, the same inducements. One is studious, cares little for out-
door amusements, and perhaps breaks down in health even before
accomplishing the object of his ambition. The other is more
given to sport or play than to work ; he may be a blockhead ;
but on the other hand he may take a respectable or even a high
position. The question may fairly be asked?"Whence arose
this difference?" Not, clearly, because one was goaded and the
other not. Why did the first boy prefer his books to the foot-
ball or cricket ? Plainly because his organization was weaker in
stamina than that of the other ; exertion of an active character
was a toil; the mind or the body must be occupied, and as he
cannot exert the one, the other must bear the burden. On some
occasion, by momentary excitement, he is drawn into some
arduous play. Look at him when it is over. He sits down upon
a stone, or leans against a wall, his face almost ghastly in its
pallor, his hand pressed to his side, his temples throbbing, and
gasping for breath. He returns to his books, to which he thence-
ortti clings as his best friends ; yet this mischief is not the result
!f nJenJ.a\ aPplication, both the one and the other are the
lesuit 01 a feeble physical frame, which is now undergoing a pro-
cess ot probation, of which none can predicate the termination.

He may break down, or he may become ail intellectual giant;
but should the former be the case, study, for which he was appa-
rently better fitted than for anything else, can scarcely be blamed.
Would not an active life have been a still shorter one ? For such
constitutions there is much hope, if they can be placed under
intelligent care, and individually watched, guarded, and assisted ;
but amongst the masses this is as a rule impracticable ; there is
no resource but the school, where general laws must be in force ;
and it is a question whether, were the standard of requirements
lower, this individual class of mind would be less subject to
pressure.

We have nothing to say on the subject of cramming the minds
of mere infants with heterogeneous learning. The evils of such
a course are utterly incalculable;* but so obvious that those who
do not instinctively recognise them, would most probably be
impervious to any argument. The stunted and deformed mind
and body of the child will presently furnish a reproach bitter
enough, and a lesson too late to be practical.
There is one other consideration of extreme importance to be
urged in extenuation of the morbid influence supposed to be
exerted by early mental culture upon life and character. We
have in a previous essay,-}- pointed out, that in certain portions of
all classes of society there are elements of degeneration at work,
tending to the extinction of races or families. We are per-
petually meeting with the last term of these vanishing series,
and witnessing the circumstances attendant upon their final dis-
appearance. Young people in all ranks, with and without educa-
tion, die daily, the victims of these hereditary influences; cer-
tainly, we may affirm, with much greater proportional frequency
in those classes where education is, and must necessarily be the
exception rather than the rule. When those die whose minds
have been left to lie fallow, we attribute their death probably to
the real cause ; but under circumstances of individual taint pre-
cisely similar, when the studious child dies, we ascribe the event
to their studies in great measure. It is a note-worthy pheno-
menon that amongst these degenerate beings, previous to extinc-
tion, there is often a remarkable development of certain faculties,
* There are certain exceptional cases on record, proving that extreme precocity
is not necessarily and invariably connected with early decay. One such is that of
the archaeologist Visconti, who died in 1818, as tat. sixty-seven. He knew his
alphabet at eighteen months old, and could read Latin and Greek fluently before
completing his fourth year. Bentham read Rapin's England when three years
old, and at eight was a proficient on the violin. He lived to the age of eighty-five.
Goethe, Scott, and Franklin, each in early childhood evinced decided indications of
the talents for which they were distinguished in after life. Two of them lived to
extreme old age, and the third to sixty-two. Many other instances might be
adduced, but these are sufficient to illustrate the principle.
f On the Degeneracy of the Race. April, 1857.
amounting to genius. This is alluded to in a passage from M.
Morel's work previously noticed:?

" II existe des individus qui resument dans leur personne les dispo-
sitions organiques vicieuses de plusieurs generations anterieurs.
" Un developpement assez remarquable de certaines facultes peut
quelquefois donner le change sur l'avenir de ces malades ; mais leur
existence intelleetuelle est circonscrite dans certaines limites qu'ils ne
peuvent franchir."

Such cases as these have generally a short and brilliant career;
and it is of such that the remark is so frequently made, " What
promise of future greatness is here nipped in the bud \" Than
this, nothing can be as a rule more mistaken?the fiat of early
dissolution is written on the degenerate organism; a lurid
phosphorescent light accompanies its decay, a light of which
decay is as necessary a condition as is the marsh to the ignis
fatuus; and if by any means this downward tendency be stopped,
it is extremely rare that the autumn of life fulfils the promise of
its spring. The life is short, not because the intellectual develop-
ment is precocious or forced, but it is short and bright from a
common cause deeply engrained in the original exceptional
organization.

There are, however, certain unhappy cases where the ambition
for intellectual distinction is directly concerned in destroying
health; these are they, where the ability is not equal to the
aspirations, and where the feeling of incompetence leads con-
tinually to more and more strenuous exertions. The boy of
talents below mediocrity, and with a strong desire (from what-
ever motive) to excel in certain pursuits, is indeed in a pitiable
case,* and will rarely escape serious injury. And this is by no
means confined to early life. We know of few more melancholy
objects for contemplation than a man?or, as it very frequently
happens, too, a woman?inspired with a love for a certain art,
poetry, painting, or music, mistaking this love for talent, and
wearing out life in hopeless efforts at performance?ever failing,
yet sometimes happily unconscious of the failure?trying again
and again, yet ever again coming far short of even their own im-
perfect ideal?finally succumbing, worn out by constant attrition
against the rock of the impossible. How many of these bruised
and broken spirits will the experience of every thoughtful and
observant man suggest to him !

If we now inquire more particularly into the circumstances
attendant upon university education, and the charges brought
against the severity of the requirements for high honours, we shall
. ? "^ie.case *8 strictly analogous to that of a weakly or lame boy wishing to excel
in running or jumping; a sa(j instance of which kind of perverted vanity was
.observed in iiyron.
find that very much, the same limitations are requisite in our
adoption of these views, as in the case of children. Men sink
under the course not from the direct influence of mental applica-
tion, but because they have not the stamina to bear even mode-
rate exercise of the mind?because they are of degenerate con-
stitution, favouring irregular circulation and congestions?because
being such, their aspirations are too high for their powers?and
because, feeling all this, they are prone to neglect the most
ordinary rules of hygiene. The pale, timid student, who labours
under continual fear of being plucked, and by night and by day
crams his mind with all sorts of miscellaneous knowledge, which
it would require a much more powerful intellect to analyse and
arrange?he can with no justice be held up as a proof that the
requirements of bis university are too high.
It is, of course, impossible to say, with any accuracy, what
proportion of our youth do break down under the strain on mind
and body attendant upon the reading for honours. "We are not
disposed to deny that many such instances do occur ; but still we
must maintain, that, not what is done, but what is left undone,
is to blame. The woodman, every now and then, pauses to
sharpen his axe?let him neglect this, and continue striking
against the unyielding tree with his blunt instrument, and by
and bye it breaks. Hear how Ficinus comments upon the
thoughtlessness of the bookworm,?

" Solers quilibet artifex instrumenta sua diligentissime curat, peni-
cillos pictor ; malleos incudesque faber ferrarius ; miles equos, arma
venator, auceps aves et canes, cytharam cytharoedus, &c.; soli musarum
mystse tam negligentes sunt, ut instrumentum illud quo mundum uni-
versum metiri solent, spiritum scilicet, penitus negligere videantur."
But is not the alarm, on this score, even too great An able
writer, from whom we have already quoted, answers this question,
very positively:?

" The mothers and merchants of England need not be in so much
alarm for the sanitary condition or the practical character of the pro-
mising sons whom they may have committed to the English Univer-
sity system. Heading men at the universities, taken as a class, are so
far from being reckless about the state of their bodies, that they are
generally very careful of their health. They are more regular than
other men in their hours and in their exercise, more abstemious in
their diet, more free from vicious habits which injure the constitution.
They imitate the candidates for the Olympic wreath in their sobriety
and continence, if not in the more active part of their training. We
will venture to say nobody would know them from their fellows by
their cadaverous appearance. They have among them, as far as our
observation extends, at least their fair proportion of men who follow
the motto, ' to be ever foremost' in the cricket field, the boat-race, and
the tennis-court, as well as in the Senate House or the Schools. So
far from being taught by their preceptors to strain their minds to the
utmost, and take no care of their bodies, they are constantly warned
of the necessity of keeping themselves in good physical order by
tutors, private tutors, friends, and all who are interested in their suc-
cess. Men have the wit to see that good health and spirits are neces-
sary to carry them through the labours of an examination, and that
they cannot study to any purpose without a clear head, or secure a
clear head without a good digestion and sound sleep. We believe the
life of a regular reading man at Oxford or Cambridge, with his eight
hours work a day (and no more is needed for high honours), his daily
air and exercise, his cheerful society, and his reading party in the
Highlands or at the seaside in the long vacation, to be as healthy a
life as any?at least as healthy as life in a counting house or a solici-
tor's office. If there is a little exhaustion immediately after the last
examination, three months with a knapsack among the Alps generally
sets all right again. The victims of wet towels and strong green tea
are, generally, not regular reading men, but gentlemen who have been
devoting themselves exclusively to their physical development till
within a few weeks of their 1 little go,' and are compelled, at last, to put
on the steam in preparing for that event. Of course, men are some-
times fools enough to overwork themselves at classics and mathematics,
as they are sometimes fools enough to overwork themselves at law or
physic; but for one man who has been injured by reading at the Uni-
versity, we think we could point to two who have been injured by
boat-racing, and four who have been injured by intemperance, and the
other vices to which idleness leads.

" University education is very apt to get the credit of destroying
constitutions which, in point of fact, it only finds weak and leaves as
it found them. A man who comes up to Oxford or Cambridge with a
confirmed and hereditary tendency to consumption, will not be saved,
by his Oxford or Cambridge accomplishments, from sinking into an
early grave. Nor must a man expect that, by having taken a good
class, he will be rendered physically equal to employments to which
he and everybody connected with him would otherwise have known
that he was physically unequal. A sickly and sensitive youth shows
intellectual power, and gets a good place in the class list. Immediately
he or his friends take it into their heads that he is to be Lord Chan-
cellor ; and he is sent, as Lord Eldon said, to ' live like a hermit and
work like a horse,' in order to realize that moderate object of ambition.
Being by nature absolutely incapable either of living like a hermit or
of working like a horse, he of course breaks down ; and then his failure
is attributed to University education. If the poet Cowper had been,
as he well might have been, a classical first classman at Oxford or
am bridge, instead of being brought up in the most practical way in
a awyer s office, Oxford or Cambridge would have borne the blame of
is ma 1 ity to pass his life cheerfully in lonely chambers in the Tem-
Pe' 0 compete with hard strong natures in the trying arena of
e ar. he fact is, that these men do not lose physical power by
being pu thiough a good course of reading?for the simple reason
that tliey never liad the physical power to lose. They gain intellec-
tual power, which they might otherwise have never possessed, and are
thereby enabled to be at least of some use to the world."
It must not be denied, however, that the tests applied at the
present day in our principal universities, to ascertain the attain-
ments of their alumni, are serious matters?so serious that men
should have a firm conviction of their strength, before entering so
arduous an arena. Strong healthy mind, good " working con-
stitution," temperance in every respect, even in work?all these
are essentially requisite. For the brain tissue of a large portion
of these workers is still in a condition not so inured and habi-
tuated to work that it has become easy, and even second nature?
it is still labour.

Perhaps it will not lead us too far from our principal design,
to take a survey, as brief as the nature of the subject will permit,
of the sort of ordeal through which the candidates for honours
at the universities of Cambridge, Oxford, and London, have to
pass, chiefly as connected with the B.A.

The first to which we open is the Senate-house examination
in January last, at Cambridge?the mathematical tripos. Three
hours in the morning of the first day are allowed for the
answering of twelve questions, such as the following (No. 8) :?
' " Prove that in the parabola SYa = SP . SA.?
A circle is described on the latus rectum as diameter, and a common
tangent QP is drawn to it and the parabola; shew that SP, SQ, make
equal angles with the latus rectum."

The mathematician will see that although there is nothing very
obscure in this, yet the labour of answering twelve such questions
in three hours requires a clear head, a ready method, great
previous practice, and last though by no means least, a hand of
almost lightning velocity, merely to do the mechanical part.
It is true that the examiners state, if asked, that all the questions
need not be answered ; that more are asked to give variety, and
to afford equal opportunities to different orders of students; yet
the aspirant after the highest honours will strive after all; we
know of instances where all has been accomplished; yet the
labour is prodigious.?In the afternoon of the same day, two
hours and a half were devoted to twelve other questions ; the one
following is but the half of No. 10 :?
" Prove the formula
Cos. (A - B) = cos. A . cos. B + sin. A sin. B.
A being greater than B, and each angle less than 90?."
On the second day the same hours were devoted to twenty-four
other questions, of which one must serve as a specimen, it being
neither more nor less elaborate than the rest.

" A ray of liglifc passes through a prism in a plane perpendicular to
its edge; shew that if and \p be the angles of incidence and emergence,
and i the refracting angle of the prism, the deviation is equal to
(f> + ? i, or ip ? (/> ? i,
according as the incident ray makes an acute angle with the face of
the prism towards the thicker end or the edge. Under what convention
will these expressions for the deviation be all represented by <j> + if/ ? i,
and with this convention for what value of </> will \p change sign ?"
On the third day the same, except that in the afternoon there
were twenty-two questions, of such a nature and complexity that
it appears utterly impossible that the demonstrations to one half
of them could even be copied out by the quickest stenographer.
Five more days were similarly occupied, but it would scarcely
interest the general reader to follow the course minutely. For
those interested in the pursuits and training of our rising gra-
duates, we make only one more quotation, this being part only
of one of the last day's questions.
" Assuming the formulae
la + m{5 + ny = Q
I m n
= = y (v*-c1)
investigate the equation of the wave surface in a bi-axial crystal."
Meanwhile the classical tripos requires the translation of Greek
and Latin into English and vice versa; the conversion of a
passage from Marlowe's " Queen of Carthage" into Greek
Iambics, and another into Greek Hexameters; a passage from
Cowley, into Latin Hexameters; four verses of the " Hymn to
Light," into Latin Lyrics, &c., &c.; and an elaborate series of
historical and philological questions.*

These are mental gymnastics of no light order, and he who pan
come out of the ordeal unscathed and with an honourable position,
has shown himself, ipso facto, to be great. It has been very
frequently urged that those men who have attained the highest
university rank have rarely been distinguished in after life. We
are not prepared to disprove a statement which has been reiterated
until it has almost become a recognised dogma; but neither can
We have given so much space to the Cambridge examination that we have
thought it not desirable to enter into any analysis of those of the other two TJniver-
si les , and in fact there would be but little variety. As is well known, Cambridge
is more especially mathematical and Oxford more classical; London is but little
6 ^ T er *n each department. He who could take honourable rank in one,
wou p ay a respectable part in either of the others. This is only so far as the
genera egreea of B.A. and M.A. are concerned. The special degrees, in medi-
cine particularly require examinations of incomparably greater severity in the
London University than i? either of the elder sisters. Perhaps there is no more
severe test applied anywhere, at least, so far as theoretical knowledge is involved,
and practice so iar as is possible also.
26 body v. mind.

we receive it as wholly true. Are we mistaken in supposing that
Sir R Peel was almost at the top of the academic tree ? And
probably many other of our ablest statesmen, could we but refer
conveniently to their earlier history. Yet even supposing it to
be the case, that the world hears little subsequently of the senior
wranglers and the " double first" men, is it necessarily because
health and intellect are ruined ? Bather may we suppose that
the studious and literary habits acquired during years of close
application have induced tastes and feelings utterly opposed to
the wear and tear of public life; and that the men thus trained
prefer rather to occupy themselves with the facts and speculations
of nature and philosophy, than to take part in the troublous
warfare of politics or polemics.

Are these requirements then, as has been so often said, too
severe ? Of the most weighty order they are certainly; but we
must hesitate before pronouncing them to be too much so. What
indeed is a test of this nature intended for, if not to distinguish
between man and man ? Crowds of men could pass through a
lighter ordeal with perhaps equal merit and distinction; and from
the nature of things it is inevitable that the severity of the test
must be increased till the few can be sifted from the many.
Moreover, we must remember that the honour is for those who
can fulfil the conditions, not for those who cannot;?it is for
the purpose of selecting the strong and clear-minded man and
the one who is capable of much hard work; for such men are
wanted in the world, as well as the strong-limbed and hard-
handed. All minds cannot accomplish the same feats, no more
than all physical frames can rival the material development of a
Lydon or a Tetraides. The following is from a recent leader in
the Times, and well illustrates the various kinds of work and
constitution:?

" There is perhaps no man living of whom more facts of labour and
triumphs over the frail physique of humanity are recorded than of Lord
Brougham. Legends of this sort have gathered round him like a
Hercules. There is a legend that he once worked six continuous days
?i.e., 144 hours without sleep, that he then rushed down to his
country lodgings, slept all Saturday night, all Sunday, all Sunday
night, and was waked by his valet on Monday morning to resume the
responsibilities of life, and commence the work of the next week. A
man must, of course, have a superhuman constitution who can do, we
will not say this particular feat, which is perhaps mythical, but feats
of this class, and probably the greatness of our great men is quite as
much a bodily alfair as a mental one. Nature has presented them not
Only with extraordinary minds, but?what has quite as much to do
with the matter?with wonderful bodies. What can a man do without
a constitution?a working constitution ? He is laid on the shelf from
the day he is born. For him no munificent destiny reserves the Great

Seal, or the Rolls, or the Chief Justiceship, or the leadership of the
House of Commons, the Treasury, or the Admiralty, or the Horse
Guards, the Home-Office, or the Colonies. The Church may promote
him, for it does not signify to the Church whether a man does his work
or not, hut the State will have nothing to do with the poor constitu-
tionless wretch. He will not rise higher than a Recordership or a
Poor Law Board. ' But,' somebody will ask, ' has that pale, lean
man, with a face like parchment, and nothing on his hones, a consti-
tution ?' Yes he has?he has a working constitution, and a ten times
better one than you, my good friend, with your ruddy face and strong
muscular frame.' You look, indeed, the very picture of health, but
you have, in reality, only a sporting constitution, not a ivorking one.
You do very well for the open air, and get on tolerably well with fine,
healthy exercise, and no strain on your brain. But try close air for a
week?try confinement, with heaps of confused papers and books of
reference, blue books, law books, or despatches to get through, and
therefrom extract liquid and transparent results, and you will find
yourself knocked up and fainting, when the pale lean man is?if not
' as fresh as a daisy,' which he never is, being of the perpetual cada-
verous type?at least as unaffected as a bit of leather, and not showing
the smallest sign of giving way. There are two sorts of good consti-
tutions?good idle constitutions, and good working ones. ^ When
Nature makes a great man she presents him with the latter gift. Not
that we wish to deprive our great men of their merit. A man must
make one or two experiments before he finds out his constitution. A
man of spirit and metal makes the experiment, tries himself, and runs
the task, as a soldier does on the field. The battle of life and death is
often fought as really in chambers or in an office as it is on the field.
A soul is required to make use of the body, but a great man must have
a body as well as a soul to work with. Charles Buller, Sir William
Moleswortli, and others, are instances of men whose bodies refused to
support their souls, and were therefore obliged to give up the prize
when they had just reached it. And how many hundreds or thousands
?if one did but know them?perish in an earlier stage, before they
have made any way at all, simply because, though they had splendid
winds, they had very poor bodies! Let our lean, cadaverous iriend,
then, when the laurel surmounts his knotty parchment face, thank
Heaven for his body, which, he may depend upon it, is almost as great
a treasure as his soul. Nature may not have made him a handsome
man, but what does that signify? She has made him a strong one.
With this remarkable instance, and many others to which we
shall have occasion to refer, before us, we do not hesitate to
express again our opinion that the effects of mental application,
even of a severe character, are not in themselves so generally
serious as it is now the fashion to consider them ; and that the
greater part of the evils which follow head-work are due to
secondary causes, against some of which at least it is easy to
guard.

The first of these which we shall allude to is the too sudden
adoption of extreme studious habits. A man who has for some
time neglected his studies, finds himself unprepared as the time
of examination approaches; at once he changes all his habits,
applying himself the greater part of the day and night to work.
Naturally enough, the system rebels against this abuse. The
muscular tissue will not bear such treatment; let him try to walk
ten or twelve hours in one day without training, and gradually
increasing the amount of exercise; and he will be most painfully
reminded that organization has its laws which cannot be violated
with impunity. The brain tissue cannot be expected to be more
enduring, or more tolerant of such liberties than this; let us but
treat it as we would any other organ, then we shall find it as
ready to act, and its actions as little hurtful or painful as those.
The mind must be gradually inured to labour, and then instead
of an enfeebled palsied development, we may hope to become
able to perform mental athletics to almost any extent without
danger, and with ease and profit. It is a most common mistake,
in considering the mind as immaterial, to lose sight of this most
important fact, that it acts always and exclusively through the
medium of a material tissue; which being, on the one hand,
subject to an immaterial essence, does not, on the other, thereby
lose its relations to the material organism of which it is an im-
portant part.

Another source of evil is the neglect of the corporeal require-
ments for a great number of hours consecutively. It is almost
certain* that the same amount of work which often proves inju-
rious by its continuity, might be achieved with ease, if it were
divided by short intervals of rest and refreshment. We appeal
to the experience of all students, if during their earlier efforts
nature did not give broad hints of requiring repose and restora-
tives ;?the stomach asserts its right to food at proper intervals,
but it is put off?" go thy way for this time ; when I have a con-
venient season then when the exhausted powers refuse
any longer to work without fuel, the meal is but a business to be
accomplished as speedily as possible; the food is swallowed un-
masticated, and the stomach, loaded perhaps with a mass of indi-
gestible material, is further impeded in its operations by the
immediate resumption of a cramped, constrained, and compressed
attitude. Indigestion with its thousand sons is the natural result.
Then the head aches, and its hint is evaded by a wet towel, and
perhaps an irritating stimulant, as a cup of strong tea or coffee;
under the influence of which, temporary power, or a semblance
of it, is regained. The weary eye, the aching limb, the general
* The writer would say to the earnest inquirer how much work he can get out
of his brain, and how he can do it most safely, that these hints are not drawn from
theory. Crede exjoerto !
febrile condition?all these are disregarded; day by day the
same process is repeated ; until the wonder is, not that the brain
gives way at length, but that it has held out so long?longer, we
venture to say, as an ordinary rule, than any other organ would
have done under an equivalent amount of ill-treatment. Yet
in all this, the fact of mental labour simply is not more to be
blamed than is commerce for the great number of deaths brought
about by the all-absorbing desire of gain, the auri sacra fames
which operates in precisely the same secondary manner upon the
health and character.

The neglect of fresh air, regular exercise, and early rising, enters
into the same category of the secondary causes.

Yet there are other conditions attendant too often upon a
literary life, which are inherent in our nature, and in the exist-
ing order of our social arrangements, which exert a most impor-
tant and gloomy influence upon the reaction of mind upon the
body ; such are the co-operation of poverty, of wearing anxiety,
of the depressing passions and emotions generally; and finally,
in an overwhelming majority of cases, the pre-existence of
elements of degeneracy and disease in the organism.
"Poverty," says old Burton, "is the muse's patrimony; and as
that poetical divinity teacheth us, when Jupiter's daughters were
each of them married to the gods, the muses alone were left
solitary, Helicon forsaken of all suitors, and I believe it was
because they had no portion."

Calliope longum coelebs cur vixit in sevum ?
Nempe nihil dotis, quod numeraret, erat.
Literature is a "good staffbut a bad crutch,"?fascinating, cheer-
ing, and enlivening, tending to promote life, health, and an
equable mind in those who pursue it for pleasure ; but woe to
those who are dependent upon their brains for daily bread?thrice
woe, if others are dependent upon them. In straitened circum-
stances, which preclude the possibility of obtaining almost even
the necessaries of life?these only to be got by unremitting toil
?under the stern necessity for doing so much brain-work in so
many hours?for coining, in short, so much nerve tissue into so
much, or rather so little, money?pale faces around him asking
for bread and shoes?a partner of his woes vainly trying to con-
ceal that she has not wherewithal to procure the day's dinner?
who can wonder that, under privation and misery such as this,
the powers fail??who can wonder, or who can venture to blame
him, if he sometimes looks forward to the coming of the " Pale
Phantom with something of hope??who dare but veil his face
and pity him if he in some dark moment courts his coming ?
And when, having to the end kept his faith in his Makers jus-
tice, and fought his good fight, he hears a voice saying " Well
done, good and faithful servant," shall we then wonder that he
can willingly leave wife and child, to be at rest ?
The presence of the seeds of disease and degeneration in the
system has already been noticed as a fruitful source of the
deaths that so often occur apparently under the influence of
studious habits. If these co-operate with the last-mentioned
class of influences, the lethal effects will be much more rapid :
then early death, or a life of wretchedness often terminated by
suicide, is an almost necessary result.

These are sad but apparently inevitable consequences of the
conditions of society and of our race. There is, and ever will be,
a loud demand for intellect and its labours,*?there exist, and
ever will, poverty, and wretchedness, and disease ;?in the ex-
haustless combinations of society these will at times become
associated; doubtless for wise and benevolent purposes these
things are appointed as amongst our probation experiences ; it
is not our province to attempt here to " vindicate the ways of
God with men " and an investigation into the proximate causes
* TVe again quote from the thoughtful writer in the Saturday Review of Novem-
ber 7th :?"The ascendancy of mind over physical strength is civilization. Every-
body knows that Thersites would now bring down Achilles half a mile off with an
Enfield rifle. We need not quote Macau lay's remarks?as brilliant as his remarks
usually are, and more true?about ' the hunchback dwarf who urged forward the
fiery onset of France, and the asthmatic skeleton who covered the slow retreat of
England' at the battle of Landen. Read the chivalrous and romantic Froissart's
account of the deliverance of France from the English invaders?you will see
nothing but the hand of Bertrand du Guesclin.. Read the true history of the time,
and you will see that the real spring of all was the head of that feeble invalid who
conquered the two Edwards, to their great amazement, without ever mounting a
horse or drawing a sword. It was the dawn, yet unperceived by the Troubadour,
of the triumph of intellect over men-at-arms. And power having passed from the
body to the mind, ambition itself (to say nothing of higher motives) will mainly cul-
tivate that which is now the real source of power. The development of physical
strength will be comparatively neglected, and the body, in this sense, will be sacri-
ficed to the mind. Our material part still asserts its claims, as all who have tried
to work with the brain under great physical suffering or debility must know too
well; but they are the claims of a servant, not of an equal. Nay, even those gifts
of mind which are most akin to and most dependent on bodily health, have a ten-
dency to fall under the dominion of others which are of a more eccentric, and, as a
man of business might think, of a morbid kind. You naturally picture to yourself
the ideal of humanity?the great man?as a noble bodily presence, full of health
and vigour, with a mind as healthy and vigorous as its abode, with all the faculties
and acquirements equally balanced, and the soundest judgment sitting supreme
over the whole. Look at the records of history and see how far this ideal is fulfill
by the men who have really moved the world. Consider the strange and unsightly
caskets in which the rarest and most potent essences of nature have been enclosed.
* Is this humanity,' the practical writer in the Times would say of Socrates in his
day-long trance of thought, or the macerated and visionary Luther in his Augusti-
nian cell. No, strictly speaking, it is not humanity. It is the upward aspiration
of a being of whom mere humanity is the lower and grosser part. It is, in one
sense, a sort of disease. But to cure that disease would be to reduce mankind to a
mass of money-getting clay."
of these evils would lead us into the fathomless abyss of ail
inquiry into the origin of evil. We turn to more practical
points.

As there are conditions of depression and deterioration in the
system which preclude the possibility of long-continued mental
labour with impunity, there is, on the other hand, a hardy, vigo-
rous, excited state of rude health, which, so long as it lasts, is as
great a barrier to successful hard work. It is not long since we
saw a hard-working student, of good sound constitution, who had
taken the relaxation of a Continental tour for a few weeks, and
who complained on his return that he could not work?his body
was too vigorous. Again, the overworked body reacts as power-
fully upon the mind, as the overstrained mind does upon the
physique ; hence the toils and anxieties of an arduous profes-
sional life too frequently incapacitate the man of moderate
powers for any striking intellectual efforts.

It is necessary and useful to inquire what classes of tempera-
ment are the best fitted for mental labour, and the most likely to
produce satisfactory results. We say, without much hesitation,
the Phlegmatic and the Choleric.

Muller, who takes a mental and metaphysical rather than a
corporeal view of the various temperaments,* describes the
Phlegmatic as one whose "mental strivings or emotions are
neither intense nor enduring."?"In persons of this tempera-
ment, ideas are conceived with as much rapidity as in others,
and there may be the same powers of mind as in other
temperaments. When the intellectual faculties are good, this
temperament will render a person capable of more difficult
acts, and successful in a more extraordinary degree, than were his
impulses rendered stronger by a more passionate temperament"
(fi-g., the sanguine or melancholic). " Such, a person, whose
mental strivings or emotions are not violent, remains cool
and undisturbed, and is not drawn away from his determined
course to the performance of acts which he would regret on
the morrow;?he is more sure and trustworthy than persons
of an opjDosite temperament, and his success more to be de-
pended on : in times of danger, and at moments of importance,
when good judgment, calculation, and reflection, rather than
quick action, are needed, his powers are all at his command.
When rapid action is required, the phlegmatic person is less
successful, and others leave him behind ; but when no haste is
According to my view, the temperaments are entirely dependent on the different
degrees in which different individuals are disposed to the strivings and emotions
^1S1,rfr ron* the depression or excitement of the feeling of self; in other words, in
t le 1 eren degrees of disposition to the states of desire, pleasure, and pain, and
on le ex en to which these states of the mind are promoted by the composition
and states of the organs of the body."?Muller's "Physiology," translated by Baly.
necessary, and delay is admissible, lie quietly attains his end,
while others have committed error upon error, and have been
diverted from their course by their passions."
In the Melancholic and the Sanguine, the chief tendencies of the
mind are to the feeling of pain in the former and pleasure in
the latter. The Melancholic person suffers impediments to de-
press and dishearten him, and a corresponding effect is produced
on the physical frame. The Sanguine is quick to conceive, but
not stable enough for execution ; full of purpose, but fickle and
volatile in performance. The system is more formed for activity
than for study.

The Choleric has not the indifference of the Phlegmatic, but
compensates for this want by the intensity and durability with
which he can act. His powers of reflection are less, but his
action is prompt, decided, and unhesitating. He has a power-
ful will, and not given to failure where his mind is once fixed
on success. Under the influence of "ambition, jealousy, revenge^
or love of rule," his powers seem to have no limits.
The nearer is the temperament, then, to the sanguine or the
melancholic, the more care will be required in the adoption of
intensely studious habits; whilst the choleric and the phlegmatic
person may with comparative safety, and with ordinary regard
to the rules of hygiene, follow the bent of his inclinations?the
one, because his constitution is specially adapted to quiet and
sedentary pursuits; the other, because his will is sufficiently
powerful to govern the functions.

But it is time to inquire whether a negative defence of mind is
all that can be brought forward, or whether there are not positive ad-
vantages and conservative influences attendant upon mental labour
which tend to ameliorate the evils of temperament and constitu-
tion, and to prolong life. It is a matter of daily experience, how
powerful is the influence of mental application in relieving bodily
pain ; how pre-eminently successful it is in soothing the ruffled,
troubled spirit, and in softening the asperity of corroding anxiety
and care. If the student be poor, his books are his riches; and
whilst living and communing with sages and philosophers, he
has no troubles about the state of the funds or the rates of dis-
count. If he be rich, his studies are an omnipotent resource
against ennui, and will (if aught can do so) prevent that
burning desire for more which riches so often bring with them.
But mental occupation has a more direct and specific influence
upon certain hereditary maladies, of which we may adduce some
instances. Burton, himself addicted to the disease, in his
"Anatomy of Melancholy," strongly recommends study as a remedy;
and by the catalogue which he gives of things to be inquired
into, he evidently does not consider that a man need limit him-
self. Finding his health and mind failing, he took to writing
this work?a perfect miracle of learning, and doubtless by its
assistance he lived to the age of sixty-four. Poor Cowper's
melancholy was greatly relieved for a considerable time by the
writing of the " Task." With the inherent vices of his constitution,
and his tendency to the worst form of hypochondria, it is very
doubtful whether, without mental labour, sometimes of a severe
and almost compulsory character, he would have lived to the verge
of seventy. Byron found a necessity for writing to preserve the
integrity of his mind. " I must write to empty my mind, or I
shall go mad." Accumulated instances would add nothing to
the force of the argument; but no one who has suffered in mind
or body, and has had resolution to try severe study as a remedy,
will doubt its efficiency.*

Let us now inquire what testimony history bears to the
longevity of men whose lives have been essentially intellectual.
Someobjectionsmay.be made to this course of investigation;
thus we can only quote the most remarkable instances;?we can-
not in many cases say how much of the life was purely studious?
we cannot, in our limits, review the labours of these men?we
cannot enumerate those who died young, nor still less can we
estimate how man}7, who would otherwise have been great as
these, have failed in physical strength. With all these limita-
tions, we may still hope, by a cursory glance at names which
have marked epochs in philosophy and literature, to arrive at
some idea of the influence of life devoted to thought rather than
to action ; and also to prove, by positive instances, that there is
nothing in the most intense application which must necessarily
tend to shorten life, seeing that many of the most laborious men
have been octo- and nono-genarians, and even centenarians.
M. Tissot states that Gorgias, the rhetorician, lived to the
age of one hundred and eight years, " without discontinuing his
studies, and without any infirmity." Isocrates wrote his " Pan-
Athenseai" when he was ninety-four, and lived to ninety-eight.
The above writer also mentions the case of " one of the greatest
physicians in Europe, who, although he had studied very hard
all his lifetime, and is now almost seventy, wrote me word not
long since that he still studied generally fourteen hours every
day, and yet enjoyed the most perfect health."

?iypimenides, the seventh of the "wise men," lived, it is supposed>
- i? A?e one hundred and fifty-four. Herodicus, a very distin-
guished physician and philosopher, the master of Hippocrates,
,1^' tru'y said, without any hyperbole, that every pursuit which
enno ) e mm has a tendency to invigorate the body, and by its tranquillizing
influence to add to the duration of life."?Madden's "Infirmities of Genius,"
lived to the age of one hundred. Hippocrates himself, whose
genuine writings alone would be sufficient to testify to a life of
arduous study, lived to the age of ninety-nine. Galen wrote, it is
said, three hundred volumes; what now remain of his works
occupy, in the edition of 1538, five folio volumes. He lived to
near one hundred years. Lewis Cornaro wrote seven or eight
hours daily for a considerable period of his life, and lived to the
age of one hundred, in spite of a feeble constitution originally.
Theophrastus wrote two hundred distinct treatises, and lived
to the age of one hundred and seven. Zeno, the founder of the
Stoic school, lived to the age of ninety-eight; and, in the
full possession of his faculties, then committed suicide, having
received, as he supposed, a warning by a wound of the thumb
that it was time for him to depart. Democritus was so devoted
to study and meditation that he put out his eyes, it is said, that
external objects might not distract his attention. He died aged
one hundred and nine years. Sophocles, died aged ninety-one.
Xenoplion, Diogenes, and Carneades, each lived to the age of
ninety. Varro wrote five hundred volumes, and lived to
eighty-eight years. Euripides died aged eighty-five; Polybius,
eighty-one; Juvenal, above eighty; Pythagoras, eighty; Quin-
tillian, eighty. Chrysippus died of laughter, at eighty. The
poet Pindar died aged eighty ; Plato, aged eighty-one. Socrates,
in the full possession of his faculties, was judicially murdered
at seventy-one. Anaxagoras, to whom we have before alluded,
died at seventy-two. Aristotle died at sixty-three. Thucydides
was eighty.

It would be difficult to select twenty-five names which exerted
a much greater influence upon literature, philosophy, and history,
than these in old times. Many- of them are known to have been
most voluminous writers?many of them most profound thinkers.
These were not the days of handbooks and vade-mecums; those
who wanted information or mental cultivation had to work for it.
Yet the average age of these twenty-five men is exactly ninety
years. It is much to be questioned whether the united ages of
twenty-five of the most distinguished farmers that the world has
ever produced would amount to two thousand two hundred and
fifty years. The list might easily be enlarged greatly by such
men as Seneca and Pliny, who came to untimely death by
accident or tyranny, and who promised to live as long as the
oldest, in the course of nature.

"VVe cannot refrain from quoting some remarks upon the
labours of the old commentators, which appeared in an amusing
paper in a contemporary journal,* before passing in review the
ages of some of the most distinguished :?

" Homer says that it would take nine men of his degenerate day to
lift a stone thrown by a single warrior of the heroic ages. We know
not how many men of our own time it would take to equal the labour
of our commentator?certainly not less than a dozen. In truth, his
were the heroic days of literature. See how the pile of manuscript
grows under his indefatigable fingers! If he lias sat at work less than
sixteen hours in the twenty-four, he considers, like Titus, that he has
lost a day. 'Fits!' says Bernard Lintot, in Pope's squib against
Dennis?' a man may well have fits and swollen legs who sits writing
fourteen hours a day.' Alas ! the degenerate days had already set in ;
in the time of Bernard Lintot, our commentator sat writing for sixteen
hours, for six months in succession, without having fits or swollen legs.
There was a time when he only allowed himself one night's rest out of
three. He was warm with youth in those days, and found that he had
gone too far; there are stones too heavy even for Homeric heroes.
No wonder that piles of folios grew out of his labours."
Yet these old writers, commentators and others, were appa-
rently a hardy race?they were generally long-lived. Beza, the
severity of whose enormous labours might be supposed to be
aggravated as to the results by the acrimonious controversies in
which he was engaged, lived in the perfect enjoyment of his
faculties up to the age of eighty-six. The learned Richard
Bentley died at eighty-one; Neander was seventy-eight; Scaliger,
sixty-nine; Heyne, eighty-four ; Parr, eighty ; Pighius, eighty-
four ; Yossius, seventy-three; Hobbes, ninety-one, at death.
Mr. Madden, the able author of the " Infirmities of Genius/'
has constructed some most instructive tables relative to the
longevity of men distinguished for their intellectual pursuits.
He says that each list contains twenty names, in which " no
other attention has been given to the selection than that which
eminence suggested, without any regard to the ages of those who
presented themselves to notice."

An analysis of the tables gives the following averages of life for
the various classes :?
Aggregate years. Average.
Twenty natural philosophers 1504 ... 75
Twenty moral philosophers 1417 ... 70
Twenty sculptors and painters .... 1412 ... 70
Twenty authors on law, &c  1394 ... 69
Twenty medical authors  1368 ... 68
Twenty authors on revealed religion . . 1350 ... -67
1 wenty philologists  1323 ... 66
Iwenty musical composers  1284 ... 64
1 wenty novelists and miscellaneous authors 1257 ... 62^
Iwenty dramatists  1249 ... 62
Twenty authors on natural religion' . 1245 ... 62
Twenty poets   1144 ... 57
D 2

This list does not by any means give too high an average of
life for literary characters. Many of the oldest are omitted from
the calculations, because, though equally laborious, their emi-
nence was not quite so great; and, again, many are inserted,
because eminent, who died young, obviously not from causes
connected with mental application. This is particularly illus-
trated amongst the poets by the cases of Byron and Burns,
whose deaths certainly were not justly to be attributed to the
nature of their mental habits. Amongst artists, also, Fuseli
(eighty-four), Nollekens (eighty-six), Kneller (seventy-five), and
Albert Durer (eighty-seven), are not mentioned. M. Lordat, in
his "Mental Dynamics/' gives many remarkable instances of
intellectual pursuits being carried on to an extremely advanced
age?" for instance, M. des Quersonnieres, one hundred and six-
teen years of age, now residing in Paris, an accomplished poet,
remarkable for his powers of conversation, and full of vivacity."
He mentions also another poet, M. Leroy, aged one hundred
years. Fontenelle, considered the most universal genius that
Europe has produced, for forty-two years Secretary to the
Academy of Sciences in Paris, lived with unimpaired faculties
to the age of one hundred years. Father Sirmond, called by
Naudd "an inexhaustible treasury of ecclesiastical lore/' lived to
the age of ninety-three. Hutton, the learned geologist and cos-
mogonist, died at ninety-two.

We will now give a table of distinguished men, with their ages,
independent of classification or chronology?such names as are
sufficiently known to the world to preclude the necessity of
giving any account of their labours :?
Age.

Bacon (Roger) . . . . 78
Buffon 81
Copernicus 70
Galileo 78
Lowenhoeck 91
Age.
Hoffman ...... 83
Pinel 81
Claude 82
Titian 96
Franklin 85
Newton 81 Halley 8G
Whiston . . . . ._ 95 ; Herschel 81
Young 84 i La Place 77
Ferguson (Adam) . . . 92 ] Linnaeus 72
Kant 80 ; Metastasio 81
Reid (T.) 80 j Milton GO
Goethe 82
Crebillon 89
Goldoni 85
Bentham ...... 85
Mansfield .88
Le Sage .... t . 80
Wesley (John) , , , 88
Bacon (Lord) .... 65
Hobbes 91
Locke 72
Stewart (D.) 75
Voltaire 84
Cumberland 80
Southern (Thomas) . . 80
BODY V. MIND. 37
Age. ; Age.
Coke (Lord) 85 Rollin 80
Wilmot 83 Waller 82
Itabelais 70 ; Chalmers 83
Harvey 81
Heberden 92
Michael Angelo .... 90
Handel 75
Haydn 77
ltuysch 93
Winslow 91
Morgagni 89
Cardan 70
South (Dr.) 83
Johnson (Dr.) . . . . 75
Cherubini 82
Fleury (Cardinal) . . .90
Anquetil 84
Swift 78
Watts (Dr.) 74
Watt (Jas.) 83
Erasmus 09

This list is taken entirely at random, and might be almost
indefinitely enlarged ; but we are warned to conclude.
There are certain practical deductions obviously to be drawn
from the details and arguments that have been brought forward.
1. Devotion to intellectual pursuits and to studies, even of the
most severe* and unremitting character, is not incompatible with
extreme longevity, terminated by a serene and unclouded sunset.
When Fontenelle's brilliant career terminated, and lie was asked
if he felt pain, he replied, "I only feel a difficulty of existing."
2. Mental application is a powerful remedy in diseases both
of body and mind; and its power as a remedy is proportionate
to its intensity as a pursuit.

3. The emotions, especially those of a depressing kind, as
anxiety, fear, &c., have a remarkable influence in giving a tone
to, and intensifying the morbific effects of, excessive mental labour.
Yet in some cases, as in those of Byron and Cowper, the best
and only resource against despair is found in composition.
4. The turmoils of active life do not appear to render intel-
lectual labour more injurious to the system; possibly here also
the influence may be counteracting. Milton, the Secretary to the
Commonwealth, in times when men lived years in months blind
and in domestic discomfort, writing his immortal poems; John
Wesley, persecuted and almost an outcast from his former friends
in "labours more abundant"?denying himself natural rest and
refreshment, yet acting with mind and body with_ unparalleled
energy; Voltaire, the apostle of infidelity, at war with more than
the whole world; Luther, hunted by principalities and powers
like a wild beast?these and a cloud of others warred with the
existing order of things, and remained masters of themselves and
their mental powers to a ripe old age.

Dr Johnson composed liis "Dictionary" in seven years! And during that time
lie wrote also the Prologue to the opening of Drury Lane Theatre ; the " Vanity ol
Human Wishes;" the tragedy of "Irene;" and'the " Rambler"?an almost in-
comprehensible effort of mind. He lived to the age of seventy-five.
5. The injurious effects of mental labour are in great measure
owing?
To excessive forcing in early youth ;
To sudden or misdirected study;
To the co-operation of depressing emotions or passions;
To the neglect of the ordinary rules of hygiene;
To the neglect of the hints of the body; or
To the presence of the seeds of disease, degeneration, and
decay in the system.

6. The man of healthy phlegmatic or choleric temperament is
less likely to be injured by application than one of the sanguine
or melancholic type; yet these latter, "with allowance for the
original constitution, may be capable of vast efforts.
7. The extended and deep culture of the mind exerts a directly
conservative influence upon the body.

Fellow-labourer! one word to you before we conclude. Fear
not to do manfully the work for which your gifts qualify you;
but do it as one who must give an account both of soul* and
body. Work, and work hard, whilst it is day; but the night
cometh soon enough?do not hasten it. Use your faculties, use
them to the utmost, but do not abuse them?make not the
mortal do the work of the immortal. The body has its claims,
?it is a good servant; treat it well, and it will do your work;
it knows its own business; do not attempt to teach or to force it;
* That a mental endowment should retain its vigour, it is necessary that it
be moderately exercised. If the exercise of the religious sentiments be interrupted,
for example, by too exclusive an attention to science, communion with God will
lose its relish. Claudius Buchanan, while at Cambridge, wrote to a friend as
follows :?"I find this great attention to study has made me exceedingly languid
in my devotional duties. I feel not that delight in reading the Bible, nor that
pleasure in Divine things, which formerly animated me. On this account have many
serious students in this University wholly abandoned the study of mathematics ;
for it seems they generally feel the same effects that I do."?Dr Cheyne, on Partial
Derangement of Mind in supposed connexion with Religion, pp. 57?59.
It is a great mistake to suppose that men who have obtained great distinction
and high honours at our two English Universities, do not in after life occupy the
most eminent positions at the bar, on the bench, and in the Senate. First, as to
Oxford.?Earl of Eldon, English Prize Essay, 1771; Lord Tenterden, (Lord Chief
Justice of the King's Bench,) English Essay, 1786, Latin verse, 1784 ; Sir W. E.
Taunton, (Judge in Court of King's Bench,) English Essay, 1793; J. Phillimore,
(Professor of Civil Law,) English Essay, 1798; SirC. E. Gray, (Chief Justice of Ben-
gal,) English Essay, 1808 ; Sir J. T. Coleridge, (Judge in Court of Queen's Bench,)
English Essay, 1813, Latin verse, 1810, Latin Essay, 1813, 1st class Classics,
1812 ; Herman Merivale, (Professor of Political Economy,) English Essay, 1830,
1st class Classics, 1827 ; Eoundell Palmer, (Deputy Steward of the University,)
Latin Essay, 1835, Latin verse, 1831, English verse, 1832, 1st class Classics,
1834 ; Lord Colchester, Latin verse, 1777 ; Sir J. Richardson, (Judge in Common
Pleas,) Latin verse, 1792 ; Sir Charles Puller, (Chief Justice at Calcutta,) Latin,
verse, 1794 ,' G. K. Rickards, (Professor of Political Economy,) English verse,
1830, 2nd class Classics, 1833 ; Senior Nassault, (Professor of Political Economy,)
1st class Classics, 1811 ; Sir Richard Bethell, (Attorney-General, University
Counsel,) 1st class on the Classics, 1818 ; Honourable J. C. Talbot, (Deputy High
attend to its wants and requirements, listen kindly and patiently
to its hints, occasionally forestall its necessities by a little indul-
gence, and your consideration will be repaid with interest. But
task it and pine it and suffocate it, make it a slave instead of a
servant; it may not complain much, but, like the weary camel
in the desert, it will lay it down and die.
Steward,) 1st double Classics, 1825 ; Travers Twiss, (Regius Professor of Civil
Law,) 2nd double Classics, 1830.

Cambridge.?Sir F. Maseres, (Baron, Exchequer,) 4th Wrangler, 1752, Senior
Medallist ; Sir Elijah Impey, (Chief Justice, Fort William, Bengal,) 2nd Senior
Optime, 1756, Junior Medallist; Sir J. Wilson, (Judge, Common Pleas,) Senior
Wrangler, 1761 ; Lord Alvanley, (Chief Justice, Common Pleas,) 12th Wrangler,
1766 ; the late Lord Elleiiborougli, (Chief Justice, King's Bench,) 3rd Wrangler,
1771, Senior Medallist; Sir S. Lawrence, (Judge, Common Pleas,) 7th Wrangler,
1771 ; Sir H. Russell, (Judge in India,) 4th Senior Optime, 1772 ; the late Lord
Manners, (Chancellor of Ireland,) 5th Wrangler, 1777 ; Chief Justice Warren, of
Chester, 9th Wrangler, 1785 ; the late John Bell, Senior Wrangler, 1786, Senior
Smith s Prizeman ; Sir J. Littledale, (Judge in Court of Queen's Bench,) Senior
Wrangler, 1787, Senior Smith's Prizeman; Lord Lyndlmrst, (late Lord Chancellor,)
2nd \\ rangier, 1794, Junior Smith's Prizeman ; Sir John Beckett, (Judge Advo-
cate,) 5th Wrangler, 1795 ; the late Sir John Williams, (Judge, Queen's Bench,)
18th Senior Optime, 1798; the late Sir N. C. Tindal, (Chief Justice, Common
Pleas,) 8th Wrangler, 1799, Senior Medallist; the late Sir L. Shadwell, (Vice-
Chancellor of England,) 7 th Wrangler, 1800, Junior Medallist ; Starkie, (Downing
Professor of Law, University Counsel,) Senior Wrangler, 1803, Senior Smith's Prize-
man ; Lord Wensleydale, 5th Wrangler, 1803, Senior Medallist; the late Sir T.
Coltman, (Judge, Common Pleas,) 13th Wrangler, 1803; Lord Chief Baron
Pollock, Senior Wrangler, 1806, Senior Smith's Prizeman; Lord Langdale, Senior
Wrangler, 1808, Senior Smith's Prizeman; the late Baron Alderson, Senior Wrangler,
1809, Senior Smith's Prizeman, and Senior Medallist; Sir W. H. Maule, (Judge,
Common Pleas,) Senior Wrangler, 1810, Senior Smith's Prizeman ; Baron Piatt,
(Exchequer,) 5th Junior Optime, 1810 ; Chambers, (Judge of Supreme Court,
Bombay,) 5th Wrangler, 1811 ; Lord Cranworth, 17th Wrangler, 1812 ; Mire-
house, (Author of Law of Tithes, and Common Serjeant of City of London,)
13th Senior Optime, 1812 ; Sir J. Romilly, (Downing Professor of Law, and Pro-
fessor of Law, University College, London,) 4th Wrangler, 1813 ; Vice-Chancellor
Xindersley, 4th Wrangler, 1814; Sir R. H. Malkin, (Chief Justice of Prince of
Wales's Island,) 3rd Wrangler, 1818 ; Lord Justice Turner, 9th Wrangler, 1819 ;
the late R. C. Hildyard, (Queen's Counsel,) 12th Senior Optime, 1823 ; Mi-. John
Cowling, Q.C., M.P., (University Counsel, and Deputy High Steward,) Senior
Wrangler, 1824, Senior Smith's Prizeman ; Vice-Chancellor Wood, 24th Wrangler,
1824; Vice-Chancellor Parker, 7th Wrangler, 1825 ; Mr. LoftusT. Wigram, Q.C.,
(M.P. for University,) 8tli Wrangler, 1825 ; Chief Justice Martin, (New Zealand,)
26th Wrangler, 1829, 3rd in 1st class Classics, and Junior Medallist.
Dublin.?1795, Sir T. Lefroy, (Chief Justice of Queen's Bench,) gold medal;
1800, Sir J. L. Foster, (Judge, Common Pleas, M.P. for University, 1807,) gold
medal; 1802, P. C. Crampton, (Queen's Counsel, Judge, Queen's Bench,) gold medal;
1803, F. Blackburne, (Lord Chancellor of Ireland,) gold medal; 1811, R. H.
Creene, (Baron of Exchequer,) gold medal; 1823, J. H. Monahan, (Chief Justice
Common Pleas,) gold medal.
