Mind And Body
==============

Art. VI.-
A LECTURE, BY KOBEB.T JAMIESON, M.D.,
President of the Medico-Ckirurgical Society of Aberdeen, Medical Superintendent of the Royal
Lunatic Asylum, <J"e.
The object of this paper is to illustrate the presumed course of
nervous movement concerned in the mental phenomena ?which
nre associated with the Brain. In the title, the use of the
term Phrenic, or Phrenical, is preferred in the notion that it
harmonizes better with physiological discussions on the cere-
bral functions, than does the commoner equivalent Psychical,
which is rather suggestive of the spiritual than of the organic
relationships of Mind. In the avoidance of the more ordinary
NO. X.?NEW SERIES.
Ik
336 MIND AND BODY.
term, however, any sympathy with materialistic views, as such,
has to he repudiated; and hut a philosophic liberty of scientific
speculation claimed as not incompatible with simplicity and faith-
fulness in matters of belief. The adjective Phrenic has been
used hitherto in physiology as denominating a respiratory nerve
going to the diaphragm, and applied originally on the supposi-
tion that that organ?the midriff, which upholds the heart itself,
and is so subservient in many an emotion?was no less than the
seat of the Mind. It is more legitimately applicable to cerebral
functions; and, indeed, as suggested by Dr. Guislain, the term
Phrenology would be the best term for the science of the mental
functions of the nervous system, could it be successfully reclaimed
from the spurious philosophy to which it is allied?as it certainly
would have best comprehended technically the observations now
offered in elucidation of cerebral action.
Avocations not averse entirely to such speculations have, how-
ever, been such as tended to make them be approached quite as
often from a medical as from a metaphysical starting-point,
rendering an apologetic prologue necessary for any inclination to
impose pathological for physiological illustrations. Nor can it
be less appropriate to claim, beforehand, some indulgence~forbring-
ing forward views which may seem neither very profound nor alto-
gether new in an assembly numbering many acquainted with, and
some eminent in, the departments of physiology and psychology.
The observation that the Mind is capable of becoming diseased,
would indicate either its non-spirituality, its composite constitu-
tion, or that it is known to us but by machinery doomed to de-
rangement and decay?for the only psychical disorders are per-
plexities and errors, or rather there is no spiritual disease but
sin. Yet, there is a plirenical pathology; and its sources are
two?being material decay on the one hand, or vice on the other
?either of which may occasion disturbance of that relationship
of spirit and matter by which manifestation of mind is possible.
The study of the human mind may be carried on in several
ways?as by subjective questionings of consciousness, by obser-
vation of the actions of men, and by examination of the human
organism. Metaphysicians have made most of the first way, and
physiologists of the last; but a right philosophy determines each
mode to be perfect, and requiring to be supplemented by the others.
In self-regarding our minds, we distinguish a set of ideas, and
a capacity of regarding these. On continued introspection, it
is further seen that the ideas, though a multitude, are really but
a succession of individuals coming into consciousness in single
file, one by one, and capable of being marshalled by the faculty
which is regarding them. That faculty is the Will; and its
power over the current of thoughts consists, not in creating
them, but in regulating their succession, so that particular ideas
MIND AND BODY. 337
may be advanced, detained, superseded, recalled, or otherwise
dealt with in the wish of the individual. The Will has a power
over the succession of ideas; and when ideas move continuously
independently of the Will, the mind is diseased.
But the Will itself is not incapable of being influenced by the
thoughts which it is its business to guide. It stirs through the
reaction of certain of these upon it?which thoughts are called
motives. In a healthy state the Will is free to act or not although
urged by motives. It cannot act without a motive ; but it need
not speak the words whispered iuto its ear, nor use the weapon
put into its hand. It has a choice of action, and a choice of
motive; and when it ceases to have, the Mind is diseased.
In the natural Human Mind, then, the Will has a government
of the current of thoughts, which, again, seek to move, but do
not coerce the Will. Individuality is in the Will; personality
is the Will; the Will is the Man. In the same state, the Will
is free, and thought and action are neither will-ful, nor will-less;
in the insane, the Will is driven by thought, and is blinded,
fettered, and overridden by disease.
But if insanity depended in any case on abeyance of judgment,
liow is it a diseased condition of the volition ; and what has dis-
ordered Understanding to do with a morbid quality of Will ?
Will and Understanding have been kept far enough apart on
psychologic pages undoubtedly; but truly, does it not seem
that not only is there no doing, but that there is even no think-
ing without the activity of the personal Will ? In every action
of the mind, thought, feeling, and volition are concerned; for,
indeed, consciousness reports itself a unity, and not a muster of
related forces. Disordered intellect is disordered mind, and, in
that, diseased Will. The Will is the essence of the faculty of
attention, which is at the base of all intellectual operations, and
that of judgment amongst them. An insane idea has its origin
in a loss of healthy action in the mental faculties, and is estab-
lished and continued through defect in the Will, just as much as a
morbid propensity is. Abnormal excitement, depression, apathy,
stupidity, folly, and delusion, are phenomena of defective control
of thought or action. They are all traceable to a fading per-
sonality. The individualism of the subject is less apparent?its
limitation less distinct?the ego less asserted?the person is less
himself less a king over his thoughts, which are more and more
impressible by external causes, and less and less the reagents of
the personal mind. Thoughts possess the man; his organisms are
becoming the playthings of sensational influences, so that instead of
possessing his ideas, lie is, as Coleridge said, possessed by them.
The ideas which furnish the mind, and are in its keeping, have
been classified as Ideas of Sensation and Ideas of Reflection.
z 2
338 MIND AND BODY.
The former proceed from the action of the material external
world on the personality, and the latter from the action of the
personality on the Ideas of Sensation. Ideas of Sensation spring
from two sources,?the Human Body and the extraneous body
of the Universe. They rush inwards towards the conscious Brain,
through " the five gates of knowledge"?the Eye, the Ear, and
other organs of sense; and rise up also, to the sensorium, from
the penetralia of the body itself. Perhaps ideas, that can scarcely
be called sensational, may be born with the Brain itself, or descend
to it from the universal Pneuma by which it is overarched ;* but
to speculate so were less metaphysical than mystic, and more
imaginative than either. Without adopting such fancies, pro-
bably we should take too narrow a gauge of our Ideas, in limiting
their origin to the impressions on the nerves of the senses, for
there is the certainty of many of our feelings being either morbid
or healthy, in harmony with states of welfare, or the reverse, in
the hidden chambers of the animal economy, where there is
neither eye, nor ear, nor any accredited ambassador from the
distant seat of government, and where even a muffled sensibility
is very doubtfully recognised. Save as general feelings of com-
fort, cheerfulness, and self-assuredness, it would be difficult to
condescend on any detail of such ideas, under ordinary corporeal
conditions; but while the psychologist might scruple to declare
them, the observer of the mental phenomena of disease has no
hesitation in pointing to the trepidation of the palpitating heart,
the moroseness of the disturbed liver, and the poltroonery or
hysteric mobility of lowered sexual vitality, as evidentiary of the
field of sensation that may lie within the barriers where the ex-
ternal senses are placed. Nay, some speculations have not
rested at the organs of the body, but have wished to establish
the recognition of a communion, through the living blood, of all
the conservative fluids of the economy with the humanizing
influences of the Brain.
The external world, both of foieign material objects and of the
somatic phases of the individual, acting brainwards, constitutes
but the receptivity or passive voice of Mind. There is an ability
of reacting on the external world; and in the mind there are
ideas of Reflection, as well as of Sensation. It possesses a power
that rules the ranks of ideas as they rise, or even recalls them
from the limbo of thought into which they sink, so that they move
again like ghosts of themselves across the cerebral tracks, or start
up in a resurrection transcending all sensational experiences. It
is not our object, however, at present, to demonstrate the reflec-
tive capacities and activities of mind, and to dwell on such phe-
nomena as Memory and Imagination abstractedly from their
* Gardiner "Wilkinson.
MIND AND BODY. 339
organic relationships, and, therefore, let us hurry forward to the
consideration of the corporeal machinery connected with phrenic
action, and the physiological rather than the metaphysical view
of the subject.
For the production of the Human Mind, phenomena are ob-
servable pointing to a union of the spiritual with the material, in
the way of sympathetic, parallel, synchronous, or, as is most
likely, unnameable and inscrutable relationship and communion.
In truth, we do not know Mind, but only Humanity. A mere
consciousness of ideas of sensation and reflection could never
have found its way into a nosology, or into an hospital, or been
treated or mistreated as efficiently "by a Doctor in Medicine, as by
a Doctor in Philosophy. Mind has a recognition in practice of
Physic as well as in impractical Metaphysics. The only mind
we know at all, and can seek to investigate, is the Human Mind;
and it is self-asserting and individual in others, quite as much as
it is conscious in ourselves. There is a faculty of Will, which in
us compels acknowledgment of itself by our fellows, and in them
a recognition by us. I know my own faculties subjectively, but
those of others only sensationally. Of me, none but I can have
any knowledge, save of those things which my body does. Subjec-
tive knowledge has an incompleteness in it practically, and mere
observation is lacking in profundity. We know not Mind but
Humauity, and that inefficiently. We know nothing of each
other but the telegraphing of our muscular systems, and the
indicia of their working, as recorded on matter around us. Ego
and non-ego are not self-limited and apart more than are ego and
tu separated from absolute observation of each other by a hedge
of muscular movement. Sensation, perceived in others, is but
motion perceived; will, but directed movement; and emotion,
but physiognomical expression. For example: What do we
know of anger, but that it is a peculiar action of the facial
muscles, with, probably, associated violence and malevolence of
deed ; of fear, but that it is tremor, flight, paralysis, and so
forth ; of talent, but that it is the successful result of endeavour;
or of genius, but the exhibition of new power? So, to harangue
from the pathologist's pulpit, in relation to disease of mind,
lunacy is simply morbid action, insanity nothing more specially
mysterious than sorrowing vitality is mysterious?only a sick
man making an unhappy self-assertion of absurdity, and requir-
ing the attention of the physician and pharmacy but to reform
his gymnastical deportment, so that he shall, peradventure, once
more appear to be, and be denominated wise. Medico-legally, as
you may be aware, it does not signify at all what hallucinations
a man has, but only what delusions he believes in and obeys to
do folly I and, therefore, that it is the doer of foolish things that,
is lunatic, and only, the madman that is insane. The Fatuus
340 MIND AND BODY.
and Furiosus, only they, are the freemen of the asylum, and the
freedmen of the social world.
From such views it may be stated, that a man's Mind is a
movement betwixt feeling and action?a spiritual intervention
betwixt organs of sense affected by impressions of matter on the
one hand, and matter affected by muscular action on the other.
Conversely, Body is a substantial nexus of feeling and willing.
All phrenical action, from the lowest manifestations in the
animal world to the highest self-consciousness in man, is educed
from animal machinery by the traction of a loving Spirit which
no human science has apprehended.
We seek but to understand something of the phreno-corporeal
relation from the corporeal side.
So far as physiology at present guides us, it would seem that
the manifestation of mind in the human body, and indeed phrenic
action under every circumstance of life, is dependent on the in-
tervention of the grey nervous cell between spiritual influence
and perceptible matter. To affect thought, matter must act through
this channel; and to influence, matter, mind must start forward
from the same intermedium. In phrenic action these cells wax
and decay, and are renewed, by an unseen stimulus acting on a
living organism, whose vital capacity of so responding has been
thought to be associated, in a more special degree, with the
phosphoric element of nervous tissue, than with any other of its
chemical constituents.
In Sensibility, which is the base of all phrenic manifestation,
and the root whereby the blossom of mind is nourished from the
soil, the grey nervous tissue, which, in the form of a cell-nucleus,
terminates every sensitive nerve, is impressed by the contact of
an external object. This impression is conveyed through a sus-
ceptible track of white nervous matter, called a nerve, to a mass
of grey neurine?a mass of nervous cells-?called a ganglion,
where the inward moving impression loses its character, and is
reflected outwards as a reacting force. This force is conveyed
from the ganglion also by a nerve, which, however, does not end
in grey neurine, but in muscular fibre. The muscle, thus
quickened, indicates the establishment of sensibility by contract-
ing, and thus more or less directly reacting on the external
matter, whose impression was the beginning of this chain of vital
action.
Such is the apparatus of sensibility; though not seen so dis-
guised in simplicity, but always elaborated; the cell-nucleus and
its adjuncts being surrounded by structures framing organs of
sense, and the opposed contractile fibres being made up with
fulcra and levers into animal forms. Sensibility need have no
connexion with Mind. It is not mind; but it always underlies
MIND AND BODY. 341
it. It is sensation without consciousness; and is, simply, what
is known to physiologists as irritability, nerve-action, spinal or
reflex action, a phenomenon in living bodies which is not phrenic,
and for which no cerebrum is required.
The above is a representation of vital reaction, not of sensa-
tion. Sensitive nerves are, it is true, employed; but before they
can be the means of conveying conscious sensation, they must
form part of a more complex nervous arrangement. The appa-
ratus must be enlarged in the ascending direction by addition of
grey nerve-tissue ; so that when the sensitive nerve is affected by
external stimulation, the impression conveyed along the nerve,
after reaching the before-mentioned ganglion, instead of being,
as formerly, immediately indicated outwardly by reflex action,
travels upwards to a second ganglion, where the impression
becomes a Perception or conscious sensation, and its external
manifestation in the muscular system an expression of Emotion,
and an indication of pleasure or pain.
The following diagram represents the machinery required for
the commencement of phrenic action, and the establishment and
indication of consciousness. Mind was not indicated before this
development was given; consciousness was not born, and no
cerebrum was required. As yet this child is but infantine; and
M. Matter, g. Termination of sensitive nerve: organs of sense.
N. Nerve : white nervous tissue. G. Ganglion : grey nervous
tissue. C. Muscle. S. Instrument of reaction: skeleton, &c.
342 mind and body.
the phrenic capacity represented demands but a small brain
made up but of the Thalami Optici, Corpora Olivaria, and sen-
sorial ganglia, and of the Corpora Striata, and motor ganglia.
Emotional acts, though the outward indication of sensation
do not express merely the perceptions derived from the five ex-
ternal senses, but also those less fully apprehensible which rise
out of the common sensation of the body?such as hunger thirst
fatigue, and many other feelings which are peculiarly liable to
be morbidly expressed. When it is well with organs, tissues-
and fluids, in the hidden chambers of the body, there will be a
declared manifestation of cheerfulness/ activity, and natural
affections; when otherwise, more probably melancholy nnnthv
and deranged impulses. Not that such conditions are in every
case so generated, even when they are the undoubted offspring of
bodily disease, for their origin may be at the nervous centre! as
well as at the nervous extremities.
Before going on further with this synthetic exposition of
phrenic action, and the demonstration in a diagrammatic way of
its machinery, it has to be stated, what may not be indicated by
signs or symbols, that the mind is more than n recipient and
exponent of sensational impiessions and emotional intercourses.
While the stimuli which pass inwards as sensations are trans.-
Sensation. j PERCEPTION. 1 Emotive Expression.
Ext. Impression. [ VITAL ACTION. \ Reflex Action
MIND AND BODY. 343
mitted outwards as muscular force, they have left something
behind, which has been called experience, in the charge of a cer-
tain capacity of retention in the nerve tissues, named memory,
and which is reproducible in recollection. In what way soever
sensations are conveyed onwards from the terminations of nerves
through nervous track to nervous track, from ganglion to gan-
glion?whether by vibration, current, or in whatever unknown
way?this current, or its effects in the nervous tissues, would seem
to be reproducible therein?not merely by the renewal of the
external stimulus, but also by an internal excitation passing
downwards to the seat of sensorial perception from regions higher
than those to which we have yet inquiringly ascended. The
sensation is again felt, and, perhaps, even its physical indications
manifested by its corporeal machinery. I repeat: the ganglia of
perception and emotion are capable of being influenced by a
recurrent stimulation generated internally, and transmitted to
them from parts higher up in the nervous scale, and which causes
them to reproduce and re-act whatever impulses had come to them
from without. The ganglia of perception have a valuable trea-
sure in them in this way, but they have no mine wider or pro-
founder than their experience, however importunate may be the
craving of imagination.
The human brain being more than a mere sensorium, is not
culminated or domed by the ganglia of perception ; and conscious
sensation is not therefore manifested outwardly in expressed
emotion as the necessary sum and completion of phrenic phe-
nomena, but travels upwards, from the domain of perception, to
ganglia which are superimposed in position, and thereby dominant
in authority. The impression, which had become a part of con-
sciousness in perception, passes along a nervous track to the
ganglia which form the seat of the Will; and when the force is;
at last diverted externally to the muscular system, it is now made
apparent, not in the guise of instinctive expression of pleasure or
pain, nor as simple reflex action, but as voluntary motion or
volition.
The nervous superaddition now referred to is the proper
beginning of the organism related to the operations of the Human
Mind. Unless the original stimulus be powerful to produce a
vital impression, and the impression distinct enough to be
advanced to the seat of sensation, and its perception be successful
in stimulating volition, it does not contribute in any degree to
the furnishing of the mind. The Will is the gate through which
ideas must be ushered to become objects to the personal con-
sciousness, and is the outlet by which go forth all the manifesta-
tions of individualism. The fundamental intellectual process is
what we term the Attention?which is but the potency of the-
344 mind and body.
Will over perception; and the base of all power is the guiding
rein by which volition holds muscular contraction, and composes
mere spasm and convulsion into resistance and endeavour.
There are no mental powers, but only a mental power?viz.,
the Will.
Speculatively, it is a power governing the current of thoughts,
and evolving from their movements and associations the various
operations of retaining, recalling, combining, alternating, and so
forth, exhibited in recollection, fancy, judgment, and other so-
called faculties of the mind; while, practically, it gives a cha-
racter of emancipation to forces which without it were fixed in
mechanical-like formality both of direction and degree, instead of
being outwardly exhibited, variously modified by the fiat of the
Attention. I WILL. 1 Vol. Motion.
Ext. Impression.
Sensation. PERCEPTION. I Emotive Expression
MIND AND BODY. 345
free internal Will, or even being entirely suppressed within the
consciousness of the man himself, were such latency the dictate
of an advised and instructed volition.
The seat of the Will is in the hemispherical ganglia of the
brain.
Reflection. [ REASON. j Control.
Attention. I WILL. | Vol. Motion.
J
Sensation. ( PERCEPTION. 1 Emotive Expression.
Ext. Impression. I VITAL ACTION.
Reflex Action.
346 MIND AND BODY.
The nervous impression, -which we have traced as an assumed
current from point to point, as becoming successively sensibility,
sensation, and volition, and as exhibited in reflex muscular action,
emotive expression, and voluntary motion, may rise yet higher
than the region of the Will, and have more transcendent and ex-
cellent manifestation carried onwards, by reference of the Will,
through the channels of reflection, to the stage of nervous orga-
nization and development, where mere reflex movement?which
had first become conscious, and next voluntary?may yet become
rationally controlled before outward declaration.
Ascent carries forward the nervous current, in the act ot
reflexion, through the ganglion of Ileason, to be displayed exter-
nally as voluntary muscular motion rationally controlled, or it
may be rationally suppressed. The establishment of an authority
higher than volition leads us to a brief consideration of the rela-
tion of humanity to freedom and fatalism. Humanity is the
manifestation of the Will of Man. The will acts from motives,
and cannot act but by the influence of motives. These are often
denominated loicer or higher. What do these terms mean in the
physiology of phrenical action ? They mean, that when motives
are such as to be called lower, they are ideas coming from ganglia
lower than the seat of volition in the phrenic organism ; and that
when they can be called higher, they are the judgments of
Reason, or the controlling influence of gauglia elevated above
that of the Will. The lower motives are independent by their
birth, and tyrannous and unrestrained by inclination. They
have a guaranteed access to the Will, but the Will need not obey
them. They are the subject mob over which the Will is king.
It is the Will that says amen to desire; instead, however, of
transmitting its tumultuous urgency onwards to a termination in
deeds?instead of converting sensational impulses into motor
force?it may direct the current upwards, so to speak, into the
sphere of Beason, and first regulate its expression by control.
The higher motives are not so chartered; they do not urge the
will unsought, as do the lower motives, but come only when
called for by the Will, and act only when thus permitted. The
degree in which the Will is subjected to the higher motives is
dependent on the phrenical habits of the man himself. His Will
is free. It may obey the lower motives, but it may refer them to
the judgment of the Reason and disobey tliem, preferring the
approval of this and such authority to the gratification of sense
or desire. Necessity compels to action, but does not govern the
deed.
The Will is the fulcrum of all muscular action that is phreni-
cally instituted. All subordinate points of vitality in cerebral
function?all sensibilities?all their corporeal expression?form
>
MIND AND BODY. 347
SPIRIT.
Faith. Love.
Reflection. I REASON. 1 Control
Attention. I WILL. I Vol. Motion.
Sensation. [ PERCEPTION 1 Emotive Expression.
Ext. Impression, f VITAL ACTION. [ 1 Reflex Action
MATTER.
348 MIND ' AND BOD'S,,
lout footsteps of the mental throne on which the volition is in-
stalled as king; and aught higher, as the Reason, whether reflec-
tive or intuitional, is hut an oracle which the king cultivates and
consults, just so far as he chooses to seek piety and wisdom.
Here, in the hemispheric ganglia of the brain, is the terminus
of the nervous chain, and the completion of the animal machinery
or corporeal apparatus of mental action : not that we are to be-
lieve that on this mountain we have but to sit down, and either
look back to the clods in the valley from which we have ascended,
or ruminate in self-absorbed regard on the fortunate adaptations
for enjoyment to be observed in the body, and the wonders of
which carbon and water are capable in a human frame; no ! for
we leave the intelligence in the act of aspiring; and although
here, where anatomical investigation becomes amaurotic, and the
physiologist has to be dumb, our diagram must terminate, we
believe that from this Jacob's ladder the Beason takes wings to
itself, and soars upwards by Faith to a Spirit acting downwards
towards humanity in Love.
The steps through which we trace the growth of the human
mind are?from organic movement to consciousness, from con-
sciousness to volition, from volition to reason, and from reason
to the capacity of acknowledging a guiding power beyond the
limits of organic life. We have looked upon phrenic effort as
commencing in mere reflex action, and carried upwards succes-
sively through instinctive manifestation, voluntary motion, and
rational action, to the development of a will capable of desiring
to act in unison with a holier will.
Humanity is the highest phasis of the relation of Spirit to
Matter in this world, and is the Human Mind for all philosophic
apprehension of psychology. At the base is a vitality which is
simply uterine; above that, merely animal; farther forward, only
foolish; above this, diabolic; and, only when transcending mere
intellectual power, graduating at Humanity, and becoming
capable of a life which may blossom as Christian in this world,
and sow the seeds of a development that will yet be more god-
like, and of a life that will be immortal in heaven.
