An Autobiographical Sketch of a Drunkard
=========================================

461
Aet. Y ?
-
With truth I may call myself a drunkard from my mother's
womb. On November 29th, 1803, after a long and severe labour
on the part of my mother, I was brought into existence, some
twenty minutes previous to which, my mother, taking advantage
of the absence of her accoucheur, got out of bed, and, impelled
by an uncontrollable desire, took from the cupboard a bottle of
brandy, of the contents of which she swallowed a large wineglass.*
Now, this act, at such a time, for a woman fond of or addicted to
drinking, would not have been considered extraordinary; but for
one of her well-known abstemious habits, who had, probably,
never before tasted undiluted spirits, could only be accounted for
from that morbid and depraved taste which sometimes prevails
with the sex on like occasions. However, such act was the
prelude to my after-existence. Now, whether the same cause
that produces diseases such as gout, stone, consumption, and
various other maladies to which suffering humanity is liable,
traceable in descendants to their parents, acted so on me in pro-
ducing that predilection for alcoholic drinks or not, I will leave
for the physiologist and curious in such matters to determine.
I will now begin briefly to relate the chequered events that
have befallen the poor inebriate, up to the time that the grace of
God changed his career, I hope permanently, by means of the
truth promulgated through the doctrines of teetotalism, together
with the mysterious revelations of the punishment awaiting the
drunkard in the kingdom of darkness, when he goes hence.
Soon after my birth, as my mother's health did not permit of
her nursing me, I was given to a person living some eight miles
from the place of my nativity, whose house was situated in the
midst of a forest of exquisite rural and sylvan beauty. Many
years since have I gone to review its romantic scenery, and
endeavour to realize the ideas and feelings and reminiscences
of my early days ;f brought to remembrance the gipsies' camp?
the shrinking, half afraid, from the extended hand of the old
crone, as she took the jug of milk, and kissed the averted cheek
of the little curly-headed child, held in the arms of the kind-
natured foster-parent, who always supplied this luxury to these
* The communication of this fact I heard made to a female friend by my mother,
whilst contemplating me as I lay in a half-drunken, half-sleeping state on some
chairs.
f Those in age, who recollect the tenacity of their very early childhood impres-
sions, will not discredit this assertion. ?-
NO. XI.?NEW SERIES. H H
462 AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD.
people, when periodically encamped under their old favourite
beech-tree, which they always selected under which to rendezvous
at certain seasons of the year. At such times, many a maiden
coy and bashful swain were wont, at evening's close, by crossing
with silver the sybil mother's palm, to elicit from her the coming
destiny of weal or woe that lay in wait on their further path
through life. Driven by the necessity their rambling life en-
joined, one bright trait redeemed the deception of half its sin?
the magic skein unravelled, no future fate foretold, that brought
to the maiden's cheelc the blush of shame, or dimmed with tear
of sorrow her sparkling eye; half doubting, yet hoping that the
tale was true, a laughing pleasure beamed from her joyous face,
that partly realized the anticipated bliss. Ah ! happy days of
inexperienced boyhood?no more amid the stem realities of life
shall such like scenes return ! How, alas! they contrast with
the years of sin and folly, and followers in their train?sorrow
and remorse?that since have beset my path ; and I cannot but
here repeat the prayer that spontaneously burst forth, on the first
conviction of sin, in early days:?" O, Virtue ! would I had
ne'er swerved from thee, thou goddess whose bright smiles do
cheer the weary sojourner oil earth, making his rough way
smooth. But now, thy rival, Vice, clinging as serpent's coil, in
soft and slippery folds, by liis close grasp unhinging all the
nobler faculties; and the seeds, O, Virtue ! thou didst sow, are, in
embryo, just bursting, crushed by the pressure."
But to resume my narrative. After remaining at my dear old
nurse's till about six years old, I recollect, one evening of a
beautiful day of summer, a post-chaise being driven up to the
wicket-gate of the little farm, and a lady getting out that I had
been told to call mother, but whom I had so seldom seen that
I could hardly reconcile to myself that it was right to call her by
that endearing name, in the stead of my dear old nurse, who had
shown all a mother's love to me. I was immediately got ready,
and in the midst of bewailings and tears, left my foster-parents'
roof, no longer to be a home to me. There was one circumstance
in her?my nurse's?habits of life, which here I must not omit
to mention, from its singularity?in contradistinction to my after-
habits of life?and that was, she never drank any beverage but
tea or water. No power on earth could make her partake of any
alcoholic drink; she did not like it; she had a natural aversion
to anything of the sort from her infancy. She took no merit to
herself for her abstinence; and " total abstinence," as a moral
virtue and enjoined practice, was then unknown. Her husband,
a small farmer, on the contrary, often came staggering home in
his cups from market, and she, woman-like, did not fail to well
scold him the next morning for his irregularity.
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD. 463
In a few days, under the caresses and kind treatment of my
parents, I became perfectly reconciled to my new home; I no
longer sorrowed for the absent. There was one little novelty, I
recollect, which tended much to reconcile me to the change, and
that was, the fine trappings my father occasionally wore as ser-
geant in the Yeomanry Cavalry, at that time in constant requisi-
tion, apprehending an invasion by Bonaparte?a name fraught
with terror to my young ears. Many curious tales of those days,
in after-years I recollect being told, about certain individuals of
the troop showing the "white feather" on a certain night, when
called to horse with the formidable announcement of the French
fleet being in sight?information derived from the lighting of the
agreed signal-fires on the neighbouring heights. The few large
vessels in the Channel which gave rise to all this commotion,
proved, at last, to have been only some of our " merchantmen."
One gallant soldier was suddenly seized with the gout; a second
had scalded his leg; a third, his horse was suddenly taken
lame;?for which excuses, I need hardly say, they had to bear
the ridicule of their townsmen for some years after. But to pro-
ceed from this digression. In due time I was sent to school ;
and after five or six years of plain education, learning 'land-
measuring and other essentials, to fit me for what I was then
intended?a farmer?I left school a hopeful lad, possessing the
love and good wishes of my master, and all who were acquainted
with me. There was, I recollect, in those early days, one trait
in my character which, from what I have hereafter to relate, will
not be considered in me vanity now to mention, and that was, a
love of truth. I was never known to tell a wilful lie. My parents
were not, strictly speaking, religious people. I was sent to my
church, taught the catechism, and, at the proper time, confirmed ;
but the sin of telling a lie had been so particularly impressed on
my mind, that that sin I was rarely guilty of; and even to this
day, that early impression, in the midst of all the complicated
sins which follow in the wake of the drunkard's career, has been
respected, and the sin held in abhorrence from that early con-
viction. From this I have often thought how necessary for
parents and guardians of youth, or rather children?particularly
as the mind at that early age is fitted for receiving and retaining
impressions of what is good and evil?how urgently should be
instilled in their young minds a hatred of all sin, as an offence
against a pure and holy God. If such practice more generally
prevailed in the teaching of little ones, I am satisfied, from my
own experience, howsoever in the heyday of youth and folly such
instructions may be forgotten, that the time will arrive in God's
providence when the seed so sown shall revive, and bring forth
fruit unto repentance.
H h 2
464 AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD.
On leaving school, I commenced my duties on the farm, during
?which, manhood began to dawn upon me. At this time, one par-
ticular occupation, at which I was occasionally engaged, tended
to increase my love for "that accursed thing which worketh
abomination,"?" that vial of wrath," mentioned in the Book of
Revelations, "that should be poured out upon the earth,"?"that
produce of the vine of Sodom and Gomorrah,"?" that poison of
dragons and the evil venom of asps," which bitetli like an adder
and stingeth like a serpent,?" that abomination that maketh
desolate." This occupation was the driving of post-horses ; for,
in addition to my father's business of a farmer, he united that of
a postmaster, and frequently, when the regular drivers were out,
I was found very useful in taking a pair of the remaining horses,
and executing any order that might come in. This accelerated
my progress to becoming a confirmed lover of strong drink.
Being naturally good-natured, and not wishing to show on such
occasions that I felt myself above the menial duties I was
employed in, I was led, unhesitatingly, to accept the contents of
th'e proffered glass. From this data, and from this cause, I
reckon my gradual progress to ruin. This alternate employment
continued till my twenty-second year, when my father took pos-
session of an additional farm, a few miles from the town in which
he lived, intending, after realizing a partial return of the capital
used in stocking the farm, to give it into my hands. In the mean-
time I was, under his jurisdiction, to manage the business, my
remuneration for which was to be the produce of a dairy of eight
cows, piggery, poultry, and other advantages, together with the
farm-house to reside in, free of rent. I had not been thus
settled more than a year, when I formed an attachment for the
daughter of a farmer retired from business, whom, after years
of wooing, I married, looking forward at that time to many years
of peace and happiness from the affection of an amiable and
beloved wife, whose excellent disposition and domestic acquire-
ments were well qualified to give a home that charm which, to
one of regular habits and well-formed mind, could not fail to be
appreciated.
I mentioned before, that I had always been brought up in a
belief in the doctrines inculcated by the " Episcopalian Church of
England," and revered her formularies,?sitting under a minister
of good moral habits, but, in his preaching, advancing very little
of that evangelical life-saving truth which, I thank God, now
more commonly prevails with the ministers of the " Establish-
ment." In those days, when the truth as it is in Jesus was
preached in all its faithfulness by a Church of England minister,
he was branded, forsooth, as a " Methodist,"?intended as a term of
reproach,?and many of his congregation, particularly amongst
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD. 465
the higher circles, would, on his ascending the pulpit after the
" prayers," abruptly leave the sacred edifice. Of this I had
ocular demonstration, shown to the person of a reverend gentle-
man who, in consequence of this treament, together with a slight
change of views, seceded from the Church, and afterwards became
a popular Baptist minister, dispensing the bread of life to a large
congregation in the metropolis, and but very recently deceased.*
About this time I accidentally heard a young man, an intended
missionary for Persia, who had previously been carrying on
business as a chemist, the power of whose preaching was such, that
by God's blessing a great impression was made on my own and
wife's mind;?on hers, thanks be to God, a permanent one ; mine,
the sequel of my history will show. After this, my old church
minister seemed to have no life in him. I in vain listened for
those quickening truths, the faithful preaching of which makes
the Saviour all in. all to the poor sinner, and by whom alone
cometli salvation; but, alas! too much dependence on creature
righteousness was preached, and too little seeking for God's
grace, by the gift of his Holy Spirit, to will in you to work and
to do his good pleasure, was his characteristic. The impression
made at this time has never been entirely obliterated, notwith-
standing the assaults of the " wicked one" have triumphed for a
time in bringing me under subjection to his will. Thanks be to
God, he has always in his mercy made my sins my reprovers, by
using them in the last extremity to bring me to a conviction of
the heinousness of their nature, in contradistinction to the emana-
tions from a pure and holy God, whose pervading influence con-
strains the sinner to seek pardon by pleading a Saviour's atoning
blood, the imputation of his righteousness, the sanctification of
the third person in the Trinity, the Holy Ghost, imparting to me
his spirit to love holiness and hate sin.f In looking back at the
serious convictions of my past life, evanescent though they were, I
can clearly see that God's grace was never withdrawn from me, nor
will be from any convinced sinner, till he ceases to employ the
means that God has provided for the preserving of that gift,?the
ceasing to pray, and the keeping from attending that place in
which he has said, " where two or three are gathered together,
that he will be in the midst of them."
At this time, having nothing more to do with driving, I had,
humanly speaking, a good opportunity to divest myself of that
* The late Rev. T. Evans, minister of John-street Chapel, Bedford-row, and
succeeded in the ministry by the Rev. Baptist Noel. Many years since, the Rev.
Mr. Evans was officiating clergyman at Milford, near Lymington, Hants.
?f- It must be understood that these were the doctrinal points in which I believed,
and had convictions, at the time these incidents occurred. I by no means identify
myself with the whole of them at the present day.?Sept. 3, 1853.
466 AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD.
baneful habit, indulgence in strong drink, and did make many
strong efforts for that purpose. But such resolutions, being
based on my own creature strength, lasted but a short time; the
temptation that beset me at the evening meeting, after the farmers'
weekly market in the neighbouring town, proved too great for
my weak resolves, and after a short interregnum of sobriety, I
seldom arrived home from them perfectly sober. This went on
amid repeated resolutions of amendment and relapses, till the
third year of my occupancy of the farm, when, from the great and
sudden depreciation in the value of agricultural produce, farmers of
small capital were, of course, injuriously affected?their rent, on
lease, having been fixed on an average of prices when corn realized
double the amount, brought many a farmer to ruin, or to emigra-
tion, with the fragment of his property that remained. This so
far affected my father's circumstances, as, instead of giving me
possession of the farm, as he had previously intended, obliged
him to throw up the remainder of his unexpired term into the
hands of his landlord; so that no resource now seemed left to me
for the maintenance of my wife and increasing family, but a re-
turn in some way to that sort of employment into which I had
formerly been initiated,?to which no insurmountable difficulty
presented itself, from my father still continuing the posting
business, enabling him, by horsing a not very profitable coach, to
procure for me the situation of a stage coachman on another coach,
on a more profitable line of road,?the losses that he sustained by
horsing one being considered as a sort of premium for the lucra-
tive situation that I held on the other. This took place in 1831-2,
and I now had a prospect before me, with moderate carefulness,
of realizing a very comfortable living, and of providing for the
exigencies of the future?my situation realizing four and five
pounds per week. This post I continued to fill without accident
for two years, when an event took place which was the indirect
means of bringing me to a stand-still?that was, the death of my
father; the direct cause of which, although the relation will form
a short episode in my narrative, may not be thought out of place
here to mention. The before-mentioned causes, which produced
the necessitous circumstances which drove my father to leave the
farm?a business to which he was devotedly attached?produced,
from continually brooding on his loss, a weakness of mind border-
ing on aberration of intellect, from which he was just recovering
when an election of a member of Parliament, for the borough he
resided in, took place,?when, the usual dinner on such occasions
being given, he, with the other immaculate, independent voters,
was invited, that indulgence in their gourmand propensi-
ties and powers of imbibition, might render less keen their
talents for entering the political arena, for the purpose of dis-
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD. 467
cussing tlie principles of him whom they were about to invest
with the authority of their representative.
He came home from the feast in good time, his usual moderate
habits and consideration of his recent illness, ho doubt, prevent-
ing him from undue indulgence, and from the too common
excesses committed on like occasions. Would that the same
caution had been observed on the second day, when the party
met for the purpose of lunch, or rather for that of consuming the
fragments that remained. The very little that my father had
drunk the preceding day being more than on ordinary occasions,
produced?as the use of intoxicating drinks always does?that
depression of the feelings which nothing but a return to the
cause of the evil seems to give a transitory relief; the consequence
was, his being brought home late at night by a good-natured,
half-reeling friend, and laid powerless on the floor of the parlour.
This ultimately produced paralysis in certain bodily functions,
and in eight days from this?the day of enjoyment?death re-
leased him from his sufferings, of which event I was the next morn-
ing apprised, by a person sent to relieve me from my duties on
the coach I was driving, so that I might be enabled to hasten to
my mother and family, to join and sympathize with them in their
affliction.
* * * Hi- * *
After the funeral, my late father's affairs were investigated, and
found to be in that state which left hardly sufficient, after his
creditors were satisfied, to enable my mother to carry on the
posting business for the maintenance of herself and the junior
branches of the family. This induced (my late father having
been an old and respected inhabitant of the town for upwards
of thirty years) the influential inhabitants of the neighbourhood
to raise a subscription in her behalf, for the purpose of relieving
her temporary difficulties, and more permanently fixing her in
the business in which she had heretofore been engaged. This
having been accomplished, matters proceeded in their usual
course until the executors of my late father, finding that the
coach before-mentioned, which had continued to be horsed for my
benefit, was such a losing concern, that they were compelled, in
justice to the junior branches of the family, to give notice of its
discontinuance. The consequence was, the proprietor having no
longer self-interested motives to induce him to continue me in his
employ, very shortly afterwards took advantage (which I am
sorry to say that I too frequently gave him) of my occasional
fits of intemperance to remove me from my situation. I should
have soon been reduced to great extremity, but for the kind indi-
viduals who had already so materially assisted my mother; they
thought me severely treated, and got up a further subscription
468 AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD.
towards establishing a coacli, that should leave the town at a
later and more convenient hour, as a feeder or branch of that
coach which left a large town eighteen miles distance, for the
metropolis, at about mid-day, to which situation I was duly
appointed.
This act gave such offence to my late employer and to the
body of proprietors, that they used every means in their power to
render the undertaking unsuccessful. This coach continued to
run for upwards of twelve months, when, notwithstanding the
exertions of my well-wishers and friends, the pecuniary loss was
so great that it was ultimately given up. I was then under the
necessity, by way of keeping the wolf from the door, of officiating
as driver for my mother, whose scanty wages?her business not
affording her the means of giving me more than an indifferent
person?were barely sufficient even for that purpose. This
derogatory employment, fly and post-chaise driving, continued
but a few months; when, from the interest employed by some
unknown friend, I unexpectedly received a letter from a large
coach proprietor, appointing a meeting on the succeeding day at
a town about twenty miles distance, which, with most sanguine
anticipations, I most readily kept. On seeing him, he told me
"that through the interest of some influential party, he was
induced to make me an offer of driving a coach from S n to
W th, a distance of seventy-five miles per diem, down one
day and back the next, in the room of an old part-proprietor and
servant, whose ill-health obliged him to leave, with but little hope
of ever again being enabled to resume his duties." He added,
" Now, take care what you are about; be steady; you have as good
a place given you as on any line of road that I am master of. I
have heard that you are given to drinking; I hope that you will
show by your conduct that the accusation is false." I warmly
thanked him, and on the succeeding Monday took possession of
my " box." I was now completely in my element; the coaches I
had driven before were over comparatively short distances, and
ihrough monotonous scenery, but now I had seventy-five miles a
day, embracing as great a variety of picturesque scenery as the
eye would wish to rest on. I removed my wife and family to
W th, one of the towns of my destination on alternate days,
at which I spent the Sunday. This town was situated in a beau-
tiful bay, like what I have heard described of the Bay of Naples,
wanting the high ground of Vesuvius in the distance. My wife
and little ones, from low spirits, impaired health, and countenances
of sickly hue, shortly obtained that buoyancy of spirit, and that
ruddy complexion of countenance, which proximity to the seaside
.so frequently produces.
There I might have been seen, on a Sunday afternoon, walking
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD. 469
with my wife and children on the beautiful esplanade formed on
the beach, envying not one amongst the many of rank and fashion
that resorted to that delightful spot to inhale the renovating
breeze from off the English Channel. I wonder not at good old
George III. selecting this spot for his summer bathing residence.
Its somewhat secluded and unostentatious beauty with much
advantage contrasted with the glaring display of the rich man-
sions and bolder scenery of B n, and the more fashionable
watering-places of the present day.
This pleasing daily employment?leaving at about a quarter
before eight in the morning, and reaching the termination of my
journey before five o'clock in the evening?continued about
fifteen months, with nothing to mar the health-inspiring exercise
but the frequent excessive use of that accursed thing to which I
have before alluded. It seemed ordained to be my curse; it
tended to neutralize all the pleasing qualities of my better nature.
The passing exclamation, when my name was mentioned in con-
nexion with this vice, was, " What a pity !" In my past early
experience of mankind I cannot, like many of the disappointed
ones on life's stage, exclaim on the uncharitableness and unde-
serving fault-finding propensities of my fellow-man; on the con-
trary, I received at that period of my life the good wishes, sym-
pathies, and much assistance of a substantial nature, from those
on whom I possessed no claim. I found many more ready to
overlook and make excuses for my failings, which I by no means
deserved, than to reproach me according to my deserts. At the
expiration of these fifteen months, the former driver of the coach,
who, as I have before mentioned, was also a part-proprietor, con-
trary to all expectation, recovered sufficiently to enable him, by
a great effort, again to resume his " seatand by keeping a help-
mate by his side to afford him occasional relief, managed to
maintain liis situation. This again obliged me to turn my
attention to other means of procuring a livelihood for myself and
family. After six months of idleness, returning from an un-
successful application for the management of a charity Founda-
tion School, for which a master was advertised, and for which,
from my previous habits and employment, I was by no means
fitted, I accidentally heard of a gentleman, a magistrate, wanting
a coachman. On the first intimation of this, the feelings of pride
were aroused in my Adamite nature,' which were somewhat
lessened on my being informed that " livery" was not required to
he worn. A house on his estate was provided to live in; and
fortunately no waiting at table or other more menial duties were
required, for which art and mystery my previous avocations in life
did not at all befit me. Driven by a necessity which admitted of
no choice, I, with a hesitating step and awkward mien, solicited
(
470 AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD.
of this gentleman the favour of filling his vacant situation. As
he had previously known me when driver of the coach, he com-
miserated the extremity of my position, which enforced my
seeking so menial an employment, and expressed his fear that
the contrast of his service with my former one would be too
great to give mutual satisfaction. I succeeded in removing his
scruples, and was forthwith engaged at a liberal wage, and
additional perquisites of milk and vegetables. This, to a man of
careful and provident habits, would have sufficed to render his life
endurable till better things turned up ; but I am sorry to admit that
my old expensive and wasteful habits still so far influenced me,
that some time was necessary ere I was disciplined into com-
pliance with more frugal fare.
But, thanks be to God for His mercy and goodness in adapting
one's mind and feelings to those changes in our temporal con-
dition in life in which it is His pleasure to place us. My home
was now situated at the northern extremity of a large park, about
half a mile from the mansion; and many times have I looked with
pleasure on my little ones lightly tripping across the park, on a
fine summer's morning, to the dairy, for a supply of milk for their
breakfast, and the day's consumption. The house, though small
and inconvenient in some respects, with its neat flower-garden,
and trellised lattice frame-work that covered the walls outside,
over which crept the woodbine and sweet-smelling, white-flower-
ing clematis, gave a humble charm and beauty to its appearance,
which tended in some measure to reconcile us to its in-door in-
convenience. There was one incident occurred during the
time I was living with this gentleman which, as a faithful chroni-
cler of actual events, degradatory though they may be, I am
bound to mention. He kept two gardeners?the head one, a tall,
bony Scotchman, of hard physiognomy and cold repulsive man-
ners, who resided in the park at an adjoining lodge to my own.
Whether the kind treatment my wife and children received from
the family at the house, or from what other cause, I know not;
but this man conceived an aversion to me and my family, which
his bearing and manners too evidently showed. However, as
long as his dislike was passively confined within his own breast,
I cared but little for the ill-feeling. But time, at last, as in all
similar cases, seldom fails to develop the venom, where such dis-
position is encouraged. It so acted on him as to produce the
following diablerie. I had heard several complaints coming
from this man of repeated losses of different vegetables from the
kitchen-garden, particularly of the loss of one or two dozen of the
sort of cabbages used for pickling. As it was no business of mine,
I took but little notice of the matter till my attention was called
to an evident alteration of manner in Mr. S., my employer, to-
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD.
wards me, and an inquiry made of me by a gentleman, a relative,
residing with him, of " whether the shoes that I wore in stable
were nailed ?" to which I answered in the affirmative, wondering at
the drift of such question. This difference of behaviour on the
part of my employer having lasted some few days, I had resolved
to ask him if I had unwittingly given him any offence, when I
received a message from a young neighbouring farmer, with
whom I had been schoolfellow, to wait on him. So doing, he
apprised me that suspicion existed in Mr. S.'s mind relative to
my having something to do with the various robberies that had
been effected from his garden: to use his own words, he said?
"When I heard Mr. S. suspected you, I was determined, at the
risk of being myself implicated for receiving things knowing them
to be stolen, to state all I knew of the matter. The gardener
came to my house, and, on seeing me, pulled from under his coat
four large red cabbages, which he presented me, at the same time
asking me if I would lend him a large hamper to pack up some
crockery, which I accordingly did. Two days after this, who
should I see but this same man and his son, bearing between
them the identical hamper which I had lent him, filled with what
appeared, from a leaf protruding from under the cover, to be
' pickling cabbages.' This took place at the little inn in the vil-
lage, where the branch London coach changed horses (and which
coach, by-the-bye, I was afterwards destined to drive). The
hamper, with its contents, he immediately put on the coach, and
booked it to some person in London. Now," he added, " you can
mention this circumstance to Mr. S. at once, or wait till you are
directly accused with the crime." I resolved to adopt the former
method, for which purpose I sought Mr. S., apologized for the
interruption, told him I had suffered much uneasiness from the
alteration in his manner towards me, which I attributed to some
person endeavouring to disparage me in his estimation. He then
told me that " his gardener had informed him that on frequent
occasions he had missed vegetables from the garden, and that
the week previous two dozen of cabbages had been stolen. On
my asking the man if he had any suspicion of any one, he told
me, ' that comparing your stable shoes with the foot-marks on the
ground, that the impressions of the nails agreed exactly.' Still
(he added), Mrs. S. and the family will not believe it, nor should
I have entertained the suspicion for one moment; but I am sorry
to have noticed lately a sort of looseness of manner in you, which
I had never noticed before, and which I am assured is produced
from a too great indulgence in strong drink; but, however, for
the future avoid that evil." Thus did this gentleman humanely
and condescendingly speak to me of my faults. On hearing the
information I had to give, he said, "I know Mr. E., from whom
472 AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD.
you received this information; I will see him, and take the
proper steps to bring the guilty party to justice." I was about
to leave him, when he suddenly added, " He likewise accuses you
of stealing bundles of wood from the ' pile,' on your way home
through the park in the evening ; but say nothing of this inter-
view with me, and I will find means of eliciting the truth." Ac-
cordingly, by setting a person to conceal himself near the " wood
pile," he found that this gardener and his son were in the con-
stant practice of taking home, nightly, two faggots of wood. Mr.
S., though a magistrate, and sworn to administer justice and
repress crime, from humane considerations of the distress and
misery that would be brought on this man's young family by a
prosecution, satisfied justice by simply discharging him from his
service. Thus was this man punished, and I hope, ere this,
brought to repentance, and led to see that even in this world the
wonder-working hand of God's providence makes our sins to find
us out and prove our correctors.
After the above circumstance had passed over, I went on very
comfortably in the quiet duties of my position, retaining the
confidence of my employer, until my frequent indulgence in my
old propensity placed him under the necessity of reluctantly
giving me the usual notice to leave his employment. Business
calling him to the town in which my mother still continued to
carry on business, he informed her of his decision, remarking at
the same time, that my love for stimulating drinks was such,
that he thought a certainty of death itself would not wean me
from the habit. This was in the year 1834, within about a month
of my wife's confinement with her fifth child, in consequence of
the proximity of which I was suffered to retain my situation till
she had gained sufficient strength to undertake the fatigue of
removal.
It was during one of my outbreaks whilst living with this
gentleman that I first felt the symptoms of " delirium tremens,"
or rather, a sort of " magnetic clairvoyanceit was not so severe
in its nature as the former malady. The feeling developed on
this occasion I shall be somewhat minute in describing, as it
forms one of a series of evidences in what I have hereafter to
relate of its producing that clairvoyant power on the soul or
mind which realizes a telegraphic communication of the " inner
man" with the immaterial essences of the invisible, or- spiritual,
world. On returning one evening across the park to my home
(not inebriated), I was suddenly surprised by hearing the voices
of a number of persons behind me, upbraiding me with my con-
duct, not only on account of its sinfulness in the sight of God,
but as calculated to bring misery and suffering on my innocent
wife and children. I seemed to hear the utterance of every word
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD. 473
clearly and distinctly. The different bacchanalian orgies of my
past life were narrated from one to the other with the greatest
exactness. I stopped for these supposed railers to come up with
me ; but no?they approached no nearer?they seemed to stop
likewise. Having a friend living in an opposite direction, I
turned with the intention of visiting him, hoping by so doing to
get rid of the annoyance; but in vain, for still they seemed to
follow me. On crossing a brook, the gurgling ripple of its
waters over the pebbly bottom beneath, formed words and sen-
tences of reproach to confound me. The breathing zephyr, as
it slightly rustled amongst the foliage of the trees, joined its voice
to the streamlet below in my condemnation. All this, at last,
satisfied me that it was no mortal whispering that I heard; and
under this persuasion, without visiting my friend, I returned back
to my home, determined, from the fear of ridicule, to keep my
mental hallucinations, as they no doubt would be called, within
my own breast. In this resolve I succeeded, and in the course of
a day or two my mind recovered its usual tone. Within a week
of the expiration of the time for me to leave this situation, I was
informed by the landlord of an hotel of an adjacent town, that a
gentleman in the neighbourhood, having bought a pair of young
horses, wanted a person to break them into double harness fit for
his own driving. I made application, and succeeded to my
wishes, recognising in him a gentleman that I had ridden with side
-i ? ? ? ?
by side after many a good fox in years gone by?a sport that my
indulgent father, fond of himself, allowed me occasionally to par-
take of in the days of his prosperity. I gave my employer such
satisfaction, that he continued to keep me with him long after
completing the object of my engagement; and I should have
most probably remained with him, I know not liow long, had not
my desires led me continually to importune, by letter, the coach
proprietor I had formerly served, and who, on the return of the
invalid coachman before-named, had promised me the first situation
he had it in his power to bestow, which promise he at last ful-
filled, chiefly owing to the kind interposition of the very gentleman
I was at the time serving. I look back, even now, with a feeling
of pleasure to the six or seven months' services I rendered this
gentleman, having left him, much to my surprise, without any
one dereliction of duty calculated to neutralize the good feelings
or alter the good opinion he had entertained of me.
$ ^
The Autobiography of a Drunkard contains in it the most
monotonous, uninteresting detail of events that can be possibly
imagined. The repeated indulgence in his degrading passion
rapidly produces that obtusity of intellect under which the viva-
city of mind and the nobler aspirations of his better part?the
474 AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD.
soul?become so stultified as to prove a barrier to the full deve-
lopment of the nobler faculties of his being. Thus it was with
me; I loved all mankind, and never did the cry of distress reach
my ears, or solicitations for relief from the wretched appeal to
my feelings, without a response as far as my means would permit.
The intuitive sympathies of the finer feelings of humanitv were
powerfully elicited by such objects; and had I but possessed the
moral courage to overcome, by self-denial, the craving desires of
my sensual appetites, I had not been such a "blot" in creation.
These were the anomalies that existed in my nature, entirely
owing to early impressions and indulgences not corrected by
proper example and education?an evidence that none of Nature's
laws can be infringed with impunity, and that reason, which ren-
ders man pre-eminent, can never be misapplied without punish-
ment.
Thus, again, after a hearty good-bye to the family household,
did I again resume my old employment of " handling the rib-
bons," professionally so called. My route this time was over
part of my old ground, sixty miles per diem, thirty miles up and
down. On arriving at one end of my destination, at eleven o'clock
in the morning, I had no useful object in which to employ myself
till the hour arrived for resuming my duties on the coach?five
o'clock in the evening; and thus were left six hours in a large
fashionable town, to be spent in idleness or folly, the enervating
influences of which tended still further to corrupt and debase my
moral nature. Two brother "whips" arriving at the town about
the same time as myself, we generally met, soon after, at a friend's,
who carried on the business of a brewer and cooper, where, seated
in a homely manner on some of his half-finished barrels, we were
wont to discuss sundry pots of his eightpenny ale, till time re-
minded us of the near approach of the dinner hour, of which
meal we invariably partook at a tavern kept by a former " knight
of the whipbut before reaching our restaurant, a half-way
house was selected, for the purpose of swallowing a glass of gin
and bitters, as a provocative to appetite, and as an assistant of
the powers of digestion. Ibis was the only meal during the
twenty-four hours I could indulge in, to do which it at last
became necessary to imbibe a vast quantity of stimulants, suffi-
cient to make a moderate drinker inebriated, to artificially produce
the requisite incentive. Grog and tobacco occupied our time till
the arrival of the hour for my return; and as diluted spirits, or
ale, formed my "refreshment at each change of horses, on my
arrival at the end of my journey I had, to every one's observa-
tion, partaken of more than a " quantum suff." consistent with
ebriety. I might even then have escaped worse consequences,
had not the politicians of the town, awaiting with impatience the
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD. 475
oracle of information jnst imported from St. Stephen's, seized me
with a "will-ye nill-ye" sort of manner, and installed me leader
of the night's carousing. Thus, from a too yielding disposition,
I was fast progressing on the road to ruin. This became my daily
routine; and well I recollect the envy with which I beheld my
brother whips, with stronger constitutions and unimpaired sta-
mina, partake of these indulgences with impunity. At last, after
several months of the same debasing practice, one night, late in
the autumn, within ten miles of my destination, I was seized with
a fit, half-drunken, lialf-apoplectic, and precipitated from the
coach-box to behind the horses' heels, one movement of which
would, in all probability, have consigned me to eternity; but,
through God's providence, the poor animals intuitively stopped,
and, half-stunned, though partially sobered by the fall, I crawled
from underneath the coach, and again mounted the box. Having
at the time no passengers on the coach, the circumstance was
never known. This had the effect, for a little time, of making
me more careful; 1 had even firmness enough to risk the dis-
pleasure of my political friends, by immediately going home after
leaving the coach. I felt, at the time, no ill effects from the fall;
but I have no doubt it had something to do in producing another
approach to delirium tremens, with which I was about this time
visited. I was awakened one night by a number of persons, who
seemed to be calling me from the road, underneath my window,
to come down and join them. I awoke my wife, and asked her
the meaning of it: she did not understand me. I told her that a
number of persons were calling me, from outside the house, to
come down and join them in their pursuits; some were going out
shooting, some horse-racing?all about to proceed on some object
of business or pleasure. The voices were so numerous that they
appeared to proceed from untold millions. As I persisted, with
every appearance of rationality, in the reality of my assertions,
mv wife very naturally asked me " How so many persons as I
described could find room to exist in so confined a space ?" I
told her that that difficulty was all made easy and clear to my
apprehension. The voices I heard, as voices, were all emanations
from disembodied spirits; their immaterial being or essence,
taking up no room, enabled them here to remain in the same
locality which they inhabited in the flesh. Some voices appeared
to my imagination to proceed from those who had been dead for
centuries ; others, who had departed at a more recent date, some
of whom I had Avell known; all seemed to be talking about their
different engagements, as in the days of their materiality; and
those I had known I recognised by their voices. One said,
"Leave him alone just now; he wont be with us yet; his time is
not yet come. Such was the shape this fantasia took on this
476 AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD.
my second attack of " mental aberration," or rather, " mental
reality."
How long I was confined at home in consequence, or whether
confined at all, I now forget; but not one iota of the foregoing
impressions, so indelibly are they engraven on my mind, can ever be
forgotten. I continued my duties on the road for about ten months
after this, nothing occurring to call for particular notice, except a
day's holiday occasionally, to get rid of the effects of a debauch the
preceding night, when one morning?a summer's morning?after
having for a week completely saturated myself with " the accursed
thing,"?so much so, that it resembled "burning lava" in my
veins, and I only wonder spontaneous combustion had not taken
place,?I was driving, or rather, attempting to drive, into a town, as
early as eleven o'clock in the morning, in a shocking state of
intoxication. I was discharged in the greatest disgrace, my
character lost, my health impaired, and with no distant prospect
of absolute starvation. But, blessed be God, the Father Almighty,
who did not, as I deserved, in this my aggravated wickedness,
utterly forsake me. A gentleman of the neighbourhood, taking
compassion on my little helpless family, and hoping that these
sore trials had worked in me reformation, which I, vainly trusting
in my own strength, hoped as well, procured for me a subordinate
Government situation in the Great Metropolis, but at so low a
weekly wage, that my wife's greatest economy made the sum
scarcely suffice to keep the children clothed and fed. The situ-
ation I now filled was of that nature that brought under my
notice many curious incidents?faux pas in high life; the revel-
ries of the disciples of Bacchus, and sports of the votaries of
Dame Venus, in middle and lower life; the cunning of the sharper
and the ingenuity of the thief, each driven to the practice of his
art by dissipated habits or improvident waste. But as a relation
of these will only give us a further insight into man's depraved
nature, which my own personal history sufficiently illustrates and
exemplifies, I will forbear to give it, and briefly bring to a con-
clusion this part of my narrative of life's past experience, by
stating that, after about nine months' servitude in the above situ-
ation, disgusted with my calling, and still under the necessity,
imposed on me by my previous habits of inebriation continuing,
my discharge was again rendered necessary; and thus once more I
became as the " offscouring of all things," shunned as a pest,
and pointed at with the finger of scorn as a degraded type of
human depravity.
*******
Notwithstanding the abandonment of myself to the influence
of the intoxicating cup, and the misery and desolation that I had
so frequently brought on myself, my dear wife, and little ones,
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD. 477
.
my love for tliem was most undoubted, malgre tlie assertions to
% the contrary of the cold, phlegmatic, and uncharitable moralists
whose peculiar "temperament" allows not Bacchanalian excesses
to be their besetting sin. Each individual has "a sin"?a sin
which his nature and his disposition render peculiarly his own?
avarice, ambition, love of frivolities and dress, pride, envy, the
giving oneself up to tlie pleasures of the world ;?all these, with-
out the grace of God prevent, will as much render the soul
unfitted for being the recipient of the spiritual and refined
delights of heaven on earth, as those grosser and more sensual
sins which, from their glaring nature, more conspicuously attract
the notice of fellow-sinners. Yes! my children I loved! But
when sober, and capable of reflection, I could not bear their
caresses; their innocent prattle went like daggers to my heart;
the tears of my much-injured and affectionate wife, when, under
the most agonizing feelings, she implored me, for her sake, the
children's sake, and for my soul's sake, to abandon the vice that
was fast bringing her and the dear children to the workhouse and
the grave, drove me to madness, and, frequently rushing out of
the house, I have been ready to cast myself from one of the
bridges, in the vain hope that, by ceasing to live in this world, I
could produce 011 my mind the effect of fabled " Lethe's stream,"
and that, by the act, past recollections could be buried in oblivion.
At this particular time, 1837, in a large city, totally unknown,
without a friend or a relative to whom I could apply for advice
or employment, a very few days or weeks must have found me a
claimant on " parish relief." Everything looked dark?there
appeared no bright side?not one glimmering ray of hope to
guide me in the way by which to procure employment to sustain
my all but starving children. Ah! poor, distressed, burdened
sinner, never despair ! " thy Saviour liveth !"?"Christ is all in
all!"?"thy God is a God of love !"?"He is a Father to the
fatherless ; a very present help in time of trouble." How often
have I noticed the providence of a wonder-working God mani-
fested at the time of my?and man's?greatest necessity ! The
more abandoned and shunned by the world, the closer is He at
hand to give relief to work His way.
My wife, in canvassing for votes to procure admission for my
eldest son?one of seven (alas ! since unhappily wrecked and
drowned at sea) to St. Anns School, Brixton, raised me up a
friend in the person of the humane and much-respected secretary
of that institution, who, although it was not in his power to
meet our wishes regarding my son, yet used his interest in pro-
curing me a situation in a " Company" then in course of forma-
tion, which once again, by God's blessing, placed within my reach
the means of providing for my family.
NO. XI.?NEW SERIES. I I
478 AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD.
This was in October, 1837, and with this "Company" I still
(1853) remain. Nearly sixteen years have gone by since I entered
their service, twelve years of which, though I drank a great deal,
I never went the same lengths in my besetting sin ; after which
time the raging desire of my old lust again overcame me,
bearing down all opposition, carrying me captive wheresoever it
would, and in consequence of which had again been nearly the
means of casting me loose on the world's cold charity, the
relation of the cause and effects of which will form the sequel
of this my narrative.
I would, by way of preamble to this sequel of my life, call to
my and the reader's recollection, how often it has been our lot to
notice the readiness with which persons convicted of gross error
in moral conduct, or on matters of business, make strong efforts
and resolutions of future amendment and caution, which resolves
are fully acted on till the next strong temptation to err, which is
given way to from the sheer necessity that the habit has imposed
on us. Habit?all-powerful, prevailing habit?how gifted to
reconcile all the contradictions to which our nature is prone :
the miser his gold, the man of business his calling, the sen-
sualist his pleasures,?all of which survive in the mind through
habit, the physical energy of the body necessary for the accom-
plishment of its purposes.
On the 2nd of October, 1837, with a joyful and thankful heart,
I entered on the duties of my new calling, resolutely determin-
ing, in my oivn strength, to avoid the abuse of the intoxicating
cup. Ah ! little did I know at that time that nothing but the
totally ceasing to taste of alcoholic drink could cure excess in
such a temperament as mine?I, who for the greater period of
my life had lived but by stimulants, and by partaking of the
least drop of this " venom of asps, lost the power over my will,
and was led by the syren captive. I had, very shortly, by
indulgence again in my fatal propensity, more than once nearly
lost my situation, when by some means " teetotalism" was intro-
duced to my attention; and reading shortly afterwards a notice
of the intended opening of " Chelsea Temperance Hall," J 838-9,
I mentioned the circumstance to my wife, who most readily
embraced the proposal of attending the opening of the Hall; and
it was mutually agreed that we should both sign the pledge,?a
determination taken on the part of my wife as an encouragement
and example to me, she being at all times an extremely abste-
mious woman. After hearing several stirring speeches, showing
the inutility of these drinks, either for the purpose of preserving
health or of imparting strength for labour, we both signed the
much talked-of pledge, now upwards of fourteen years since,
which pledge my dear partner has consistently and conscien-
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD. 479
tiously kept, notwithstanding the importunities and the ridicule
of professing friends. Now, what did this total abstinence from
the drunkard's drink give rise to in one who, for nearly thirty
years of his life, had been a confirmed inebriate ? Why, in less
than twelve months from the time of signing this pledge, the
attendant changes from levity and carelessness, to thoughtfulness
and sobriety, were the means of more fully developing the expe-
rience I had gained in my previous situations in life; and some im-
provement which I suggested in the working of the business of the
Company in which I was employed, being appreciated and acted on,
I was promoted to a situation more than equal to my expecta-
tions. My health, from the change in my habits, for the first
six or seven months wonderfully improved; my spirits were of that
buoyant nature, in consequence, that I could hardly restrict myself
to walking in the streets, but felt inclined to lay aside the rules
of decorum, and run. My pledge was sacredly kept for fifteen
months, when, suffering from some ordinary and simple indispo-
sition, I applied to a medical man* who, on learning the nature of
my dietetic habits, ordered me to drink two glasses of stout per
diem, observing at the same time, that if 1 continued in my plan
of total abstinence from alcoholic drinks, I should soon be food
for the worms. I unfortunately " listened to the voice of the
charmer," vainly hoping that my past experience of the horrors
of slavery to the habit of indulgence in strong drink, and the
self-denial I had exerted, during the fifteen months I had kept
the pledge, would have kept me from ever more becoming its
victim. Vain hope ! mistaken self-reliance ! And I would here
digress, to earnestly press on the attention of any young man
whose eyes these lines may meet, should he unfortunately already
have contracted a liking for the inebriating cup, which merely
the love of company and good fellowship may excite, though he
may as yet avoid excess, take care that use, in time, does not
produce a confirmed habit, which will certainly in the end lead
liim to the drunkard's grave. Few men have self-command
over their moral powers,?the same, after the excitement of the
first glass, which they before possessed. The more that he feels
himself exhilarated by the pleasing draught, or, as he expresses
himself, "the more good it does him," the more lie should be
convinced that his temperament is the one above all others that
should cease the indulgence. Xlie foregoing advice of some of
the faculty has sent thousands back, as " the dog to his vomit
again, and the sow to her wallowing in the mire." Pause, ye
medical professors of the present day, ere you prescribe that to
your patients which is causing the ruin of millions of souls.
* This very surgeon, I have recently been informed, is dead?cut off in the
prime of life, principally through his indulgence in this vice !
I I 2
480 AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD.
Thanks be to God's providence in enlightening men's minds to
search after truth?thanks be to Him for the new light thrown
on this question by students of physiology in the present day !
We know that there are medicines, as tonics and stimulants, in the
" Materia Medica," much more effectual than alcohol in any form
or shape, and which, if always substituted medicinally in the
place of the body and soul-destroying leaven, would tend much
to bring into disrepute the dangerous practice of making these
drinks a fashionable daily beverage, and thus save many a back-
slider. Thus, as I before observed, after owing my promotion to
total abstinence, and after having strictly kept by my pledge
for fifteen months, I was encouraged by this son of Esculapius'
advice to again partake of the " accursed thing," the chief instru-
ment in Satan's hands for trepanning the souls of men. Two
glasses a day, as might have been expected, did but for a little
time ; my business taking me out of doors a great deal, the
importunity of my friends?so called?when they found that I was
no longer a strict abstainer, quickly overcame the reluctance I at
first felt to increase the quantum. The natural result very
quickly followed, and I not unfrequently found myself what is
commonly called, " disguised in liquor."
This state of things continuing for some seven or eight years,
alternating between abstinence and the excessive use of the beve-
rage, I could never touch it with impunity. Total abstinence or
gross inebriety was my practice. When I hear one person tell
another that " he should do as he does, leave off when lie has had
enough," I compare such advice to one person carrying a certain
weight a given distance, and another being blamed for inabi-
lity to carry the same for more than half that distance. At
length, after continually sipping every half hour for days, for the
sake of keeping up the necessary stimulation?eating nothing?
the souglit-for provocative of these beverages at last ceased to be
felt; they completely failed even in their intoxicating property; I
called, on my way home in the evening, on a gentleman of my
acquaintance, and* was describing my feelings to him very ra-
tionally, as he afterwards informed me, of having the apprehension
of some great calamity hanging over my head, an indescribable
sensation bordering on despair, which drink no longer seemed to
have power to dispel. He sympathized with me, and advised
me when I got home to wash myself over with tepid water, well
rub myself with a rough towel, and go immediately to bed. On
reaching home, my wife was surprised to see me so sober, rational,
and apparently composed. I acted on my friend's recommenda-
tion, and retired to bed, with the vain hope of composing myself
to sleep. I shall never forget that night, so fraught with horror,
that even now, at nearly six years' distance, my blood curdles at
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD. 481
tlie thought. " Whether in the hotly or out of the hotly," as the
holy apostle St. Paul describes, " I know not;" it was not natural,
though it might have been magnetic, sleep. I found myself
walking in a large and rather secluded street of an extensive city,
in the dusk of the evening,when suddenly, a loud cry?not in words,
it seemed to me, hut a cry that shook all nature, and that all crea-
tion felt?" The Son of Man cometh!" And immediately, on my
looking up, I helield an innumerable host of angels, which no
man could number; they appeared to fly in a sort of wedge-like
form, the leading angel, larger than the others, having a trumpet
at its mouth ; those that followed gradually grew less in size and
greater in number, assuming a shape something like what we
have seen represented of the clierubims. They flew " steadily
swift," as an eagle's flight; the smaller angels darting down and
gathering up the people in the street, like the eddying whirlwind
of a summer's day gathers up the sticks and straws and dust.
We were thus cought up in knots of eleven or twelve persons, of all
ages and sizes indiscriminately; one or two old men, with girls and
children, were in the lot I was whirled up with. Each individual,
judging by my own experience, had his doom fixed. I was imme-
diately changed from the form (though possessing the same feel-
ings) of a human being, into that of a globe,* a ball, or, indeed,
as it seemed to me, in reality and shape, a world of darkness?
darkness the most intense?fated to revolve on my own axis, in
an orbit, round an amassing centre of gravity, a fixed sphere of
darkness. The Spirit immediately told me, or rather the fact
emanated from the Spirit, that this state was that of the existence
in " everlasting blackness and darkness of despair,"?that as the
sun, in the system of the visible universe, was the great centre of
attraction, giving out warmth, and light, and life; so, on the con-
trary, this dark central globe of attraction was hell, Satan's home,
from whence proceeded misery, despair, and woe, to endure for
endless ages. It seemed that I revolved on my axis exactly on
the same principle as that of the earth?continually turning round.
I was always in the greatest agony; full to repletion, never empty,
though the contents of my stomach were continually leaving me;
under the most intense sensation of sickening agony, yet never
lessening the overpowering sense of fulness. This was'to he my
punishment for ever and for ever, for having so grossly abused the
natural appetites which God had given me for the sustenance of
my body. I had so revolved about three times, though it seemed,
ages, under the torture of mind and agony of body, when I re-
turned to this world; in other words, I returned into and
* Every human creature is a world to himself, in himself; his sins, his virtues,,
thoughts, and feelings, all emanate from the living principle within, by which his.
future state will be governed.
482 AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD.
quickened the body. How long this magnetic trance-like state
continued, I know not; but of so appalling a nature was the im-
pression produced on my mind by the settled conviction of the
reality of the tortures endured, and was, I felt persuaded, to be
reimposed on my final entrance in my spiritual state to the unseen
world, on the dissolution of my body, that I could not bear its
contemplation, but endeavoured all in my power to anticipate my
fate by attempting to dash my brains out against the wall, as no
other means presented themselves to my notice with which to ac-
complish my purpose. This continued a day or two, every
portable piece of furniture being removed from the room. Con-
tinuing still to agonize on these reflections, my wife earnestly
entreated me to appeal to that Being, through the medium of
a Saviour, whose ears are always open to the cries of the dis-
tressed. This induced me to turn my thoughts to that source
of help, feeling myself to be a condemned, lost soul. The
"great enemy of mankind," for a long time, urged that my
sins were of too dark a dye to find forgiveness; that I had
sinned against light and against truth, and had crucified the Son
of God afresh, and nothing was left but a fearful looking for-
ward to a fiery indignation from judgment to come. But to
these and other suggestions of Satan, I seemed to have on the
other side of me, as if from the breathings of angelic natures,
sentences of Scripture full of hope and love, as an answer to
these condemnatory charges, urged by the " arch-enemy of man."
These delusions?no, these realities, fearful realities !?assumed
a different shape from those I have before related, inasmuch as
then, voices and utterance of words were distinctly heard. Now,
on the contrary, I felt intuitive spiritual emanations, that
.seemed to proceed from two distinct intelligences within,?one
leading to hope, the other driving to despair. As these urged
themselves on my mind, I seemed under an irresistible power,
obliged to give utterance to them; when a word failed me to com-
plete the passage?for they were all texts from Scripture?my wife
would assist me by supplying the necessary word, for every fresh
hope seemed well grounded only as the enemy's accusations were
answered from the Book of Life. For these I would bless, thank
her, and call her "Eve." She begged me not to call her "Eve;"
but I looked hard at her, and saw clearly enough that she repre-
sented in herself the first mother of mankind,?she appeared pure
in her nature as before the fall,?and the words and sentences to
which she directed my attention seemed to me, by the Spirit's
suggestion, to represent links in that perfect chain of the Word
of God that was to bind the "Deceiver" throughout eternity.
This importuning God, through the Saviour as a Mediator, went
on for some nights and days with but little intermission, the
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD. 483
absolute reality of past horrors still keeping possession of my
mind, till at last my medical attendant had great doubts of my
recovery, and asked "how it was, at intervals, I was always
wanting the Bible to read, when before my illness, as he had
been told, I had shown no particular predilection in its favour ?"
I told him what was then the fact,?that in times past I did
not understand its contents, but that now I seemed to read and
understand every line, both in its natural and spiritual sense. I
had evidently, to every one's perception, undergone some mental
change; some mental magnetic spell was on me; every incident
in my past life was palpably before me, engraven on my mind as
on a book; whole sentences, nay, nearly whole chapters of God's
word I could quote from memory, though I had not read them for
years before. I made my son write from my dictation what memory
spontaneously brought forth as applicable to my spiritual state.
The sense no longer seemed ambiguous ; every sentence seemed to
contain a world of meaning. I 110 longer wondered, as heretofore,
at the punishment mentioned in the Apocalypse for taking
away one word from the Book of Life, that God should take
away his part out of that Book of Life; and I moreover now see
the truth, and its applicability to the sinner, of what is said in
the Gospel of St. Jolm, that "in the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.' Appealing
to this God through my Saviour as a Mediator, and answering
in this Word my " persecutor," God in me gained the victory.
At one particular time, whilst engaged in my intense supplica-
tions, I suddenly saw the whole of my children, seven in number,
and wife, standing at the foot of the bed, surrounded by a halo of
soft and heavenly light; I felt under the conviction that the
meaning of this vision was, that I saw them represented in this
state as saved souls. Glowing with surprise and pleasure at this
sight, I looked intently again, and exclaimed, "What! all?" The
Spirit answered me, "Aye, all!" I had scarcely realized the joy
it gave me, when my adversary whispered, "You do not see
yourself there!" My joy vanished, my fears returned; I again,
like Jacob with the angel, renewed my importunities, and wrestled
with God, and exclaimed, " I will not let Thee go except Thou
bless me." At length, in the midst of my agony, I saw above a
scarcely perceptible ray of light,?that ray, that little twinkling
ray, was like life from the grave. In fervour my prayers in-
creased. The light grew stronger ; I felt more composed than I
had for days ; my fears allayed, I slept a blessed sleep (I had not
closed my eyes for thirteen days) ; for, on awakening, I felt that
indescribable " peace of mind which passeth all understanding.
Whilst blessed with this feeling, my wife came into the room:
I sat up in bed, and told lier that I was perfectly happy. I said (it
484 AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD.
seems now to me presumption), " I am a saved soul,?my sins
are forgiven me." On something being mentioned about tlie
probable loss of the situation I tilled, about ?which I had pre-
viously been so anxious, I said, " I am in God's hands, I fear
nothing : God has said, ' Seek ye first the kingdom of God and
His righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto
you.' " My fears on this head entirely disappeared.
From this time I gained strength rapidly?so much so, that my
medical attendant was astounded to see me so soon, after this
three weeks' illness, walking with as elastic a step as though I had
never been ill. When convalescence returned, still in the enjoy-
ment of the indescribably happy state of mind before spoken of,
I felt an irrepressible desire to again join the ranks of the total
abstainers, and accordingly took the first opportunity which a
meeting presented of again signing the abstinence pledge, which
was accompanied by earnest prayers that I might not again swerve
from it; and during the nine months I observed this, I was the
happiest of mortals. Nature in me seemed exempted from the ills
of mortality ; everything I looked on?the works of nature or of
art?seemed to call forth thanksgivings to the great Creator. Look-
ing up at the starry firmament at night, and gazing on its splen-
dours of revolving planets, of fixed stars, suns of other systems,
and the great and wondrous whole,?so absorbed my feelings were,
and so filled my soul with awe, wonder, and love, that I had
some difficulty in restraining myself from kneeling down, in the
face of man, to pour forth my gratitude to the great Maker of
all for his love in enabling me to be a partaker in joys so great.
* * * * * * * *
" Ah !" I think I hear my reader exclaim, " why this pause ?
What! again, after being brought to that happy state, that reali-
zation of heaven upon earth, that millennium state of blessed-
ness which will be enjoyed by His people when 'His will is done
on earth as it is in heaven,' which the great movements of the
present day seem fast making way for,?after being a partici-
pator in all these unhoped-for blessings, hast thou again done
despite to the Spirit of Grace -sinned against light and truth,
and trampled under foot and crucified the Son of God afresh?"
Reader, I have!?I had committed the unforgiven sin ! But
God is love.
I said about nine months I enjoyed this state of happiness,
when my Adamite nature again led me into sin; neglecting the
means of grace, I became careless, and fell from this height of
spiritual fervour, which seemed, when gone, to be lost for ever.
Sin is ever progressive; there is no pausing in the downward
course. Satan once again got the victory, and made use of his
subtle and specious arts by stifling convictions, to lead me again
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD. 485
into that abyss from which I had before so frequently, by God's
special grace, been extricated. I again partook of the drunkard's
cup; and so bound over, body and soul, was I again to its servi-
tude, that I abjured for ever, as a monstrous error, the total
abstinence doctrine, and avowed that I would never again become
converted by its sophistry and fallacies. I continued under this
delusion four years, occasionally taking less, as my feelings of
coming ill-health at times admonished me. It was about this
time alcoholic drinks seemed to produce on me a different physical
action; and instead of getting stupidly and insensibly unconscious,
my intellect and apprehension seemed, under its influence, asto-
nishingly to expand. I could carry on my argument, 011 any
subject with which I was at all acquainted, with such method
and vigour, that neither I nor any of my companions considered
me to be drunk. I essayed to take my departure, when, much to
my surprise, I seemed to have lost the locomotive power, and as
a policeman observed, when I told him that I was drunk, that if
so, it was my legs and not my head, for that I talked too reasonably
for a drunken man. In this manner I continued sipping every
half-hour, every day, for several days, as I could not eat, with an
idea of stimulating myself to that exertion necessary for me to
fulfil the duties of my calling. The result can be foreseen?again
delirium tremens, or a species of it, attacked me, and now in a
more fearful manner than ever. This was about the end of July,
1850.
It seems to me, in looking back to this period of my ex-
perience, that Satan gains more power over the soul of the
inebriate each time that he falls into this state of syncope. I
believe it is a state in which God leaves the soul for a time?in
some cases, for eternity?entirely abandoned to Satan's power.
Again his influence was constantly exerted to cause me to
commit suicide; and nothing but my soul being occasionally
urged to prayer by ministering spirits, prevented the accomplish-
ment of his purpose. In this condition I still continued mecha-
nically to fulfil the duties of my station, but, no doubt, in so
strange a manner as to attract the notice of all with whom I had
any business to transact; and yet I possessed sufficient tact to
make my singularities attributed to any other than the right
cause. Again I had my sleepless nights and restless days, ha-
rassed with the most fearful forebodings, and threatened by
the denunciations of the " wicked one." All the sins of my
past life were brought individually and collectively with fearful
distinctness to my view; each separate sin seemed mysteriously to
bear its part to work out that retributive justice with which I was
then being punished. The veil seemed lifted that concealed the
torments of eternity. I then felt that it was no corporeal punish-
486 AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD.
ment in the next world that awaits our sins, though typified in
this world by a natural element?fire?the sufferings inflicted by
which our materiality can realize. It is the mind, the conscience,
the soul, that immaterial part of us, that is to realize the torture
typified hy burning brimstone and fire?a fit emblem of its reality.
Again the demon made use of the same weapons he had here-
tofore used, but with far greater power and success; I seemed
entirely to despair under his accusations and threatenings, veri-
fied as they were by the "Word." I was, after great agony,
enabled to answer him by some word of truth in its proper inter-
pretation, suggested to my mind by some heavenly antagonistic
spirit; he was 110 sooner driven away by one reply, so suggested,
than he brought another more fearfully condemnatory to my
soul's views?so I continued to be tormented until I found myself,
as in my former experience, out of the body in a liquid lake of
molten fire. In my feelings 011 this occasion there is an
anomaly. I seemed to realize the torment inflicted by the liquid
lake but for a moment, and yet I seemed to be there for ages. I
was irresistibly impelled to call out, in the spirit, so loud, that
in that fearful place it seemed to reach immensity, the following
words?" How long, Lord ? how long ?" These words I was
commanded by the Spirit to call three times; and so loud did
I call, that it seemed to shake the foundations of earth and hell.
On coming to myself, or on returning into the body, methoughtit
necessary, to carry out God's purpose, that the same cry should
be made in the flesh, which I essayed to do, but was, in my
attempt to give utterance to the words, stopped by my wife
placing her hands before my mouth, and calling down my eldest
son to assist her. I looked on her, and said, "What, Eve!" (for
she still appeared to me, in the state I was then in, to again
represent our first parent, "Eve")*?"You suppress the word of
life ? you that formerly gave to me the word"?alluding to the
experience on a like occasion some years back. I looked hard
into her eyes to see if it was indeed "Eve." Yes, she was the
first mother; but there was an expression in her features different
from that heavenly look she had when I first identified her as
" Eve." On asking her the meaning of the change, the Spirit
answered me?"You saw her then before the fall, in her original
purity; you see her now after the transgression, contaminated by
sin; hence the wicked part of her nature induces her to assist
the wicked one in suppressing the Word of Life." Thus encouraged
by the Spirit, I struggled, and eventually succeeded in giving, in
a loud cry, utterance, with much opposition, to the predestined
words, "How long, Lord??how long?" three times; which
* Long since the above was originally written, I accidentally came across the
derivation of the word " Eve," from its original meaning. It is, " Life-giver
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD. 487
seemed, as before, to reach to the confines of the earth. On
my last call, I was answered by the words?" When death is
swallowed np in victory;" and the Spirit moreover told me to
answer all my spiritual tormentors with those words, and "to
rest there." He then added, "Yon are sealed." I supplicated to
he informed whether for " glory" or " perdition," hut could get no
further answer. The only hope I had was from his before telling
me "to rest there."
* * * * * *
The Conclusion.?Reflections.?As I lay on my bed gradually
recovering from the effects of the foregoing excesses, my thoughts
became insensibly engaged in analyzing the act of the Saviour in
turning water into wine at the marriage feast at Cana at Galilee,
and of His administering wine to His disciples on His last par-
taking of the Passover, on His instituting the Eucharist. Was
it possible, I asked myself, that our blessed Lord would set an
example of partaking of that beverage, the use and abuse of
which would hereafter become a curse and reproach to us as a
nation calling itself after His name,?more especially as a great
majority of physiologists have declared the use of it to be
not only unnecessary to a human being in a state of health, but
to act injuriously on the finer tissues of the body, and otherwise
disarrange the more susceptible part of man's nervous system,?it
being a well-known fact that some constitutions are of that delicate
construction, that not the least portion of alcoholic drink can be
partaken with impunity, without giving a false colouring to
objects, by which such person's self-denying power is lost, and
thus causing tliem to err ? Whilst these thoughts were revolving
in my mind, I again seemed to have the same powerful agency
telling me " to search !"?" search !"?" search !" till I was im-
pelled, as it were, to get out of bed and get the Bible to satisfy
my doubts. Under the same irresistible tuition, I sought for that
which preceded the Eucharistic rite of the Passover, the formalities
of which institution I found in the 12th chapter of Exodus, verse
15?" Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread; even the first
day ye shall put away leaven out of your houses; for whosoever
eateth leavened bread from the first, day until the seventh day,
that soul shall be cut off . from Israel. " Verse 19?" Seven days
shall there be no leaven found in your houses." Exodus, chap,
xxxiv. ver. 25?" Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice
with leaven." Now, had alcoholic wine been used on that occa-
sion, it must have been leavened, fermented, and undergone the
first process to decay, which would have been a very inapt em-
blem of " the Blood of the New Testament,"'?that blood that
flowed from that body of our Blessed Lord, that had in it no
element of decay. The human nature, derived from his mother
4SS AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DRUNKARD.
Mary, had been so purified and made perfect by suffering, and
overcoming temptation, as fitted that body for becoming the resi-
dence of His divinity, and by the process purged it of all elements
of dissolution. But it is useless considering further, or arguing
a point which is not disputed by those who have made themselves
acquainted with the late manners and customs of the Jews. There
were two sorts of wine used in those days?one fermented,
leavened, or alcoholic; the other, and most commonly used, as
being most congenial to their tastes and the habit which their
climate produced, unfermented, of the expressed juice of the
grape, before leaven, that " type of sin," had been applied
to it. The wine used at the Passover of the Jews of the present
day is, I am given to understand, of a somewhat similar nature?is
unalcoholic. Believing this fact, many eminent divines of the
Christian Church (nonconforming) make use of the unchanged
element when acting on this command of their Master, to " do this
in remembrance of me." Somewhat exhausted by the mental
exertions used in the investigation of the above subject, I lay
back on my pillow, with the hope of composing myself; but a
short time elapsed before I was again " acted 011 by the Spirit" (I
use this phraseology, as the impulse given seemed of that uncon-
trollable nature as to seem supernatural) with the same " Search !"
?"search !" I seemed to be for a time satisfied, but still more
urgently did the Spirit tell me to " Search !"?" search !" I again
got the Bible, and found out our Lord's institution of the Eucha-
rist, which I came across at the I4.th chapter of St. Mark's Gospel,
]2th and following verses?"And the first day of unleavened
bread, when they killed the Passover, His disciples said unto
Him, Where wilt thou that we go and prepare that thou mayst
eat the Passover? And He sendeth forth two of His disciples,
and saith unto them, Go ye into the city, and there shall meet
you a man bearing a pitcher of water: follow him." I read so far
undisturbed; but on coming to the passage, which I must needs
repeat, it had such an effect on me,?"and there shall meet you
a man bearing a pitcher of water: follow him,"?I became so agi-
tated that I nearly fainted. On recovering, I was impressed with
the presentiment that some great theological fact was about to be
given to the world, in connexion with this ordinance, which had
never been thought of before, which was still further confirmed
by the " Invisible Presence" most urgently reiterating, " Read
on ! ?" Read on !" I read on till I came to the 22nd verse of
the same chapter (14th)?" And as they did eat, Jesus took bread,
and blessed, and brake it, and gave to them, and said, Take, eat:
this is my body." 23rd verse?" And He took the cup, and when
He had given thanks, He gave it to them : and they all drank of
it." 24th?" And He said unto them, This is my blood of the
AUTOBIOGKAPHICAL SKETCH OF A DKUNKARD. 489
New Testament, which is shed for many." I at this part seemed
to he interrupted, and was asked?"What is my blood of the
New Testament ?" I paused to reflect. The question (similar)
was repeated, as in another version you find it?" What is the
New Testament in my blood ?" I mentally answered, "the con-
tents of the cup,?the wine." The Spirit replied?" How do you
know it was wine ? Turn to the 19tli chapter of the Gospel of St.
John, and the 34tli verse;" and I read?"But one of the soldiers
with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith came thereout blood and
water." I exclaimed?"Blood and water !" "Blood and water!"
said the Spirit. Thus is verified what is stated by St. John?
"This is He that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ;
not by water only, but by water and blood. And it is the Spirit
that beareth witness, because the Spirit is truth." Water is the
type of truth. " This," said the Spirit, " is the New Testament
in His blood; the water that flowed from His side. The blood
showed and typified His human nature, derived from His mother
Mary, according to the flesh; the water His divine. When He
had perfected that humanity by overcoming, temptation, and
finished the work the Father gave Him to do, it was then that
He bowed His head, and said, ' It is finished.' The blood of His
perfected Humanity, poured out as the grand atonement by which
His people received remission of their sins; the water, by the
partaking of which in faith we are sanctified emblematically, and
fitted by God's grace to become recipients of heavenly joys."
After so far telling me, I said, on reading further?"Verily I say
unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine until that day
I drink it new in the kingdom of God." He replied?" ' I am the
vine, ye are the branches;' read the Lord's Prayer,"?which I re-
peated with much reverence?"Our Father, which art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come; thy will be done on earth,
as it is in heaven." He stopped me to say?" Thou wast not
taught to pray in the Saviour's words, for what will never be. His
kingdom will come, when His will is done on earth, as it is in
heaven; then will He drink the wine, new and unfermented, in His
Father's kingdom on earth, when, with virtue and goodness,
universal temperance shall prevail, and the Spirit of Evil, typified
by alcohol, go back and reside with the Spirit who gave it." So
impressed was I, at the time, with the truth of the above revela-
tion (not having partaken of any sustenance for some time, having
no desire), I immediately rose in my bed, rang the bell, and
ordered a cup of water to be brought me, on receiving which I
knelt down with the greatest awe and reverence, under the im-
pression of the omniscience and omnipresence of the Deity, and
enthusiastically, with much fervour, invoked God's blessing on
w
490 A SINGULAR CASE OF INSANITY.
the element which I then verily believed to typify His holy
Spirit, "the New Testament in His blood." ,n
I was then referred, as a climax to the whole, to the 44th //.
chapter of Ezekiel, 21st verse, where I read?"Neither shall
any priest drink wine when they enter into the inner court."
23rd verse?"And they shall teach my people the difference i
between the lioly and profane, and cause them to discern between
the unclean and the clean." The Spirit then left me, telling
me, "I was sealed." This took place, dating from this 1st of
November, 1853, nearly four years since, from which time, by j
God's mercy, I have not touched the unholy thing. I feel assured
that when the time will arrive when " His kingdom is come, and
His will is done on earth as it is in heaven," its use will be
banished the earth. John the Baptist came?a water drinker?
heralding in the "first coming of Christ;" so I believe this pre-
sent total abstinence movement from alcoholic drinks to be a faint
ray of that light which will ultimately prevail to herald in " His
second coming."
