On The Causes Of Idiocy
=========================

%
THE JOURNAL
OF
I PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND
MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
JULY 1, 1858.
Aet. I.?

?-
BY S. G. HOWE, M.D.,
Of Massachusetts, U.S. A.
From a Report of the Commissioners appointed by the Legislature of Massachusetts, in 1816, to
inquire into the Condition of the Idiots of the Commonwealth.
All those who have a living and abiding faith and trust in the
goodness and wisdom of the Creator, will readily believe that the
terrible evils which now infest society are not necessarily per-
petual ; that they are not inherent in the very constitution of
man, but are the chastisements sent by a loving Father to bring
back his children to obedience to his beneficent laws. These
laws have been as much shrouded in darkness, in times past, as
the hieroglyphics of Egypt; and though they were written upon
every man's body, no Cliampollion was found to decipher them.
But a better day has dawned, and men are beginning to read
the handwriting upon the world, which tells them that every sin
against a natural law must be atoned for by suffering here as well
as hereafter.
It is beginning to be seen, also, that man has a double nature
and double interests; that he is a social being, as well as an
individual; and that he cannot sin with impunity against the one
nature any more than he can against the other. God has joined
men together, and they cannot put themselves asunder. The
ignorance, the depravity, the sufferings of one man, or of one
class of men, must affect other men, and other classes of men, in
spite of all the barriers of pride and selfishness which they may
erect around themselves. The doctrine of impenetrability does
not obtain in morals, however it may do in physics ; but, on the
contrary, as gases afford mutually a vacuum to each other into
which they rush, so the nature of every individual is a vacuum
to the nature of society, and its influences, be they for good or
be they for evil, interpenetrate him in spite of himself. It is clear,
NO. XL?NEW SERIES. b B
366 ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY.
therefore, tliat in this, as in everything else, the interest and the
duty of society are common and inseparable.
Idiocy is a fact in our history of momentous import. It is
one of the many proofs of the immense space through which
society has yet to advance before it even approaches to the per-
fection of civilization which is attainable. Idiots form one rank
of that fearful host which is ever pressing upon society with its
suffering, its miseries, and its crimes, and which society is ever
trying to hold off at arm's length?to keep in quarantine, to shut
up in gaols and almshouses, or, at least, to treat as a parish caste;
but all in vain.
There are the paupers?a host in themselves; the drunkards,
the vagabonds, the criminals, the insane, the blind, the deaf?all
these together form a number, the proportion of which to the
whole population is fearfully great, and the existence of which is
a reproach to our civilization, for that existence implies gross
ignorance and open violation of the laws of nature.
The moral to be drawn from the existence of the individual
idiot is this:?he, or his parents, have so far violated the natural
laws, so far marred the beautiful organism of the body, that it
is an unfit instrument for the manifestation of the powers of the
soul. The moral to be drawn from the prevalent existence of
diocy in society is, that a very large class of persons ignore the
conditions upon which alone health and reason are given to men,
and consequently they sin in various ways; they disregard the
conditions which should be observed in intermarriage; they over-
look the hereditary transmission of certain morbid tendencies, or
they pervert the natural appetites of the body into lusts of divers
kinds?the natural emotions of the mind into fearful passions?
and thus bring down the awful consequences of their own igno-
rance and sin upon the heads of their unoffending children.
Idiocy is found in all civilized countiies, but it is not an evil
necessarily inherent in society ; it is not an accident; and much
less is it a special dispensation of Piovidence \ to suppose it can
be so, is an insult to the Majesty of Heaven. No! It is
merely the result of a violation ot natural laws, which are simple,
clear, and beautiful; which require only to be seen and known,
in order to be loved; and which, if strictly observed for two or
three generations, would totally remove from any family, however
strongly predisposed to insanity or idiocy, all possibility of its
recurrence.
No scientific exposition of these laws will be attempted here;
but many facts and observations will be recorded, which inay
awaken some abler minds^io the importance of codifying them
and setting them forth for the benefit of mankind. Suffice it to
say now, that out of 420 cases of congenital idiocy examined,
ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY. 367
some information was obtained respecting the condition of the
progenitors of 359. Now, in all these 359 cases, save only four,
it is found that one or the other, or both, of the immediate pro-
genitors of the unfortunate sufferers had, in some way, widely
departed from the normal condition of health, and violated the
natural laws. That is to say, one or the other, or both of them,
were very unhealthy or scrofulous; or they wre hereditarily pre-
disposed to affections of the brain, causing occasional insanity;
or they had intermarried with blood relatives ; or they had been
intemperate; or had been guilty of sensual excesses which
impaired their constitutions.
Now, it is reasonable to suppose that, if more accurate infor-
mation could have been obtained about the history of the other
four cases, some adequate cause would have been found in them
also, for the misfortune of the child, in the condition of the
progenitors.
This subject of the hereditary transmission of diseased ten-
dency is of vast importance; but it is a difficult one to treat,
because a squeamish delicacy makes people avoid it; but if ever
the race is to be relieved of a tithe of the bodily ills which flesh
is now heir to, it must be by a clear understanding of, and a
willing obedience to, the law which makes the parents the bless-
ing or the curse of the children; the givers of strength, and
vigour, and beauty, or the dispensers of debility, and disease, and
deformity. It is by the lever of enlightened parental love, more
than by any other power, that mankind is to be raised to the
highest attainable point of bodily perfection.
Can there be so sad a sight on earth as that of a parent looking
upon a son deformed, or halt, or blind, or deaf, with the con-
sciousness that he himself is the author of the infirmity ; or
upon a sick and suffering daughter, fading and dying in early
youth, from the gnawing of a worm which he himself placed
within her breast; or a wayward and unmanageable child, urged
and hurried on to lust, and licentiousness, and crime, by the
irresistible force of passions which he himself bestowed upon it ?
If such parent erred in ignorance; if he had always obeyed the
laws of life and morality, as far as lie knew them, still must his
suffering be grievous; but if he sinned against the clear light of
Grod s law; if he secretly defiled the temple of his soul, ran riot
in lust, fed the fire of passion until it burnt out the very core of
his body, and then planted a spark from the smouldering ashes to
shoot up into unhallowed flames in the bosom of his child?how
horrible must be his sensations when he looks upon that child,
consuming, morally, every day before his eyes ! Talk about the
dread of a material hell in the far-off future ! The fear of that
can be nothing to the fear of plunging one's own child in the
'-? 'I B B 2
368 ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY.
hell of passion here. It is probable that there are thousands of
such parents among us, who never dream that they are at all
responsible for those bodily ailments of their offspring which
sadden their own lives; or for the stupidity, the waywardness,
or the vice which almost hardens their hearts against the
children who manifest them, while, in reality, those ailments and
vices are but the dregs of a poisoned chalice returned to their
own lips.
It may be assumed as certain, that in all cases where children
are born deformed, or blind, or deaf, or idiotic, or so imperfectly
and feebly organized that they cannot come to maturity under
ordinary circumstances, or have the seeds of early decay, or have
original impetuosity of passions that amount to moral insanity?
in all such cases the fault lies with the progenitors. Whether
they sinned in ignorance or in wilfulness, matters not as to the
effect of the sin upon the offspring. The laws of God are so clear
that he who ivill read may do so. If a man violates them igno-
rantly, he suffers the simple penalty; if he violates them know-
ingly, he has remorse added to his suffering; but in no case can
the penalty be remitted to him.
The conditions of the law of transmission of hereditary ten-
dencies to disease of body and of mind are beginning to be
known, but there are many circumstances which obstruct the
spread of knowledge upon the subject. First and foremost
among these is the mournful ignorance about Physiology.
People are blind to prinriples which, if understood, would make
the whole law clear and beautiful.
The transmission of any infirmity is not always direct. It
is not always in the same form. It may be modified by the in-
fluence of one sound parent; it may skip a generation; it may
affect one child more, and another less; it may affect one in one
form, and another in another; and so, in a thousand ways, it
may elude observation. But more especially does it escape
observation, because it may affect a child merely by diminishing,
not destroying, the vigour of his mind or body, ? by almost
paralysing one mental faculty, or giving fearful activity to one
animal passion, and so reappearing in the child in a different
dress from what it wore in the parent. Variety is the great law
of nature, and it holds good in the transmission of diseased ten-
dencies, as well as in everything else. But unerring certainty,
too, is alike a characteristic of this law; and let no one flatter
himself or herself that its penalties can be escaped.
The health and vigour of the body may be compared to a
man's capital; it is a trust fund given to him by the Creator, of
which he may expend the interest in the natural enjoyments of
life, but he cannot encroach in the least on the principal without
ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY. 369
real loss. Every debauch, every excess, every undue indulgence,
is at the expense of this capital. A rich man may throw away
cents or dollars, and not feel it,?but he is really poorer for it;
and a young man, with a large capital of health, may daily throw
away part of it, and still feel strong; but every over-stimulant to
the nerves, every overload to the stomach, is a cent or a dollar
taken from his capital; feel it, or not feel it, he is poorer for it,
and so will be the children afterwards born to him.
There is this difference, however, between the capital which
God gives man, and that which he accumulates for himself,?
that the one is never so great but its interest can be spent with
enjoyment, while the other may be so enormous as to cumber
and embarrass him like an overload of fat. He may grasp so
much, that, like the boy with his fist full of olives in the nar-
row-mouthed jar, he cannot withdraw it, and will not let any
drop.
Were it not for the action of certain principles which give to
the race recuperative powers, there would be danger of its utter
deterioration as a whole by the sins of so many of its individual
members.
The conviction of the existence and the importance of the law
of hereditary influences has been brought home so strongly by ex-
amining the condition of the unfortunate objects of this research,
that this digression has been inevitable.
Before referring to the tabular views appended, we shall at-
tempt to give an idea of the leading differences among the persons
referred to, although it is no part of the object of this Report to
establish a scientific classification of idiots. The best way,
perhaps, to give an idea of the leading distinctive features of dif-
ferent classes of these unfortunate beings will be to describe
several individual cases. For all humane and practical purposes,
we may divide them into Pure Idiots, Fools, and Simpletons,
?or Imbeciles, as they are sometimes called.
According to M. Seguin, the type of an idiot is an individual
who " knows nothing, can do nothing, cannot even desire to do
anything." This is the maximum of idiocy; the minimum of
intelligence ; and but very few cases can be found (we were in-
clined to think none could) in which a being in human shape is
so much below even insects, and so little above a sensitive plant.
The vast European hospitals, in which the two ends of humanity
seem to meet where beneficence, guided by science, stoops to
give attention to the most shocking and repulsive forms of
human suffering and degradation;?those great lazar-liouses of
London and Paris do sometimes, as their records show, pi'esent
such cases of idiocy as, one would fain hope, can be found no-
where else. But, alas! when, overcoming the repugnance to
370 ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY.
close contemplation of utter degradation, one looks carefully
among tlie sweepings that are cast out hy society for something
that may he saved to humanity, he finds, even in our fair com-
monwealth, breathing masses of flesh, fashioned in the shape of
men, hut shorn of all other human attributes.
Idiots of the lowest class are mere organisms, masses
OF FLESH AND BONE IN HUMAN SHAPE, IN WHICH THE BRAIN
AND NERVOUS SYSTEM HAS NO COMMAND OVER THE SYSTEM OF
VOLUNTARY MUSCLES AND WHICH CONSEQUENTLY ARE WITHOUT
POWER OF LOCOMOTION, WITHOUT SPEECH, WITHOUT ANY MANI-
FESTATION OF INTELLECTUAL OR AFFECTIVE FACULTIES.
Fools are a higher class of idiots, in whom the brain
AND NERVOUS SYSTEM ARE SO FAR DEVELOPED AS TO GIVE PAR-
TIAL COMMAND OF THE VOLUNTARY MUSCLES; WHO HAVE CON-
SEQUENTLY CONSIDERABLE POWER OF LOCOMOTION AND ANIMAL
ACTION ; PARTIAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE AFFECTIVE AND INTEL-
LECTUAL FACULTIES, BUT ONLY THE FAINTEST GLIMMER OF
REASON, AND VERY IMPERFECT SPEECH.
Simpletons are the highest class of idiots, in whom
THE HARMONY BETWEEN THE NERVOUS AND MUSCULAR SYSTEM
IS NEARLY PERFECT; WHO CONSEQUENTLY HAVE NORMAL POWERS
OF LOCOMOTION AND ANIMAL ACTION ; CONSIDERABLE ACTIVITY
OF THE PERCEPTIVE AND AFFECTIVE FACULTIES; AND REASON
ENOUGH FOR THEIR SIMPLE INDIVIDUAL GUIDANCE, BUT NOT
ENOUGH FOR THEIR SOCIAL RELATIONS.
Among idiots proper should be classed the following cases:?
E. G., aged eight years. . This poor creature may be taken as
a type of the lowest kind of idiocy. He has bones, flesh and
muscles, body and limbs, skin, hair, &c. He is, in form and out-
line, like a human being, but in nothing else. Understanding
he has none ; and his only sense is that which leads him to con-
tract the muscles of his throat, and swallow food when it is put
into his mouth. He cannot chew his victuals; lie cannot stand-
erect ; he cannot even roll over when laid upon a rug ; he cannot
direct his hands enough to brush oft the flies from his face ; he
has no language?none whatever; he cannot even make known
his hunger, except by uneasy motions of his body. His habits
of body are those of an infant just born. He makes a noise like
that of a very sick and feeble baby,?not crying, however, in a
natural way. His head is not flattened and deformed, as is usual
with idiots, but is of good size and proportion.
It would seem as if the powers of innervation were totally
wanting in him. There is no nervous energy; nothing to brace the
muscles ; no more power of contractility than in a person who is
dead drank. The involuntary muscular motions are properly
performed; that is, the organic life goes on regularly; the heart
ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY. 371
contracts and dilates ; the peristaltic motion of tlie bowels is
regular.
The probable causes are hereditary ones. Ihe grand-parents
were very scrofulous and unhealthy, ilie parents were appa-
rently healthy, but gave themselves up to excessive sensual in-
dulgence. They lost their health in consequence of this, and
were so well aware of it as to abstain and to recover again. In
the mean time, five children were born to them, two of whom
were like E. G-., and died at five or six years of age: two others
were very feeble and puny, and died young.
A male, aged nine years. This organism in the human form is
hardly a grade higher than the preceding. He has no muscular
contractility ; he cannot stand, nor sit upright, nor even turn
over; for, if laid upon his. stomach, he paws and kicks until
turned over upon his back, which position he likes best. He has
not even power to masticate his food, though he swallows very
well when it is thrust into his mouth. He has no language, but
seems to understand some simple sentences. He has more in-
telligence than the boy above-named, and the principal trouble
seems to be want of contractility. He can feel flies that alight
upon his skin, and can brush them off. His habits are like those
of an infant. His head is very small.
The causes are probably hereditary, and he seems to be the
last and lowest' of a constantly degenerating breed. The grand-
parents were intemperate and depraved. The children born unto
them were puny and weak-minded, and they sank still lower in
the slough of vice and depravity. The mother of this boy was
herself a simpleton; and this was her second illegitimate child.
Though of feeble health, she gave herself up to excessive licen-
tiousness, her passions becoming almost maniacal.
H. W., aged seventeen. This wretched being seems to be,
like the preceding ones, so deficient in nervous energy that he
lies almost as powerless as though he were a mass of jelly, with-
out a bone or a muscle in his composition. If his legs are
pinched or irritated, he seems to try to move them, but scarcely
draws them up an inch. If flies alight upon his face, he can
hardly reach them with his hand. He sometimes rolls his head
from side to side with a languid motion, and this is the most he
can do in that way, for he cannot raise it up even to take food.
He is fed like a sick infant, with half-chewed victuals, from a
spoon. He has no speech, and apparently no knowledge of
persons. When food is brought near to him, something like a
smile comes over his countenance; perhaps he is made aware of
it by the smell.
His head is not very small, nor is it deformed. The family of
which he comes is very scrofulous and degenerate physically.
372 ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY.
His relatives (especially his mother) are, many of them, remark-
able for erysipelatous humours, tumours, carbuncles, &c. One
of his cousins is idiotic, though not of so low a degree as he is.
It is remarkable, that in this case, as well as the two preceding,
there is not the peculiar look so common with idiots, and which
may be better expressed by the word monkeyish than any other.
When the animal nature is pretty active, and there is, at the same
time, a governing intellect, the resulting expression is human.
The higher the intellectual endowment, the more lofty and noble
is the look; the lower the degree of endowment, the more nearly
the look approaches that of animals, until we get down to the
mere twinkle of cunning in the low rogue, or the monkeyish looks
of the idiot.
Now, the three persons above mentioned do not seem to be
idiotic from any deficiency in the size, or deformity in the shape
or structure, of that part of the organization on which the mani-
festation of intelligence immediately depends. There is, at any
rate, no appearance of anything of that kind ; but there seems to
be a want of power in that part of the organization by which the
nervous fluid gives energetic action to the frame. The look is
that of languor rather than that of idiocy.
Among idiots of the lowest class are found some who, unlike
the preceding, seem to have a superabundance of innervation,
who have great muscular contractility?that is, great command of
all the muscles by the nervous system?and who are consequently
very active. They appear like insane persons in a state of excite-
ment, and yet they have no speech, and no reasoning faculties.
The distinction made with so much ingenuity by a celebrated
French writer holds true here?" The insane man reasons falsely;
the idiot reasons not at all."
Jonas  , aged eight years. His body is well-proportioned
and strong, but very small. His face has the deformed look of
idiocy. The sides of his head seem to be at a fever heat. He is
almost all the time in violent motion. His appetite is not only
voracious, but evidently morbid and insatiable; for, after eating
heartily at table, he swallows anything he can lay his hands
upon?raw potatoes, the bark of trees, chips of wood, and even
small stones. He has been known to swallow pebbles as large as
chestnuts. He hears and seems to understand the meaning of
some sounds, but has no speech. He has no sense of propriety,
no affection, no attachment; his brothers and sisters are no more
to him than the dog and cat.
His father was intemperate to the last degree. His mother
was of a very scrofulous habit of body.
Cases of this kind are not very frequent, and they are often
mistaken for cases of insanity. They are generally proper sub-
ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY. 373
jects for instruction, though the long continuance of their life is
not probable, for there seems to be morbid action in the brain.
TOOLS
Make that class of idiots who have the muscular and
NERVOUS SYSTEM WELL DEVELOPED ; POWERS OF LOCOMOTION AND
ANIMAL ACTION ; IMPERFECT SPEECH ; PARTIAL DEVELOPMENT OF
THE PERCEPTIVE AND AFFECTIVE FACULTIES, BUT VERY FEEBLE
POWERS OF REASON.
This class is more numerous than the preceding. Cases are
found in every town, in almost every almshouse. The type of
this class would be a man who uses all his senses; who observes
things about him; who can make simple sentences, and under-
stand simple directions; but who obeys every animal impulse
without any thought about responsibility to others, or conse-
quences to himself.
The description of some of these cases will be put in such a
form as to give an idea of the course that was followed in in-
quiring into the condition of these unfortunate persons.
It was obviously necessary to have some regular series of
questions, or rather a series of subjects about which questions
were framed upon the spot, and put in such form as the occasion
and circumstances demanded.
Some of the terms used, as will be seen, are borrowed from a
system of mental philosophy, which (however undeniable its
claims are to have presented the clearest and best analysis of the
human faculties ever yet known,) has not been relied upon by the
Commissioners in their examination. In speaking of the instinct
to oppose and destroy, of the sentiment of self-esteem and love of
approbation, the faculty of number, &c., as manifested in the
following cases, no reference is had to the question whether there
is or is not a proportionate development of those parts of the
brain which some able anatomists and keen observers of nature
maintain to be the part of the organization which is most imme-
diately instrumental in the manifestation of such instinct, senti-
ment, or faculty. Indeed, in most cases, the notes were taken
before the actual measurements were made. It was thought,
however, that the close personal examination of so many idiots
presented too rare and important an opportunity for ascertaining
their craniological as well as other bodily peculiarities to be lost;
and accordingly it was improved, and the general results may be
found in the Tables. It may be stated here, in general terms,
that the result of this examination and measurement shows that
no dimensions of the head, except extreme diminutiveness, and
no shape whatever, can be relied upon as criteria of idiocy. A
few of the worst cases of idiocy are those in which the head is
374 ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY.
normal as to size and shape. Nevertheless, the Tables show
that, taking the aggregate of all the cases, an obvious relation is
seen between the size and development of the cranium, and of its
different parts, and the amount of intellectual power, and of the
different lands of mental manifestation.
The results of the observations and measurements are published
without any inference being drawn, in order that those who choose
to examine and study them may do so.
Some writers have hastily concluded, that because a few idiots,
whose heads were smaller than the measure which had been laid
down as the minimum of brain by which intelligence could be
manifested, have nevertheless been partially educated; and because
many others, with heads of normal size and shape, are hopelessly
idiotic,?therefore the doctrine of the dependence of mental mani-
festation upon the structural condition of the brain is overthrown.
They say, it has been asserted that persons with heads of a certain
size must necessarily remain idiots, and they triumphantly point
to certain idiots who have recently been trained to show a certain
amount of intelligence, though their heads were smaller than this
arbitrary standard.
This conclusion, however, does not seem justified by close and
candid observation. Size is only one of the structural conditions
of the brain upon which mental manifestations depend;?quality
of fibre, health, exercise, &c., are others essentially modifying it.
It may very well be that one anatomist and philosopher, who
wrote fifty years ago, saying that a man with a head below a
certain measurement must necessarily remain an idiot in spite of
any means of education then knoivn, would be still right in his
general conclusions, notwithstanding means are now discovered
to educe considerable intelligence out of such a supposed idiot.
The result of close and extensive observations of idiots has been
strongly to confirm, not only the doctrine of the volume of brain
being one important element in the means of manifesting mental
power, but all the main doctrines of that school of philosophy
which teaches that God gives us the body not merely as the
handmaid of the soul, but weds and welds the two together in
bonds of dependence that death alone can sever.
That philosophy has been aptly illustrated by comparing the
body to a musical instrument, the soul to an invisible player. It
is indeed so; and if the harp have a thousand strings, and they
all be kept in tune, then the soul discourses sweet and varied
music. But the idiot's body is a wretched thing, and its few
strings are so sadly awry, that even in a seraph's hand it could
give nothing but jarring and discordant sounds.
The whole of the success which has recently been gained, in
attempts to improve the condition of idiots, has arisen from tlia
ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY. 3.7,5
adoption in practice of tlie principles of that much-ridiculed
doctrine which teaches that the first thing to he done is to put
the instrument in tune. Surely, then, the attempt to show what
are the material conditions of the bodily instrument in such a
number of idiots as have been examined by the Commissioners
will not be condemned by candid observers, as such attempts
made upon other classes of men have too frequently been.
That the different degrees of keenness and vigour with which
different manifestations of mind can be made by different indi-
viduals, and by the same individual at different times, do, in
some way, depend upon the original nature and the actual con-
dition of some part of the bodily organization, none are now
found foolish enough to deny; that they do depend, moreover,
most immediately upon the structure and condition of the brain
and nervous system, few will doubt; that there must be some
peculiar corresponding outward signs by which the internal
structure and condition of the brain and nervous system may he
known by examination of the outward man, will not be ques-
tioned by sagacious observers of nature; that such examination,
made upon an extensive scale, can lead to any but good re-
sults, will not he asserted by any but the few who think that
modern observations should only be made to confirm ancient
theories. If it is found that a certain condition of brain is an
invariable accompaniment of a certain passion; if the condi-
tion is more marked when the passion is strong, less marked
when it is weak, and unobservable when the passion is want-
ing ; if, moreover, the condition changes with age, waxing and
waning as the passion grows or declines,?then the inference be-
comes almost inevitable, that there is relation of cause and
effect; then the external sign by which such internal structure
and condition can be known is as much the natural language
of the passion as a smile is the natural language of gladness.
Now, to say that, because such signs have not yet been satis-
factorily ascertained, therefore they never can be ascertained,
and that the attempt to ascertain is impious or foolish, is just
what it would have been a few years ago to say that, because
a nebula never had been resolved, therefore it never could be
resolved; that infusoria never had been seen, and therefore
never could be seen; and that to turn a telescope to the sky,
or the microscope to the water, was impious and foolish.
But however certain it is, first, that the activity and strength
of mental manifestations must depend upon the internal struc-
ture and condition of the bodily organization; and second, that
this structure and condition, like everything material, must
have signs and language,?no reference is had to such signs
in the following cases.
376 ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY.
When it is said that a certain idiot's instinct to fight and
destroy is very active, no reference is had to the fulness of his
head about the ears ; it is meant simply that he strikes, bites,
scratches, or smashes things, and thus proclaims, in another kind
of language, the activity and strength of the propensity. In
order to see how many cases there are of coincidence between
the craniological development and the existence of the pro-
pensity, reference must be had to the Tables.
W. C., a lad aged thirteen years. Bodily and mental con-
dition of parents.?The father is a man of scrofulous tem-
perament, and very puny and feeble both in body and mind.
Has been insane at times, especially at religious revivals, at which
he prays and exhorts.
The mother is of a similar habit of body and mind, and has
always been considered a simpleton.
They have one other child, a girl aged twenty, who is a
simpleton.
Functions of assimilation, digestion, growth, &c.?These
seem to be pretty active and healthy. He is of the ordinary size,
and, though subject to fits when enraged, he has tolerable
health.
Muscular vigour, rather below the average.
Appetite for food is insatiable. Unless restrained, he will
always so overload his stomach as to bring on fits. He is now
limited to a certain ration, which is about double the quantity
consumed by other boys of his age. His thirst is also insa-
tiable. He has been known to drink six quarts of water in
twenty-four hours.
Instinct of reproduction does not manifest itself, for he
has been carefully watched in this respect.
Instinct to fight and destroy is pretty active. He not
only defends himself by striking and scratching, but will rush at
things and persons, and push them over. He pulls things to
pieces, but does not seem to know how to use his fists to strike,
or to handle a stick.
Disposition to hide and conceal is apparent in the man-
ner in which he disposes of things.
Disposition to possess and hoard is manifested by his
claiming his own chair, and his own cup and plate at table;
also by carrying apples and fruit to his room, to put them away.
Self-esteem is not apparent in any of his actions.
Love of approbation is feebly manifested.
General activity of senses.-?The five senses are normal,
though not acute, except smell.
Perception of individual objects is feeble. He knows
those immediately about him, and the common household things,
r
ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY. 377
but he evidently does not know how to recognise persons and
things as other children do.
Perception of colour unknown.
Perception of number very imperfect; he could not tell the
difference between two, three, four, and five,
i Perception of time feeble.
Perception of musical sounds null.
' Faculty of language feebly developed. He knows a few
words, but has no power to construct a sentence to express his
wants. He hardly knows a hundred words.
v Causation he seems to have no sense of whatever. The nearest
approach is his habit of stealing hot water and putting it away
to cool, in order to gratify his thirst.
Disposition to imitate very feeble; he will pick up chips
when he sees other persons doing so, but cannot understand a
direction to do so.
Benevolence utterly wanting: the same with Veneration,
Imagination, Conscience, Hope of the Future, &c.
Male, aged twenty-four. Bodily and mental condition of
progenitors.?The mother was a very intemperate prostitute,
and not much else is known of her, except that she died of deli-
rium tremens.
The father is rather apocryphal.
Functions of his general development and condition
of body, imperfect. Head is very small. The extremities
are shortened at the end; that is, the bones of the hands, fingers,
and feet are very short in proportion to the other bones, as if
the central formative power had not been vigorous enough to
push the growth to the circumference. He is scrofulous, and
often covered with sores, scabs, &c.
Functions of assimilation, digestion, growth, &c., are
pretty efficient.
Muscular vigour seems nearly equal to the average. When
sufficient motive is held out, he can do hard work; but the will
is wanting, because the nervous energy is wanting.
Appetite for food is healthy as to quality of what he eats,
but ravenous as to quantity.
Instinct for reproduction is fiercely active and ungovern-
able, and leads him on blindly to excesses of various kinds. The
instinct to fight and destroy seems manifested by his instantly
resorting to force to destroy whatever opposes his will?to smash
an inanimate object; to kill an animate one, whether it be a fly, a
dog, 01* a child.
Aged twenty-two. The mother of this idiot was a very scro-
fulous and puny person; she was insane during her gestation
with him, and died of consumption soon after his birth. She had
378 ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY.
three children. One was a simpleton, and died young. The
other, a sister, is almost idiotic.
The father, a healthy man, married a healthy woman for his
second wife, and has five healthy and intelligent children bv
her.
The head of this idiot is exceedingly small, measuring only
17'5 inches in its greatest circumference, 22 inches being the
standard.
The other physical peculiarities need not be referred to here.
His language is imperfect, like that of a little child. He un-
derstands all simple directions given in sentences short as his
own.
There is a useful lesson to be learned from this poor youth's
history and treatment. He was formerly very irritable and
violent when enraged, breaking and destroying things. For
this he was treated in the usual way: force was met by force.
He was whipped and punished corporally in various ways, for
every offence, by any one about him. As he grew older and
stronger, the number of those who could whip him with impu-
nity grew less, till at last the father was obliged to become
executioner-general, and in the evening gave him a sound
drubbing for the divers and sundry misdemeanours of the day.
The father spared not the rod, but healed not the child, who,
on the contrary, grew worse and worse. The lessons in punish-
ment were not lost upon him. Whatever object offended him,
he would beat and punish just as he had been punished. If it
were a tool of any kind, lie would smash and break it in pieces ;
if it were a dumb beast, he would beat and abuse it. He
smashed rakes, hoes, &c., without number, and one day broke a
cow's leg with an axe.
It happened one evening that a zealous member of the Peace
Society was a visitor at the house, and witnessed a scene of
contest in which the father barely came off victor. The visitor
urged the father to follow a different course with his unfortunate
son; to abandon all blows, all direct use of force, and try mild
measures. By his advice, Johnny was made to understand that,
if he should commit a certain offence, he would be mildly and
kindly remonstrated with, have nothing but bread and water for
supper, and be obliged to lie upon the floor, with only a little
straw under him. Very soon he began himself to practise this
mode of punishment upon the cattle. If the cow offended him,
instead of flying into a passion and beating her, he addressed her
gravely, telling her the nature of her offence, and assuring her of
the consequences. He would then lead her out, lay some straw
upon the ground, bring a little water and a crust of bread, and
tell her that was all she could have for supper.- One day, being
ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY. 379
in the field, lie hurt his' foot with the rake, and instead of getting
angry as he was wont to do, and breaking the instrument to pieces,
he took it up mildly hut firmly, carried it home, got some straw,
and laid the offending tool upon it; then he hi ought some bread
and water, and demurely told the offender that it had been very
naughty?that he did not want to hurt it?but it should have 110
other supper, and no bed to lie upon.
By such means he has been very much improved, not only in
behaviour, but in temper. He is growing less violent and more
manageable every day.
This is not at all strange; it is not even different from what
happens every day with common children. The poor idiot could
not understand much of the spoken words by which reason mani-
fests itself, but he could understand the natural language of all
the passions very well; the angry looks, the harsh voice, the
threatening gesture, were felt in the full force of their meaning,
and they roused in him the answering feelings of fear, rage, or
revenge. These feelings, being called into frequent action,
?> grew more prompt and more fierce by every day's exercise, and
would at last have come to be spontaneously and habitually
active. But, by withdrawing from before his eyes the natural
language of those passions in others, his own were no longer
awakened.
i As a fierce dog sleeps quietly amid the din of other sounds,
but rouses up with defiant growl at the angry hark of another
dog, so anger sleeps quietly in our nature, unmoved by anything
except the language of its kind in another person, which lan-
guage it understands and answers in a moment. We may make
this, and other like passions, sleep so long and so soundly, that
they will grow feeble, and even die out; or we may rouse them
up so often that tlioy cannot sleep, even when we will them to do
so. The moral of this idiot's history will not be lost upon those
whose passions became so restive before they were aware of their
nature as to be a source of perpetual trouble in after-life, when
the moral sense had become awakened to the necessity and the
difficulty of self-control.
Simpletons are the highest class of idiots, in whom
THE HARMONY BETWEEN THE NERVOUS AND MUSCULAR SYSTEM
IS NEARL\ PERFECT , WHO CONSEQUENTLY HAVE NORMAL POWERS
OF LOCOMOTION AND ANIMAL ACTION ; CONSIDERABLE ACTIVITY
OF THE PERCEPTIVE AND AFFECTIVE FACULTIES, AND REASON
ENOUGH FOR THEIR SIMPLE INDIVIDUAL GUIDANCE, BUT NOT
ENOUGH FOR THEIR SOCIAL RELATIONS.
As the class of fools is much larger than that of idiots, so that
of simpletons is much larger than that of fools. Indeed, it is
very difficult to estimate their number, 01* to say what persons
380 ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY.
shall be included in it, for they can only he measured by a sort of
sliding scale, with a standard adapted to different localities and
conditions of society. A Russian serf, a Bavarian boor, might
enjoy liis sinecure office of citizen, and fill his narrow social
circle, with a paucity of intellect such as would incapacitate a
man for political rights or social relations in Massachusetts. So,
among the inhabitants of the least intelligent and active village
population of Massachusetts, a youth might be thought to be of
tolerable capacity, be permitted to go to the polls, and even into
society, who would be rated as a simpleton, and treated as such,
in the active and bustling crowd of one of our thriving marts,
where the weak sink down and disappear, and the strong alone
live and thrive. And so it may be with regard to time; a century
hence, the standard of intellect and of knowledge may be raised
so high as to exclude from the polls, as simpletons, men equal to
some of our generation who consider themselves qualified not
only to be citizens, but to hold offices. Who would arrest such
progress, provided no qualification but that of knowledge and
virtue could ever be required !
The persons put down in this Report as simpletons, are those
about whom there could be no doubt, even in this day and gene-
ration. They are persons the highest of whom should be con-
sidered unable to take any responsibility, to contract matrimony,
or to vote. The latter tests, however, should never be applied by
interested parties. Some of the simpletons in the list have been
wheedled into matrimony, and the bond afterwards cancelled by
authority, though nobody can tell how many continue unchal-
lenged. Politicians, too, are sometimes as blind as lovers to the
demerits of a head which can command a hand. Several cases
have occurred where the taxes were paid for simpletons, and they
voted?until the opposite party showed that they had a greater
number of fools whom they could qualify and bring to the polls;
and then the poor creatures, who had been used to violate the
purity of the ballot and to defraud an election, were thrown aside
in contempt.
It has been the aim to include in this Report none who could
be considered by impartial persons as compos mentis. They are
susceptible of great improvement, and could be made useful and
reputable men, but they cannot be taught in common schools, or
trained in the common way.
The following cases will serve as specimens :?
H. C. F., aged thirty-three. Parentage.?His mother was
extremely intemperate for several years before his birth; she con-
tinued to be so for years afterwards, and died of delirium tremens.
Condition of father not known.
Functions of digestion, assimilation, growth, &c., seem
ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY. 381
tolerably well performed. His body is pretty well developed, and
his health generally good.
Muscular vigour is impaired by a singular affection of his
nervous system, which gives to him the air, gait, and appearance
of a drunken man ! He seems to have inherited from his mother
a strong resemblance to her acquired habit of body. He trips and
staggers in his walk, and frequently falters in his other motions.
The nervous fluid seems to flow unsteadily from the brain, or to
be frequently wanted; hence the motions of his muscles are
suddenly checked, his jaw is arrested in the act of chewing, his
lips in the act of speaking; or, if walking, and the stoppage
is considerable, he stumbles, perhaps falls down. Sometimes
he remains insensible for a minute or two, and is afterwards
utterly unconscious of what passed. More often the command
of one muscle, or of one side, is lost for an instant, and he is
obliged to hitch and wriggle along with the others. Thus the
poor creature drags himself about, a living monument of his
mother's shame.
AprETiTE for food is almost insatiable, and he is very glut-
tonous. It is said that his mother used to give him rum when
he was an infant.
Instinct of reproduction does not manifest itself in an un-
natural degree.
Instinct to fight and destroy is not over-active. He does
not desire to break things, as some idiots do, but he is ready to
fight in self-defence.
Instinct to possess and hoard displays itself in his readi-
ness to store up food.
Disposition to hide and conceal shows itself in the cunning
with which he compasses his purpose of obtaining things to eat,
and of shirking work.
Self-esteem is manifested in various ways.
Love of approbation is the sentiment most acted upon by
those who have the charge of him. To secure the praise and
flattery of others, he will do anything in his power.
General activity of the five senses is normal.
Perception of colour is about as usual.
Perception of the relations of numbers is very imper-
fect. He can count off, by rote, even to a hundred, but can
scarcely tell how much two added-to three will make.
Perception of time is feeble. He keeps step pretty well in
walking, but is perplexed in estimating the passage of time.
Sense of musical relations feeble; he never attempts to
sing.
Faculty of language is imperfectly developed. He knows
the names of individual objects and persons and can use com-
NO. XI.?NEW SERIES. c C
382 ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY.
mon sentences, but does not use involutions and complicated
expressions.
Causality seems active in proportion to his other faculties.
He can build a fire, wash potatoes, and put them to boil for
breakfast, and do similar simple household acts.
Disposition to imitation is not so active as in most persons
of his class. Provided lie attains an object or an end, he does
not seem to care whether he proceeds in the same way that
others do or not. In some idiots, this disposition is very strongly
marked.
Benevolence (so little manifested by most idiots) seems
active in this man. He is very tender-hearted. His pity is easily
excited. He gives away readily of whatever he has.
Veneration is but feebly manifested. He cares little for his
parents, or his elders and superiors?of course, nothing for God.
Conscience is feebly developed, and he cannot be governed
by appeals to it. Hope reaches not beyond the things of this
life : scarcely beyond the things of to-day.
A. B., woman, aged fifty-five, not.a pauper. Parentage, &c.
?Her grandmother was insane, and finally became idiotic. Her
mother and all her brothers and sisters are puny and consump-
tive. Her youngest sister is stunted in growth, and scarcely
compos mentis.
Functions of assimilation, growth, &c., are imperfectly
performed. She is humpbacked and nervous.
Muscular vigour, below average; she is incapable of bearing
much fatigue.
Appetite for food is natural as to quantity, but her taste has
become perverted by use of tea, coffee, spices, &c.
Instinct of reproduction apparently active, though great
pains have been taken to prevent its development. Character in
this respect good.
Instinct to fight and destroy is manifested in the degree
usual with children. She shows passion sometimes, and if in-
jured retorts, and immediately assails the offender.
Disposition to possess and hoard is not shown in its usual
activity; for, though she is desirous of possessing and owning
things, she cares not to retain them long.
Disposition to hide and conceal shows itself not only in
regard to material objects of possession, but sometimes in hypo-
critical conduct. She will put on certain airs in order to conceal
some purpose which she may have.
Self-esteem is very strongly manifested by its usual natural
language. If her simple understanding could be convinced
twenty times in a day that she is sadly deficient in everything of
which people are usually vain, it would make no difference; self-
I
ON THE CAUSES OP IDIOCY. 383
esteem springs up again as elastic as ever, and makes her regard
herself with great complacency.
Love of approbation is one of tlie most prominent traits in
her character. To gain the attention and praise of others, she
will do things that would otherwise be very disagreeable to her.
Tendency to imitation is very strong indeed. She does
things as she has seen others do them, imitates their actions j
and nothing but their example wins her from continual repeti-
tion of the same thing, in the same manner that she once learned
to do it.
The general activity of the senses is normal.
Perception of individual objects, within a certain range,
is good. She recognises most of the individuals of the village,
and common things about her; but then her circle is narrow,
and beyond it she takes no notice of differences between indivi-
dual objects.
Perception of colours is not vivid, but no striking want of
power noticed.
Perception of numbers limited. With the assistance of
objects, she can count a score or two, as the number in a pile of
plates, the stitches on a knitting needle; but she cannot count
or reckon abstractedly without the aid of objects. She can count,
for instance, a pile of ten or fifteen cents, but cannot tell how
many cents are in two or* three half-dimes. She cannot make
change, therefore, or reckon higher than ten, even with the aid
of her fingers.
Perception of time feeble; she can tell the hour by the
clock, but without idea of measuring the lapse of time by it.
Perception of musical sounds is apparent in her. She
sometimes hums a tune; but no fondness for music has been
engrafted upon this capacity, which miglit have been done.
Faculty of language is not well developed; and her range
of words is limited, though she can make simple sentences very
well.
Perception of causation is very feeble.
Benevolence and conscience are feebly manifested.
Hope is very feeble ; the horizon of her future is bounded by
to-morrow.
The cases thus very imperfectly sketched, will serve to give
an idea of the different classes of idiotic persons, and of the
mode in which the inquiry into their condition was pursued.
But they are strongly marked cases each of its kind, and it must
not be supposed that all idiotic persons can readily be ranged in
one or other of these classes. The highest of the lower class of
"l Idiots can hardly be distinguished from the Fool; the least
C C 2
384 jON the causes of idiocy.
stupid of Fools can hardly be distinguished from the Simpleton ;
and the highest among Simpletons stand very near the level of
hundreds who pass in society for feehle-minded persons, but still for
responsible free agents. These latter, indeed, are looked down
upon by the crowd; but, then, the crowd is looked down upon by
tall men; and these, in their turn, are looked down upon by the
few intellectual giants of each generation, who stand higher by
the whole head and shoulders than the rest.
This view of the gradation of intellect should teach us not
only humility, but humanity; and increase our interest in those
who are only more unfortunate than we are, in that tlieir capacity
for seeing and understanding the wisdom, power, and love of
our common Father, is more limited than ours, in this stage of
our being.
It is thought best not to close this Report without alluding to
some
CIRCUMSTANCES OR CAUSES WHICH PREDISPOSE
PERSONS TO IDIOCY.
This is a difficult subject, requiring more scientific research
and accuracy than this Report can pretend to. Some facts,
however, which have been observed, and some thoughts which
have suggested themselves, may possibly be of use to others
who follow in this field. When certain circumstances are
noted as 'preceding idiocy, it is not meant that they certainly
caused it; indeed, it is hard to say that any one cause or con-
dition in a parent will produce idiocy in the offspring; neverthe-
less, a number of causes united may do it. For instance, take
the case?
Wm. B., aged thirteen, which is one of idiocy of the lowest
kind. This boy cannot walk alone, and can hardly creep about.
Has no speech, though some of his natural signs can be under-
stood. He cannot feed himself with a spoon, but can cram food
into his mouth with his fingers. His head is very small. His
intellect is almost null, and of course the affective faculties are
not manifested.
In searching for accompanying circumstances which may
throw light upon the probable causes, it is found that the father
was a very intemperate man. This is not enough, for all in-
temperate men do not have idiotic children. His wife was re-
lated to him by blood, though not within the degree of first
cousin; and still less was this a sufficient cause for the idiocy
of the son. The wife's family was tainted with idiocy, her aunt
having an idiotic child. We find, therefore, both intermarriage
and idiotism in the family; but still this was not cause sufficient,
because the parents of this boy had seven other children, all of
tolerably good parts.
:
?
ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY. 385
Looking at tlie mother's condition during gestation, it is found
that, at an early period of it, she was several times very much
agitated by terror and mental distress; that at a later one, she
became ill, and had great difficulty in carrying her child to its
full period; and finally, that her confinement was very long, pro-
tracted, and painful.
May it not be that these circumstances caused idiocy in this
case, though they might not do so in ordinary cases, where the
intemperance, or the intermarriage, or the tainted blood, or all
of them, were wanting ? May it not be, likewise, that any one
of these circumstances occurring alone,?the intemperance, the
intermarriage, the family taint, the fright, the illness, or the
long and difficult parturition,?though it would not cause idiocy,
nor have any very manifest effect, might, nevertheless, materially
diminish what would otherwise have been the bodily and mental
vigour of the offspring ?
With this explanation, and with the understanding that probabi-
lity, and not certainty, is aimed at, mention will now be made of
some of the immediate causes of idiocy; among which by far the
most prolific one is
THE LOW CONDITION OF THE PHYSICAL ORGANIZATION OF ONE
OR BOTH PARENTS.
It is said by physiologists, that among certain classes of
miserably-paid and poorly-fed workmen, the physical system
degenerates so rapidly, that the children are feeble and puny,
and but few live to maturity; that the grandchildren are still
more puny; until, in the third or fourth generation, the indi-
viduals are no longer able to perpetuate their species, and the
ranks must be filled up by fresli subjects from other walks of life,
to run tlie same round of deterioration.
It would seem that startled nature, having given warning, by
the degenerated condition of three or four generations, at last
refuses to continue a race so monstrous upon the earth.
We see here another of those checks and balances which the
exhaustless wisdom of God pre-established in the very nature of
man, to prevent his utter degeneration. As the comet, rushing
headlong towards the sun, is, by the very velocity which it gains,
and which seems hurling it into the burning mass, carried safely
beyond,?so a race of men, abusing the power of procreation,
may rush on in the path of deterioration until, arriving at a
certain point, a new principle developes itself, the procreating
power is exhausted, and that part of the human family must
perish, or regain its power by admixture with a less degenerate
race.
It will be seen by the Tables, that by far the greater part of
386 ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY.
the idiots are children of parents one or both of whom were of
scrofulous temperament, and poor, flabby organization. It is
difficult to describe exactly the marks which characterize this
low organization, but the eye of a physiologist detects it at once.
Eegarding it as a matter relating to the mere animal man,?if a
farmer had swine, cattle, or horses, as inferior to others of their
kind as many of these people are inferior to other men and
women, he would pronounce them unfit to breed from. Such
persons are indeed unfit to continue the species, for while they
multiply the number, they lessen the aggregate powers.
In saying that such persons are generally scrofulous, the
word is used in its popular-sense, without any pretension to
pathological accuracy. Indeed, it is difficult to give a correct
idea of scrofula, because its symptoms are so manifold and so
various. The class of persons to whom reference is made may
be known by several signs. They do not stand erect and firm ;
they seem rather to be trying to hold their head and shoulders
up by their muscles, than to rest firmly and gracefully poised
upon the spinal columns and lower extremities. V
Eed and sore eyelids, turgid lips, spongy gums, swellings in
the glands, liability to eruptions and diseases of the skin, mark
this class of persons. The skin is generally fair; the muscles
flabby; the hair is light,?seldom hard, crispy, and strong.
They are not liable to fevers and violent inflammations, as
others are; but, when unwell, nature relieves herself by sores,
ulcers, eruptions, &c.
The peccant humours show themselves upon the surface in
various ways?swellings and ulcerations of the glands, blotches,
tetters, ringworms, rash, salt rheum, &c.
But it is not the surface alone that is affected; the internal
tissues are often vitiated, and show their morbid tendencies by
various affections, of which cancer is the worst.
Great pains have been taken to ascertain the physical pecu-
liarities of the blood relatives of most of the idiots whose names
are upon the list. In reading oyer the description of more
than four hundred families in which idiots are found, one is
struck with the great number of cases in which the affections
abovenamed are found. A few cases will give a better idea than
any general description can do:?
< F. D., aged four and a half years. This child is a poor,
puny, and scrofulous creature. Her head is very small, being
only sixteen inches in circumference. She is quite idiotic, as
might be expected with a head of such dimensions, upon a
frame so weak and low-toned. She is very feeble in the spine;
her right side is torpid, and right arm seems paralysed. Her
family is very thriftless and dirty, and presents the spectacle,
ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY. 387
so rare in this country, of sharing their room with the pigs and
poultry.
The father is afflicted with salt rheum and other humours,
which seem to affect his whole system, and make him dyspeptic
and wretched.
The mother is a feeble creature, whose skin is covered with
eruptions. One of her children, sister of F. D., lately died from
a virulent cancerous affection.
Abner and Palmyra H., a brother and sister, aged thirty-
three and forty-three, both idiotic. Heads small. Bodies of
feeble and flabby fibre. The bones of the extremities seem
shortened?that is, out of proportion as to length, compared to
the body. They are both afflicted with scrofulous humours and
sores.
The man shows some of those remarkable signs, often mani-
fested by idiots, of the instincts which one can suppose men
would have in the undeveloped animal stated. When a boy, he
had a passion for burrowing in the earth like a rabbit. He still,,
at times, will wander off into the woods, dig a hole as for a cellar,
collect wood, and go on for days with this occupation,, until dis-
covered and brought home.
The general appearance of these idiots is said to be remarkably
like that of their parents when they were in their long drunken
debaucheries.
Both the parents were of unhealthy habit of body,, troubled
with scrofulous humours, St. Anthony's fire, rum-sores (as they
are called), and other eruptions. All these natural impurities
were made worse by intemperance in drink and depravity of life.
By temperance, cleanliness, and careful observance of all the
natural laws, they might have corrected the vicious humours* of
their bodies, lived pleasant lives, and been blessed with children
to comfort their old age; but they chose to outrage nature in
every way, and she sent them their punishment in the shape of
those idiotic children.
Cynthia T., a girl of eighteen years old, idiotic. She was
deformed at birth about the eyes and nose. She still shows the
marks of a very scrofulous temperament. The bones of the
hands and feet are shortened, and the ends seem as if they had
been gnawed off. Hie upper edges of the frontal and parietal
bones seem shortened, thus reducing the size of the upper part
of the brain, or rather, perhaps, being reduced by its non develop-
ment.
Her parents, uncles and aunts, cousins, &c., are afflicted
more or less with St. Anthony's fire, salt rheum,, cancerous
sores, &c.
> , Her father, as if his constitution was not corrupt enough,
388 ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY.
poisoned it still more by liquid fire. He has an idiotic cousin,
who resembles C. T. in many respects.
In seeking for the causes which lead to this sad deterioration
of families, it will he found that the most prominent and prolific is
INTEMPERANCE.
By inspection of the Tables, it will be seen that, out of 359
idiots, the condition of whose progenitors was ascertained, 99
were the children of drunkards. But this does not tell the
whole story by any means. By drunkard is meant a person
who is a notorious and habitual sot. Many persons who are
habitually intemperate do not get this name even now; much
less would they have done so twenty-five or thirty years ago ;
and many of the parents of the persons named in the Tables
have been dead longer than that time. A quarter of a century
ago a man might go to his bed every night muddled and sleepy
with the effects of alcohol, and still not be called an intemperate
man.
By pretty careful inquiry as to the number of idiots of the
lowest class whose parents were known to be temperate persons,
it is found that not one quarter can be so considered.
The effect of habitual use of alcohol seems to be to lympha-
tize the whole bodily organization ; that is, to diminish the pro-
portion of the fibrous part of the body?to make the lymph
abound in all the tissues. The children of such persons are
apt to be of the scrofulous character above described ; and their
children are very apt to be feeble in body and weak in mind.
Idiots, fools, and simpletons are common among the progeny
of such persons. Thus, directly and indirectly, alcohol is pro-
ductive of a great proportion of the idiocy which now burdens
the commonwealth. If, moreover, one considers how many
children are born of intemperate parents, who, without being
idiots, are deficient in bodily and mental energy, and are pre-
disposed by their very organization to have cravings for alco-
holic stimulants, it will be seen what an immense burden the
drinkers of one generation throw upon the succeeding. Many
a parent, by habitual stimulus applied to his own nervous
system, forms and fashions his child in such wise that he is
more certain to be made a drunkard by the ordinary tempta-
tions of life than the child of a temperate man would be, even
if living from his youth upward within the temptations of a
bar-room
Probably the habitual use of alcoholic drinks does a great deal
to bring families into that low and feeble condition of body
alluded to in the preceding section as a prolific cause of idiocy.
There is another vice,?a monster so hideous in mien, so dis-
ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY. 389:
gusting in feature, altogether so beastly and loathsome, that, in
very shame and cowardice, it hides its head by day, and, vampyre-
like, sucks the very life-blood from its victims by night; and it
may perhaps commit more direct ravages upon the strength and
reason of those victims than even intemperance,?and that vice is
SELF-ABUSE.
One would fain be spared the sickening task of dealing with
this disgusting subject; but as he who would exterminate the
wild beasts that ravage his fields must not fear to enter their dark
and noisome dens, and drag them out of their laii*,?so he who
would rid humanity of a pest must not shrink from dragging it
from its hiding-places, to perish in the light of day. If men
deified him who delivered Lerna from its hydra, and canonized
him who rid Ireland of its serpents, what should they do for one
who could extirpate this monster vice ? What is the ravage of
fields, the slaughter of flocks, or even the poison of serpents,
compared with that pollution of body and soul, that utter extinc-
tion of reason, and that degradation of beings made in God's
image, to a condition which it would be an insult to the animals
to call beastly, and which is so often the consequence of excessive
indulgence in this vice ?
It cannot be that such loathsome wrecks of humanity as men
and women reduced to drivelling idiocy by this cause, should be
permitted to float upon the tide of life, without some useful pur-
pose ; and the only one we can conceive is that of awful beacons
to make others avoid,?as they would eschew moral pollution and
death,?the course which leads to such ruin.
This may seem to be extravagant language; but there can be
no exaggeration, for there can be no adequate description even,
of the horrible condition to which men and women are reduced
by this practice. There are among those enumerated in this
Report some who not long ago were considered young gentlemen
and ladies, but who are now moping idiots,?idiots of the lowest
kind ; lost to all reason, to all moral sense, to all shame,?idiots
who have but one thought, one wish, one passion,?and that is,
the further indulgence in the habit which has loosed the silver
cord even in their early youth?which has already wasted, and, as
it were, dissolved, the fibrous part of their bodies, and utterly
extinguished their minds.
In such extreme cases there is nothing left to appeal to?abso-
lutely less than there is in the dogs and horses, for they may be
acted upon by fear of punishment; but these poor creatures are
beyond all fear and hope, and they cumber the earth awhile, living
masses of corruption.
If only such lost and helpless wretches existed, it would be a
?90 ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY.
duty to cover them charitably with the veil of concealment, and
hide them from the public eye, as things too hideous to be seen;
but, alas I they are only the most unfortunate members of a large
class. They have sunk down into the abyss towards which thou-
sands are tending. The vice which has shorn these poor
creatures of the fairest attributes of humanity is acting upon
others, in a less degree, indeed, but still most injuriously; ener-
vating the body, weakening the mind, and polluting the soul.
A knowledge of the extent to which this vice prevails would
astonish and shock many. It is indeed a pestilence which
walketh in darkness, because, while it saps and weakens all the
higher qualities of the: mind, it so strengthens low cunning and
deceit, that the victim goes on in his habit unsuspected, until he
is arrested by some one whose practised eye reads his sin in the
very means which he takes to conceal it?or until all sense of
shame is for ever lost in the night of idiocy, with which his day
so early closes.
Many a child who confides everything else to a loving parent,
conceals this practice in his innermost heart. The sons or
daughters who dutifully, conscientiously, and religiously confess
themselves to father, mother, or priest, on every other subject,
never allude to this. Nay, they strive to cheat and deceive by
false appearances; for, as against this darling sin,?duty, con-
science, and religion, are all nothing. They even think to cheat
God, or cheat, themselves into the belief that He who is of purer
eyes than to behold iniquity can still regard their sin with
favour.
Many a fond parent looks with wondering anxiety upon the
puny frame, the feeble purpose, the fitful humours of a dear child,
and, after trying all other remedies to restore him to vigour of
body and vigour of mind, goes journeying about from place to
place, hoping to leave the offending cause behind, while the
victim hugs the disgusting serpent closely to his bosom, and con-
ceals it carefully in his vestment.
The evils which this sinful habit works in a direct and positive
manner are not so appreciable, perhaps, as that which it effects in
an indirect and negative way. For one victim which it leads
down to the depths of idiocy, there are scores and hundreds whom
it makes shamefaced, languid, irresolute, and inefficient for any
high purpose of life. In this way the evil to individuals and to
the community is very great.
It behoves every parent, especially those whose children (of
either sex) are. obliged to board and sleep with other children,
whether in boarding-schools, boarding-houses, or elsewhere, to
have a constant and watchful eye over them, with a view to this
I
ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY. 391
)
insidious and pernicious habit. The symptoms of it are easily
learned, and, if once seen, should he immediately noticed.
Nothing is more false than the common doctrine of delicacy
and reserve in the treatment of this habit. All hints, all indirect
advice, all attempts to cure it by creating diversions, will generally
do nothing but increase the cunning with 'which it is concealed.
The way is, to throw aside all reserve; to charge the offence
directly'home; to show up its disgusting nature and hideous
consequences in glowing colours; to apply the cautery seething
hot, and press it on to the very quick, unsparingly and un-
) ceasingly.
Much good has been done of late years by the publication of
cheap books upon this subject. They should be put into the
hands of all youth suspected of the vice. They should be forced
to attend to the subject. There should be no squeamishness
about it.
There need be no fear of weakening virtue by letting it look
upon such hideous deformity as this vice presents. Virtue is not
salt or sugar, to be softened by sucli exposure, but the crystal or
diamond that repels all foulness from its surface. Acquaintance
with such a vice as this,?such acquaintance, that is, as is gained
by having it held up before the eyes in all its ugliness,?can only
serve to make it detested and avoided.
Were this the place to show the utter fallacy of the notion that
harm is done by talking or writing to the young about this vice,
it could probably be done by argument?certainly by the relation
of pretty extensive experience. This experience has shown that,
m ninety-nine cases in a hundred, the existence of the vice was
known to the young, but not known in its true deformity; and
that, in the hundredth, the repulsive character in which it was
first presented made it certain that no further acquaintance with
j it would be sought.
There is one mode of treatment, however, often recommended
by physicians, which in many cases deserves only denouncement
as erroneous or sinful?that is, causing the victim to contract
matrimony. The cure is generally effectual, and the mode in
which it is accomplished may, in some cases, be justifiable; but
certainly, in many others, the retribution of offended nature is
awful, and seems like a whole volume of revelation of God's
purpose. In no less than ten cases which are here recorded, the
idiocy of the children was manifestly attributable to this sin of
the parent. Now, if a cause which would be so carefully con-
cealed, is brought out in these ten cases, in how many more must
it have been at work unnoticed and unsuspected ! And if these
ten extreme cases of idiocy have been the visitations upon the
392 ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY.
children of the sins of the parents, how many times ten cases
must there he where the visitation is less severe, hut still awful!
How much bodily disease and weakness; how much mental
obliquity and imbecility; how much of ungovernable lust, are
thrown upon the children of this generation by the vices of their
fathers and mothers of the foregoing one!
There is one remarkable and valuable fact to be learned re-
specting this vice, from observation of idiots, and that is, that
some of them, though they have no idea of right and wrong, no
sense of shame, and no moral restraint, are nevertheless entirely
free from it. They could never have been in the practice of it,
else they would never have abandoned it.
From this may be inferred, that it is a pest generally engen-
dered by too intimate association of persons of the same sex;
that it is handed from one to another like contagion; and that
those who are not exposed to the contagion are not likely to
contract the dreadful habit of it. Hence we see that not only
propriety and decency, but motives of prudence, require us to
train up all children to habits of modesty and reserve. Children,
as they approach adolescence, should never be permitted to sleep
together. Indeed, the rule should be?not with a view only to
preventing this vice, but in view of many other considerations?
that after the infant has left its mother's arms, and become a
child, it should ever after sleep in a bed by itself. The older
children grow, and the nearer they approach to youth, the more
important does this become. Boys even should be taught to
shrink sensitively from any unnecessary exposure of person before
each other; they should be trained to habits of delicacy and self-
respect; and the capacity which nature has given to all for
becoming truly modest and refined, should be cultivated to the
utmost. Habits of self-respect, delicacy, and refinement with
regard to the person, are powerful adjuncts to moral virtues;
they need not be confined to the wealthy and favoured classes;
they cost nothing; on the contrary, they are the seeds which may
be "had without price, but which ripen into fruits of enjoyment
that no money can buy.
intermarriage of relatives.
In assigning this as one of the remote causes of idiocy, it is
not meant that, even in a majority of cases, the offspring Of mar-
riage between cousins, or other near relations, will be idiotic.
The cases are very numerous where nothing extraordinary is ob-
servable in the immediate offspring of such unions. On the
other hand, there are so many cases where blindness, deafness,
insanity, idiocy, or some peculiar bodily or mental deficiency, is
seen in such offspring, of the first or second generation, that one
t
.ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY. 393
is forced to believe tliey cannot be fortuitous. Indeed, the in-
ference seems to be irresistible, that such intermarriages are
violations of the natural law, though not such flagrant ones as
always to be followed by obvious and severe punishment. If two
full "cousins, who are both in good health, and free from any
marked predisposition to any disease or infirmity, should marry,
the probability is, that their immediate offspring will have tole-
rably good constitutions?though no one can say how much less
vigorous in body and mind they are than would have been offspring
born to either parent from marriage with some one of another
healthy family. On the other hand, if a man in whose constitu-
tion there lurks a predisposition to any particular disease of body
or mind, inherited from his father's family, should marry a
daughter of his father's brother or sister, there would be a strong
probability that the disease or infirmity would appear in the off-
spring ; while the probability of such reappearance would be less
if he married a healthy cousin by his mother's side, and still less
if he married a person free from all unhealthy predispositions,
who was not related to him at all.
It is seen by the Tables that, out of 359 cases in which the
parentage was ascertained, 17 were known to be the children of
parents nearly related by blood; but as many of these cases
were adults, it was sometimes impossible to ascertain whether
their parents, who are dead, were related or not before marriage.
From some collateral evidence, we conclude that at least 3
more cases should be added to the 17. This would show that
more than one-twentieth of the idiots examined are offspring of
the marriage of relations. Now, as marriages between near rela-
tions are by no means in the ratio of 1 to 20, nor are even, per-
haps, as 1 to 1000 to the marriages between persons not related, it
follows that the proportion of idiotic progeny is vastly greater in
the former than in the latter case?that is, taking this limited
number of 400 for what little it is worth as data for calculation.
Then it should be considered that idiocy is only one form in
which nature manifests that she has been offended by such inter-
marriages. It is believed by some, that blindness, deafness, im-
becility, and other infirmities, are more likely to be the lot of the
children of parents related by blood than of others. If so?and
it seems likely that it is?then the probability of unhealthy or
infirm issue from such marriages becomes fearfully great, and
the existence of the law against them is made out as clearly as
though it were written on tables of stone.
The statistics of the 17 families, the heads of which, being
blood relatives, intermarried, tells a fearful tale.
Most of the parents were intemperate or scrofulous; some were
both the one and the other; of course, there were other causes to
394 ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY.
increase chances of infirm offspring, besides that of the intermar-
riage. There were born unto them ninety-Jive children, of whom
forty-four were idiotic, twelve others were scrofulous and punv,
one was deaf, and one was a dwarf! In some cases, all the chil-
dren were either idiotic, or very scrofulous and punv. In one
family of eight children, five were idiotic.
ATTEMPTS TO PROCURE ABORTION.
It appears that out of the idiotic persons examined, at least
seven were probably made so by attempts, on the part of their
mothers, to procure abortion. We say at least seven, because it
is natural to suppose that, in most cases, every effort would be
made to conceal the crime ; in many cases the circumstances,
even if generally known at the time, would be forgotten in the
course of a few years, so that those who had the charge of an
idiot twenty or thirty years of age would hardly go back to causes
preceding his birth in giving to a stranger an account of the case.
If, then, with all these inducements for secrecy, and all these
liabilities to forgetfulness, we find that seven out of about four
hundred idiots were made so by attempts at abortion, the proba-
bility is very strong that others, whose history we do not know,
were made idiotic by the same dreadful crime. Attempts are
sometimes made by young women to conceal their shame by
getting rid of their unborn proof of it; but, failing in this, they
get married, and the child is idiotic, though all children born
afterwards of the same parents are sound and healthy. Several
cases of this kind are among those above alluded to. One woman
had seven sound children, and another had six, born in wedlock,
though the oldest child of each of them, upon whom abortion
was attempted, was idiotic.
This subject is indeed most painful. It is horrible to think
that a mother should aim a blow at the life of her unborn babe,
and, failing of murder, wound and maim his soul, and bring forth
a dirvelling idiot to be a life-long witness against her crime. But
such is one of the forms in which the fruit of sin reappears to
punish the sinner and forewarn all beholders.
There is nothing which nature so carefully guards as the life
of her creatures. This must be secured, if necessary, at the ex-
pense of everything else. This care is manifested from the first
moment of conception. The tender being, hidden in the inner-
most and vital centre of its mother, floating in an elastic fluid,
and carefully enveloped, fold within fold, by curious membranes,
is not only beyond her reach, but almost beyond the reach of
accident. She may fall?her bones may be broken?she may be
wounded even unto death?and her babe be still safe. She may,
it is true, affect its health by her own intemperance in food or
ON THE CAUSES OF IDIOCY. 395
drink; she may affect its passions by indulging her own; but still
it lives.
Now, the attempt to destroy what nature so carefully guards is
a most dangerous one; and it can only succeed by using medi-
cines or measures of such violence that the whole system is
shaken to its centre, and the life of the mother put in peril in
order to kill the babe. The attempts, however violent, may fail;
they do fail, perhaps, oftener than they succeed ; but, alas! the
poor innocent who has escaped murder has not escaped injury. It
cannot be doubted that many are made idiotic, and more have
their faculties impaired and their bodies injured, by attempts at
this unnatural crime.
Sceptical persons may naturally inquire how it is possible for
the Commissioners to procure any reliable information concerning
matters of this kind, since the parties would not be likely to
criminate themselves. It is to be recollected, however, that most
( of such persons are very ignorant and indiscreet; that some of
them do not perceive any guilt in an attempt to destroy evidence
of shame; that women are very communicative; and that an
inquisitive person, whose object was evidently only to learn all
he could about the idiotic child, solely with a view to the good
' ^ of that child, would obtain evidence not easily obtained from
others.
4 Matters like these soon become known among the friends and
neighbours of the parties, if they are of the ignorant class, and
I are spoken about without much reserve.
It may be said about this, as about supposed causes of idiocy
referred to above, that great care has been taken to obtain evi-
dence ; that much has been suppressed which was deemed doubt-
ful ; and that the rest is given with such explanations of its
source, that each one may place upon it as much reliance as he
thinks it deserves.
We have thus alluded to some of the most obvious and fertile
causes (either remote or proximate) of the existence of such a
great number of idiots as are found in this, and all other countries
called civilized. It would swell this Report to volumes, to ex-
amine these causes pathologically and minutely. Scientific
research has not been our object; but we have sought diligently
for every item and scrap of knowledge upon the subject of idiocy
which could be of practical use to the Legislature. In so doing,
we have been obliged, in some cases, to drag, as with a net, the
lower depths oi society, seeking for the pearls of truth. With
those pearls there may be much worthless trash, but this will all
perish, while the gems will remain indestructible ; and if they
are of value enough to redeem only one human being from the
brutishness of idiocy, our labours will not be in vain.
