On the Moral Pathology of London
=================================

536
Art. II.?
?
The emotion wliicli Dante underwent when, in a vision, he was
suddenly removed from earth and placed within the confines of
hell, was not unlike that which would he experienced hy one who,
for the first time, was transported from a main thoroughfare of
London into the midst of one of those dense masses of building
in which the nether class of the metropolitan population mainly
dwells, and in which utter poverty, squalid wretchedness, and
flagrant villany have their home.
As the boundaries of the metropolis have extended, certain
results have come to pass, which are in some respects similar to
those which may be traced as having happened during the growth
of several of the great cities of India. In them, as successive
dynasties have widened the area of a city, the older portions have
been deserted and suffered to fall into ruin, and ultimately they
have become the haunt of the jackal and the hooded snake ; and
while London has been growing vaster and vaster, and its streets
have been spreading out still more widely, the wealthier classes
of the metropolis have gradually deserted the older and closer
portions of the city. These, forgotten altogether by the many,
have fallen through various stages of degradation, and in the end
the dilapidated, and even ruinous buildings have become the sad
homes of those who, from poverty or from vice, have wished to
hide themselves from the common eye, and who have found a
secure retreat in the midst of the brick-and-mortar jungles
of the metropolis.
Narrow and little-known streets traverse these districts, and
their cores are pierced with courts which reek with filth, and
which are contracted and irregular as if they had been painfully
gnawn out of the huge blocks of brickwork. The houses are
foul and dilapidated without, but they are fouler and more
ruinous within. The walls are stained with damp, and the floors
are rickety. The wood-work is black with age and filth, and it
swarms with vermin. The ceilings are broken and discoloured.
The windows are shattered, and paper and rags take the place of
glass. Every room in these houses shelters a separate family,
and every house is tainted throughout with foul odours, which
steam from the open doorway and raised windows into the court-
yards and streets. The door-steps are littered with children
whose contracted and impish features parody a maturer age ; and
men and women, whose faces are graved deeply with those lines
which tell of that terrible fight for a livelihood in which, as one
ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON. 537
I of their own class said, " They don't find a living, it's only
another way of starving," or whose aspect is that of bold, open,
and perhaps full-fed villany, lounge upon the pathway.
Cradled in such scenes a child is not merely familiarized, it is
naturalized, with wretchedness, filth, and vice. It receives little
parental care, for the parents are too commonly engaged in those
fierce, never-faltering efforts by which alone they can scrape
together the barest means of subsistence. The mother may not,
if she would, give much attention to her offspring, and too often,
alas! the incessant occupation of the mind in that toil by
which the food necessary to sustain human life has to be ob-
tained, and the perverted and deadened feelings which arise from
the continued struggle with want, blunt the mother's affection
towards her child, and it receives from her only those cares which
arise from a savage necessity. Coarsely, often insufficiently, and
usually irregularly fed, the little being learns at the very threshold
of life to endure with more or less patience the cravings of hunger;
its intellect is first stirred into action in seeking the means to
satisfy its most urgent physical wants; and often it exhibits a
painful precocity in those matters which are needful to procure a
mere subsistence :?
" 'I go about the streets with water-creases,'" said a little girl, who, "al-
though only eight years of age,55 writes Mr. Mayhew, " has entirely lost all
childish ways, and was indeed in thoughts and manner a woman. There was
something cruelly pathetic in hearing this infant, so young that her features
had scarcely formed themselves, talking of the bitterest struggles of life with
the calm earnestness of one who had endured them all. I did not know how
to talk to her.55?" ' I go about the streets with water-creases, crying four
bunches a penny, water-creases,5 55 said this girl. "' I am just eight years old?
that5s all; and I've a big sister and a brother, and a sister younger than I am.
On and off, Fve been very near a twelvemonths in the streets. .Before that I
had to take care of a baby for my aunt. No, it wasn't heavy?it was only two
months old; but I minded it for such a time till it came to walk. It was a
very nice little baby, not a very pretty one, but if I touched it under the chin
it would laugh, liefore I had the baby I used to help mother, who was in the
fur trade, and if there was any slits in the fur I'd sow them up. My mother
learned me to needlework and to knit when I was about five I have to
he down at Earringdon-market between four and five, or else I can't get any
creases, because every one almost?especially the Irish?is selling them, and
they're picked up so quick When we've bought a lot, we sits down on
a door-step and ties up the bunches. We never goes home to breakfast till
we've sold out; but if it5s very late, then I buys a pen-north of pudden, which
is very nice with gravy. I don't know hardly one of the people as goes to Par-
ringdon, to talk to; they never speaks to me, so I don't speak to?them. We
children never play down there, 5cos we're thinking of our living It's
very cold before winter comes on rcg lar?'specially getting up of a morning.
I gets up in the dark by the light ot the lamp in the court. When the snow
is on the ground, there s no creases. I bears the cold?you must; so puts
my hands under my shawl, though it hurts 'em to take hold of the creases,
especially when we takes 'em to the pump to wash 5em. No; I never see any
children crying?it's no use I don't have no dinner. Mother gives me
538 ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON.
two slices of bread and butter and a cup of tea for breakfast, and then I go till
tea, and has the same. We has meat of a Sunday, and, of course, I should
like to have it every day. Mother has just the same to eat as we has, but she
takes more tea?three cups sometimes I am a capital hand at bargain-
ing?but only at buying water-creases. They can't take me in. If the woman
tries to give me a small handful of creascs, I says, I ain't a goin' to have that
for a ha'porth, and I go to the next basket, and so on all round. I know the
quantities very well. For a penny I ought to have a full market hand, or as
much as I could carry in my arms at one time without spilling. For three-
pence I has a lap full, enough to earn about a shilling; and for sixpence I gets as
many as crams my basket. I can't read or write, but I knows how many
pennies goes to a shilling, why, twelve, of course, but I don't know how many .
ha'pence there is, though there's two to a penny. When I have bought three-
pen-north of creases, I ties 'cm up into as many little bundles as I can. Tliey
must look biggish, or the people wont buy them; some puffs them out as
much as they'll go. All my money I earns I puts in a club, and draws it out
to buy clothes with. It's better than spendin' it in sweet stuffs for them as has
a living to earn. Besides, it's like a child to care for sugar-sticks, and not like
one who's got a living and vittals to earn. I ain't a child, and I sha'n't be a woman
till I'm twenty, but I'm past eight, I am. I don't know nothing about what I
earns during the year, I only knows how many pennies goes to a shilling, and
two ha'pence goes to a penny, and four fardens goes to a penny. I knows, too,
how many fardens goes to tuppence?eight. That's as much as I wants to
know for the markets.' "*
The first smatterings of a child are commonly in a language
which is very peculiar. It teems with words which are in use
among the nether class alone. Remnants of the gipsy tongue
may perhaps form a part of this language, hut in the main it
consists of words which, seemingly, have been originally invented,
with strange ingenuity, for the readier concealment of the peculiar
habits of the different segments of the nether class, and it is
thoroughly fitted for that purpose, and also to express the most
depraved passions of man. With this language the child is fami-
liarized the moment he hegins to frequent the streets, if not from
the cradle ; and long before the meaning of the words uttered can
he fully comprehended, a child will become practised in the use
of the most repulsive phrases of the nether tongue. The shrill
oaths and the foul expressions which may he heard bandied about
among the children of the nether class are used as common forms
of speech, of the actual signification of which the child is gene-
rally ignorant.
The crowded room which forms the child's home, and in which
the whole family herd together night and day, and the whole of
the domestic arrangements have to he carried out, gives rise to
habits which are destructive of all the ordinary feelings of modesty
and decency; and in the streets the sensual passions are early
aroused to full swing by the constant association of the two sexes.
The passer-by may witness, in the by-paths and close alleys,
* " London Labour and London Poor," by Henry Mayhew, vol. i. pp. 151-2.
ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON. 53D
among the children which tumble about and roll upon the path-
way (in their degradation not unlike the wild dogs which are found
in the streets of a Turkish town), the first stages of that excessive
sensual depravity which characterizes the maturer years of the
nether class. Moreover, the wild, untrained life in which these
children grow during their earlier years, unfits them almost ever
after for the steady and persistent labour of a handicraftsman.
It is certain that they will have to struggle sternly for their bread,
and that, too, from early morn till night, day by day, but they
will have recourse solely to such labour as will give them the
freedom of moving about as they list, and which will keep them
in the open air, and near the constant turmoil and excessive
excitement of a large town.
So soon as the child becomes strong enough to aid in getting
its own living, it is at once set to work in one of those occupa-
tions which alone are open to it. It is taught the necessity of
perfect honesty to its own class, and those sleights of dealing
by which the profits of the occupation it is learning may be
increased. Already grounded in the language and actions of
vice, the child enters into more intimate association with those
who have already matriculated in the cares, the vices, and the
pleasures of the streets, and listening with greediness to the
vicious achievements of older children, it seeks to emulate their
actions. The lad of eight years of age may be seen copying the
matured bestiality of his elders, gambling with the few halfpence
lie may chance to have picked up, and aping the man at the bar
of the dram-shop ; while the childish girl will often shock the
ears and offend the eyes by her filthy language and still filthier
actions?nay, the teens of years will barely have been reached,
before both boys and girls will have become fully trained in
everything that is vile and vicious.
The full-grown lad is characterized usually by great quickness
in whatever relates to his peculiar mode of life. He rarely misses
the opportunity of "turning a penny;" and he is thoroughly
initiated in all the wiles of his irregular existence. Of virtue he
knows nothing: the burglar and highwayman are his chief
heroes, and he looks upon the successful thief with admiration.
He has but a vague notion of the wrongfulness of thieving ; his
idea of a thief, indeed, is somewhat similar to that entertained by
the ordinary run of people about a soldier. Many admire and envy
the successful soldier, but comparatively few will undergo the
danger necessary to acquire the envied distinction; and the lad
of the nether class envies the boldness of the thief, but he does
not care to undergo the peril of thieving; but he hates the police
with a perfect hatred, and he regards the law either as a necessary
evil to which his class is exposed, or as an engine put in force
NO. XII.?NEW SERIES. N N
"1
I
540 ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON".
for tlie special benefit of the higher classes. He is singularly-
ignorant of most things beyond the requirements of a street-life,.
and this ignorance often contrasts strongly with the sharpness
and cunning which he displays in procuring his livelihood.
" Yes," said a strcet-lad, of thirteen or fourteen years of age, to Mr. Mayhewr
" he had heer'd of God who made the world. Couldn't exactly reeollec' when
he'd heer'd on him, but he had, most sarten-ly. Didn't know when the world
was made, or how anybody could do it. It must have taken a long time. It
was afore his time, or ' yourn either, sir.' Knew there was a book called the
Bible; didn't know what it was about; didn't mind to know; knew of such a.
book to a sartinty, because a young 'oman took one to pop [pawn] for an old
'oman who was on the spree?a bran new 'un?but the cove wouldn't have itr
and the old 'oman said he might be d d. Never heer'd tell on the deluge ; of
the world having been drownded; it couldn't, for there wasn't water enough to-
do it. He weren't agoing to fret hisself for such tilings as that. Didn't know
what happened to people after death, only that they was buried. Had seen a
dead body laid out; was a little afeard at first; poor Dick looked so different,
and when you touched his face, he was so cold! oh, so cold ! Had heer'd on
another world; wouldn't mind if he was there hisself, if he could do better, for
things was often queer here. Had heer'd on it from a tailor?such a clever
cove, a stunner?as went to 'Stralia [Australia], and heer'd him say he was-
going into another world. Had never heer'd of Prance, but had heer'd of
Frenchmen; there wasn't half a quarter so many of 'em as of Italians, with
their earrings like flash gals. Didn't dislike foreigners, for he never saw none.
What was they ? Had heer'd of Ireland. Didn't know where it was, but it
couldn't be very far, or such lots wouldn't come from there to London. Should
say they walked it?ay, every bit of the way, for he'd seen them come in all
covered with dust. Had heer'd of people going to sea, and had seen the ships
in the river, but didn't know nothing about it, for he was very seldom that way.
The sun was made of'fire, or it wouldn't make you feel so warm. The stars was-
fire, too, or they wouldn't shine. They didn't make it warm, they was too-
small. Didn't know any use they was of. Didn't know how far they was off -T
a jolly lot higher than the gas-lights some on 'em was. Was never in a
church; had heer'd they worshipped God there; didn't know how it was done ;
had heer'd singing and playing inside when he'd passed; never was there, for
he hadn't no togs to go in, and wouldn't be let in among such swells as he had
seen coming out. Was a ignorant chap, for he'd never been to school, but was-
up to many a move, and didn't do bad. Mother said he would make his fortin
yet. Had heer'd of the Duke of Wellington; he was old Nosey; didn't think
lie ever seed him, but had seed his statty. Hadn't heer'd of the battle of
Waterloo, nor who it was atween; once lived in Webber-row, Waterloo-road.
Thought he had heer'd speak of Buonaparte; didn't know what he was;
thought he had heer'd of Shakespeare, but didn't know whether he was alive
or dead, and didn't care. A man with something like that name kept a dolly,
and did stunning; but lie was such a hard cove that if he was dead it wouldn't \
matter. Had seen the Queen, but didn't rccollec' her name just at that minute ;
oh! yes, Wictoria and Albert. Had no notion what the Queen had to do.
Should think she hadn't such power (he had first to ask me what ' power"
was) as the Lord Mayor, or as Mr. Norton as was the Lambeth beak, and
perhaps is still. Was never once before a beak, and didn't want to. Hated
the crushers [police]; what business had they to interfere with him if lie was
only resting his basket in a street ? Had been once to the Wick ["Victoria
Theatre], and once to the Bower: liked tumbling better; he meant to have a
little pleasure when the peas came in."*
* " London Labour and London Poor," vol. i. p. 474. ?*/
ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON. 541
The licentiousness and depravity of both boys and girls of the
nether class are astounding. It is not uncommon for a lad of
fourteen years of age, if he has succeeded in obtaining a livelihood,
to form a companionship with a girl, and both leaving home
they will live together as man and wife. No bond but sensual
fancy binds the couple together, and friendly exchanges of
"partners" are not unknown between lads. Notwithstanding
this laxity of affection, however, the lads are usually fiercely
jealous, and they will often treat their girls with great brutality,
on the slightest provocation; on the other hand, the girls will
freely prostitute themselves, in order to gratify a want of the boy
with whom they are united. Many girls have lost their chastity
long before they know the signification of the term; and by the
nether class marriage is regarded with the utmost indifference,
and it is commonly looked upon as a most unnecessary rite. One
of the principal results of the close packing of families, male and
female, in one room, and of the low lodging-houses where men
and women herd together in the same apartment, is to pervert or
destroy all notions of modesty and virtue, and to degrade the
passions of both children and up-grown persons to the level of
those of the dog. The horrible scenes of immorality enacted in
the low lodging-houses, which are the great resort of lads living
in companionship with girls, of vagrants, and of thieves, are in-
describable. The surveillance of the police and the requirements
of the law are doing much, however, to restrain the vice of these
houses within less rampant bounds.
Personal indifference to pain is a common matter of boast
among the boys, and they manifest little sympathy for the suffer-
ings of others. Both boys and girls are loud in anger, and the
latter admire pugilism, but they are not much addicted to fighting
among themselves. The boys delight in dog-fighting and rat-
catching, but their chief amusements are gambling (which is
usually an extravagant passion with them, and one very early
developed) and the cheap theatres. A certain degree of vanity in
dress is occasionally manifested, and will at times incite a lad to
unusual exertions to gratify his taste; and not unfrequently, if
the pocket will permit, and the boy's gains have not been
A swallowed up by gambling, the palate will be indulged to excess
in sweetmeats and rich food, and perhaps also in spirituous
liquors.
The same traits that characterize the boy and girl, stamp also
the full-grown man and woman: vagrant in habits?ignorant of
all beyond the readiest modes of obtaining a livelihood?haters
of the law?admirers of successful crime?knowing little or
nothing, or indifferent to morality and virtue?sensual even to
the terrible climax of incest?eminently brutal?utterly improvi-
'( - N N 2
542 OX THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON.
dent, indeed, ignorant of the value of saving, when there may be
an opportunity of laying money by?at one time pandering to
the appetite by spirits and food, at another bearing semi-starvation
with singular stolidity?and not only ignorant of the higher
duties of life, but wanting the preliminary knowledge by means
of which those duties may be comprehended.
"Visiting a sick man," writes Mr. Yanderkiste, "witli one new missionary,
I requested him to read and instruct him, which he did, detailing to him our
fallen condition, our need of salvation, and the redemption purchased for us,
in a very correct manner, and then reading a portion of a chapter in the
Gospels in proof of what he had said. The poor man listened with every appear-
ance of attention, and when my young friend said, ' You know Mr. ,' or any
other interrogatives, he replied, 'Certainly, sir;' or, 'In course, sir.' My
companion appeared pleased with the mau's attention to instruction, and I
thought it time to undeceive him. ' Mr.  ,' said I, ' my friend has been
taking much pains to instruct you, and now I will ask you a few questions.
Do you know who Jesus Christ was ?' ' Well, 110,' said lie, after a pause, ' I
should say that's worry hard to tell.' ' Do you know whether he was St. John's
brother?' 'No, that I don't.' ' Can you tell me who the Trinity are ?' 'No,
sir.' ' Are you a sinner ?' ' Oh, certainly, sir, we are all sinners.' A pause.
' Have you ever done wrong ?' ' Why, no, I don't consider as ever I have.'
'Did you ever commit sin?' 'Why, no, I don't know as ever I did.' 'But
do you think you're a sinner ?' 'Oh, certainly, sir, we're all sinners ' 'What
is a sinner?' 'Well, I'm blest if I know rightly; I never had no liead-
piece.' "*
Dark ignorance, and an entire absence of moral feeling, are the
grand characteristics of the nether class ; and they are the natural
results of the circumstances under which that class exists. The
foul and fetid dwellings, the herding together of families as if
they were wild beasts, and the entire swallowing up of the
mind in the struggle for daily bread, are main steps in the sad
genesis of that degradation, both physical and mental, which is
witnessed among this ill-starred people. It is difficult, perhaps
impossible, to estimate the number of the nether class of the
metropolitan population ; but it forms a mass which exerts a too
manifest influence upon the social condition of the metropolis.
Having no fixed political knowledge, but hating blindly all that
is placed above it by comfort or wealth ; ignorant of the meaning
and end of the law, and detesting its officers; and living in habits
and indulging ideas of life which are altogether subversive of
social stability, this class forms an unstable mass, which is ever
ripe for the worst form of demagogue to work upon: and still
worse, the ordinary habits of the individuals who form the nether
class are separated in so slight a degree from that of actual crime,
that every change in the condition of the class (whether it be for
the better, and thus furnish the means for gratifying the inor-
* "Notes and Narratives of a Six Years' Mission, principally among the Dens
of London. By R. W. Yanderkiste, late London City Missionary." Third
Edition, p. 37.
ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON. 543
dinate desire for sensual pleasures, or for the worse, and
causes suffering and want) is apt to destroy, in many instances,
the slight barrier that separates the common feelings and practices
of the class from overt criminality; and thus the nether class
becomes a source from which is constantly flowing a greater or
less stream of crime.
In " good times" the goodness is measured by the amount of
gain which may be devoted to the dram-shop, to gambling, and to
profligacy, and both men and women every moment float into
crime on our modern Phlegethon, the river of "strong drink"
(for once in the deep stream, one may not hope to escape from
the current scathless, banked in as it is by profligacy and ruin),
while the fierce excitement of gambling continually pricks the
loser beyond the pale of the law; and in " bad times" the
feeling grows apace which was aptly expressed by a ticket-of-
leave man in 1857 : " I don't see why I should starve ; and I'm
not going to do it." Action is only wanted to convert such a
thought into open crime.
Again, the brutality of a father, the harshness of a mother, the
sufferings of a week's hunger, the unsettledness of a vagrant
life, the temptations arising from a false code of morality, the
passion for sensual and other pleasures, all pave a broad and easy
pathway, along which the children of the nether class troop to
crime, and, if need be, a guide and tempter is never wanting in
the practised criminal, who is always at hand.
It may be wondered how, with so unstable a class of the popu-
lation living in our midst, suffering so much, and yet so little
bound by the laws of morality, we should be for one moment safe
in our houses, and that crime and villany should not be more
rampant than they are. But there is never wanting among the
nether class a vague but salutary notion?one which the individuals
of the class would themselves find difficult to define, and which,
indeed, has more the character of a superstition than anything
else?of the supreme power of the law, and of the higher classes
of society; and crime is almost always regarded as a final and
irremediable step. Moreover, a slight moral influence?" a little
glooming light, much like a shade"?(which is not to be lost sight
of in estimating the restraining powers at work among the nether
class) is brought to bear upon the class by the intermixture with
it of many who have had the advantage of a moral training, and
who from misfortune have had to seek a home in the sinks of the
metropolis, but whose moral faculties have not been obliterated.
The nether class of the metropolitan population is not recruited
within itself alone. It receives constant accessions from those
who, being reduced to extreme poverty, are compelled to seek a
refuge in the worst haunts of the metropolis, and to pick up a
O44 ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON
I /
living in the streets; it is the abyss into which fall those ill-fated
children who flee from their homes on account of cruel usage,
who are outcast from desertion or from being orphans, or who,
from a perverted love of a ^itasi-idle and wandering life, prefer
the wild and irregular mode of existence of a street lad. The
nether class is also the great receptacle into which fall those who,
degraded by flagrant vice, sink step by step from a higher grade
of society, until they at length plunge into this deep slough of
humanity. Those who have been driven by poverty and want
into the haunts of the nether class, have among them many who
have not wanted a greater or less degree of education and moral
tuition, and who, notwithstanding the deadening effects of their
impoverished state, still retain much of their better nature, and
by their moral influence exert some slight check upon their
neighbours; but those who have been degraded by their ill-
regulated passions, commonly outgo, in the foulness of their vice,
that with which they are brought into contact. They exercise their
more fully-developed mental faculties to give a higher finish to
villany; they study to give language its highest power for the
suggestion and fulfilment of immorality; they become the arch-
teachers of devilism; they, in fact, show but too fully that the
most thorough villain is the best-educated villain.
But there is a section of the nether class?the street Irish?
which, although found in the same haunts, and exposed to the
same struggles-for existence, and to the same temptations and
vice, differs greatly in the character of its morality from the
ordinary members of the class. In the heart of London, the emi-
grant Irish preserve almost intact the peculiar traits which dis-
tinguish them in their own country. They retain in a great
measure their prejudices against the English, their warm attach-
ment to their own family, their habits of herding together and of
feeding on the coarsest food, their excitable passions (which often
lead them to break the law), and their ready wit and tongue.
They also maintain, in a great measure, their aversion to steady
and protracted labour, and without shame, or with indifference,
have recourse to beggary or the workhouse. The majority of the
?street Irish are Roman Catholics, and they keep their hold of
Bomanism and that blind faith in the priest which is only found?
at least, in this country?among the most ignorant professors of
that religion. But the chief moral characteristic of the street
Irish, as compared with the remainder of the nether class, is their
freedom from wantonness. The females retain their virtue in the
?deepest sinks of vice; and the testimony is general, that when
the Irish females do fall into immoral courses, it is from the un-
favourable influences to which they are exposed by constant
?association with vice.
V
ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON. 545
The promiscuous herding together of males and females in the
?same apartment at night, and the intimate association of the
young of both sexes, are not necessary causes of immorality. It
is only when these causes co-exist with loose or imperfect notions
of morality, that we find the sad results which are too commonly
witnessed among the nether class of the English in large towns.
Among the Romanist Irish, a stern notion of morality is invari-
ably found, partly traditional, mainly, perhaps, a result of religious
teaching; for it matters not how destitute and impoverished an
Irish Romanist may be, it is rare for him to be beyond the influ-
ence of religious teaching, and the doctrines of morality, which
are taught side by side with his religious duties, are also prac-
tised with as great regularity. Moreover, the Irishman, even in
England, is not often exempt from the supervision of the priest,
who has an individual influence over his flock of vast power in
.teaching and restraining.
A criminal section of the nether class is one of the necessary
iresults of the physical and moral circumstances under which the
class exists. But the nucleus of the criminal section is not
formed of individuals who have had recourse to crime incidentally,
or who have been driven to crime by necessity, but mainly of
persons who are of criminal parentage, and who have been speci-
fically trained to crime, and to whom crime is simply the business
of life. Hereditary crime cannot, however, often boast of such
long descent that its origin may not be readily traced. The
course of the law usually cuts short the development of family
?crime before it has attained to the growth of a third or fourth
generation. The common criminal possesses in excess all the
evil qualities of the class from which he is an offshoot; and
the low cunning which he shows in his pursuits is no greater
in degree, although it may be much more striking in appearance,
than that which is displayed by the nether class in more honest
endeavour to obtain a livelihood. The ill-concealed feeling of
admiration which is entertained by a large portion of the nether
class for individuals who have dared to break the laws; the ex-
citement consequent upon the act of crime itself; the apparently
easy mode in which, by pursuing criminal courses, money may
be obtained, comparative idleness indulged in, and a passion for
gambling or other pleasures gratified, have a peculiar fascination
for many young criminals. " Lord, how I do love thieving !" ex-
claimed a young thief in Colonel Chesterton's hearing, " if I had
thousands, I'd still be a thief."*
By the thoroughly trained thief the law is regarded much in
the same way as ordinary individuals regard sickness. The evil
* " Revelations of Prison Life, with an Inquiry into Prison Discipline and
.Secondary Punishments," by Geo. Laval Chesterton. 1856. Vol. i. p. 165.
(
L
546 ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON.
is a necessary one, and it is to be avoided, if practicable; but
should a casualty befal, it must serve as a lesson by which, in
future, mischief may be more readily shunned. An efficient
police has done much to diminish the halo which hangs about
crime and the criminal in the haunts of the nether class, but still
the false lustre lingers and serves as a stimulant to the juvenile
criminal.
Although the nether class of the London population has its
peculiar haunts, and its depravity and licentiousness are, in a
great measure, kept within itself and hid from the common eye,
except in so far as they are made known by overt crime, or, per-
haps, by a popular commotion, it would be a serious error to
suppose that the social influence of this class does not extend
beyond its capacity to nurture crime and to furnish a portion of
the material by which popular tumults may be carried out. The
nether class has more or less intimate bonds with the operative
class on the one hand, and with the commercial class, through
various kinds of tradesmen, on the other, and a baneful effect is
produced upon the morality of both classes by the influence of
the nether class. Moreover, the baneful effect of this influence
is probably felt in every grade of society, however remote it may
be in appearance from the exercise of such an influence. Cer-
tainly in the metropolis the nether class is more separated from
the moral restraints of other classes than in smaller towns, and
in this greater degree of separation consists one of the principal
characteristics of the metropolis. In small towns the worst dis-
tricts of the town are usually well open to the eye of the classes
having a higher social grade than the nether class, and an indirect
moral influence is brought to bear upon that class which is not
without benefit. Moreover, in small towns the worst districts
are easier of access to ministers of the Gospel. In the metro-
polis, however, where wide areas are inhabited by the nether class
alone, and where these districts are almost unknown but to this
class and to the policeman, an indirect moral influence of the
kind mentioned is but slightly felt; but, on the other hand, it is
probable that the greater amount of intense vice (not greater
intensity of vice, for the difference is most probably in quantity
not quality) in these districts acts much more sensibly upon the
classes thrown into contact with the nether class than else-
where.
The operative class is thrown into intimate connexion, both in
business and in pleasure (particularly in those places of common
resort, the dram-shop and beer-liouse) with that portion of the
nether class which is known as the " street-folk," and it be-
comes to a greater or less extent familiarized with the laxity, or
rather the absence of moral and religious feeling among the
ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON. 547
latter. This familiarity with the aspect and form of vice has a
most injurious hut insidious influence upon the moral faculties,
perverting their manifestations and blunting their sensibility.
Children are very susceptible of these evil effects, and the chil-
dren of the operative class have not, neither can they have, as a
rule, that constant maternal care which is essential to the thorough
well-being of a child. The necessity which very commonly
exists for every able member of an operative's family to aid in
the maintenance of the family, renders it requisite that the child
should be left usually in the charge of a younger member of the
family, or of some person who does not possess that full interest
in the welfare of the child which the mother alone feels. The
child is thus left during a great portion of the day to seek its
own amusement, almost uncared for, among its fellows in the
streets and alleys, and there it has constantly thrown in its way
waifs of the foul language, and hints of the foul habits of the
" street-children," which it too readily adopts, while the grosser
passions of the child, in great measure uncontrolled, are rapidly
developed. Even during the school-days of children of the
operative class the moral faculties are too frequently still further
stunted, for the education consists often of the rudimentary forms
of learning alone, the moral faculties being left altogether un-
filled, or if tilled, the process is of so imperfect a character as to
interpose only a slight obstacle to the evil influences to which
the child is exposed.
It is in childhood that the greatest mischief to morality is done.
The susceptibility of the child to sensuous impressions, and the
inordinate development of the passions in comparison to the
intellect and moral faculties, is the chief cause of that blunted
moral sensibility which is observed in after-life in almost all
classes of society. The after play of the organism by means
of which mental action is displayed is determined chiefly in child-
hood and youth, and if the passions be developed disproportion-
ately to the intellect and moral faculties, the disproportion is
commonly continued to the remotest period of life. If, indeed,
the action of any portion of the material framework of thought
be exaggerated or warped in youth, its effects will be manifested
to a greater or less extent ever after. The influence which is
exercised by the nether class upon that portion of the operative
class with which it is most closely brought into contact tends to
blunt the moral susceptibilities of the class, and, according to
our own observation, it contributes in a marked degree towards
the formation of that weakened sense of morality which is found
prevalent among a large section of the operative class.
The nether class also exercises an indirect but important in-
fluence upon the commercial class. A large number of the retail
548 ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON.
dealers who supply the nether class with articles of consumption
are of that class, and consequently partake of all its habits and
feelings. But, in addition, the wants of the nether class are
supplied by numerous tradesmen who possess education and sub-
stance, but who practise to an extraordinary extent those petty
frauds of trade (petty in name only) which consist particularly in
the adulteration of food and drink. The nether class suffer much
from these frauds, and the inability of individuals of the class
to protect themselves, their ignorance, and their desire, from
poverty, to obtain cheap articles, forms a great temptation to
tradesmen to practise a system of petty fraud for the augmenta-
tion of trade profits. The system of petty trade frauds is not
?confined to the tradesmen dealing principally with the nether
class, but it is found, perhaps, in greatest intensity among them.
The majority of the petty trade frauds are, perhaps, practised by
the retail dealer; but many of the more serious frauds, particularly
in the adulteration of articles of consumption, cannot be carried
out without the co-operation of the manufacturer or wholesale
dealer; hence the system of petty fraud practised by the lowest
branch of a trade is found to extend its influence through every
branch of the same trade. The petty frauds common among
shopkeepers form a ^wasi-justification for fraud which the street
dealer is quick to seize upon :?
"It ain't ice" remarked a street tradesman, "as makes coffee out of sham,
chicory; it ain't we as makes cigars out of rhubarb leaves; ice don't make
duffers' handkerchiefs, nor weave cotton things and call them silk. If we quacks
a bit, does we make fortius by it as shopkeepers does with their ointments and
pills ? If wc give slang weights, how many rich shopkeepers is fined for that
there ? And how many's never found out ? and when one on 'em's fined,
why, he calculates how much he's into pocket, between what he's made by slang-
ing, and what he's been fined, and on he goes again. He didn't know that there
ever was short weight given in his shop; not he! No more do we at our stalls
or barrows ! Who 'dulterates the beer ? Who makes old tea-leaves into new ?
Who grinds rice among pepper ? And as for smuggling,?but nobody thinks
there's any harm in buying smuggled things. What we does is like that pencil
you're writing with to a great tree, compared to what the rich people does."*
In addition to the baneful influence to which the operative class
is exposed by its more or less intimate connexion with the nether
class, it is also liable to be affected by other agencies which tend
to blunt or weaken the moral faculties. Of these agencies the con-
fined dwellings of the class, and the physical requirements, if we
may so speak, of relaxation hold a prominent place. One of the
most powerful causes tending to blunt the morality of the opera-
tive class, is the house which has but one room, or the house which
has only a single bed-chamber. When all the members of a family,
parents and children, male and female, occupy the same apartment
fit night, it has the effect of deadening the sense of modesty and
* " London Labour and London Poor," p. 474.
ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON. 549
decency among the children, and it leads to a weakening of the
moral faculties and to an impurity of thought, the importance of
which can with difficulty be appreciated to its full extent. Even
the strictest religious training is barely sufficient to obviate the
evil effects which may arise from this source. The sensual pas-
sions of children are very readily developed, even when the child
itself knows nothing of the nature of the feelings which it expe-
riences ; but the single-chambered dwelling, or the house with one
bed-chamber, occupied by several individuals of different ages and
sexes, early gives a directive tendency to the sensual passions, and
a proclivity to active immorality of the very gravest character. It
is not, however, in the direct production of early overt immorality
that the evil is most witnessed, but in a diminution of the feelings
of modesty, and a proclivity to sensuality, which is shown, perhaps,
in its most serious character among young females. The effects
of this sensual proclivity may be readily witnessed in the lax con-
versation and manners which, short of actual immorality, occur
in large mills or workrooms, where females of the operative
classes are employed, and where no moral superintendence is
exercised; but its worst effects extend into every grade of
society. For, from the children of the operative class, the
ranks of domestic servants are mainly recruited, and to the
charge of these servants the children of the middle and higher
classes of society, in infancy and early youth, are principally
committed, and it frequently happens that the low grade of
morality of the nurse or the housemaid either degrades or
perverts the moral faculties of the most carefully trained child.
The scene depicted in the " Winter's Tale" is but a faint outline
of what frequently occurs in our own homes :?
" 1 st Lady. Come, my gracious lord,
Shall I be your playfellow ?
Man. . . No, I'll none of you.
1st Lady. Why, my sweet lord ?
Man. . . You'll kiss me hard; aud speak to me as if
I were a baby still.
* & * x an ?
2nd Lady. Hark ye:
The queen your mother rounds apace; we shall
Present our services to a fine new prince,
One of these days; and then you'd wanton with us,
If we would have you."?Act ii. sc. 1.
The young man who begins to breast the world with a pro-
clivity towards sensuality, derived from the circumstances, of his
childhood, be he poor or rich, usually leaves behind him a broad
wake of sin ; the young woman, to whatever class of society she
may belong, is apt to be overwhelmed by the first heavings of
passion or the earliest promptings of vanity. It is the blunted
moral sense and the proclivity to sensuality which are the conse-
550 ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON.
quences of defects in the early training of a child, that clogs our
streets with prostitutes and our registers of births with entries of
children horn out of wedlock. In 1855, out of 85,582 births in
London, 3455 were illegitimate; and in 1857 there were known
to the police, also in London, 8G00 prostitutes, and 2825 houses of
ill-fame. The number of illegitimate births, and number of known
prostitutes form, however, but imperfect gauges of the amount of
unchastity among unmarried females in the metropolis. In 1851,
8203 children were born out of wedlock in London, and in the
same year the number of unmarried women was 212,293. If
this proportion of unmarried women living unchastely to every
illegitimate birth, be the same as that of married women to every
legitimate birth, it would follow that at least 15,000 (about 1 in
every 15) unmarried women living in London in that year were
unchaste.
The protracted physical labour of the operative induces a con-
dition of mind, apart from education or religious instruction,
which disposes him to seek relaxation in sensuous rather than in-
tellectual pleasures. When we consider, therefore, the as yet
comparatively slight extent to which sound education has per-
meated the operative class, and the insufficiency of the means
which exist for the literary accommodation and intellectual grati-
fication of the class, it will follow as a natural consequence that
such instruction as the majority of the class possess will be ap-
plied rather to the purpose of gratifying the passions than the
intellect, and that the readiest and least troublesome method of
indulging the senses and passions will be adopted. The gin-palace
and the beer-house, the flaming decorations of the one and the
cosey looks of the other, outshining the contracted, and perhaps
crowded cottage, are flocked to, and probably comic songs, glees,
or other attractions may be added to the seductive influences of
gossip and strong drink. Many may keep within due bounds and
never exceed either in one indulgence or another by frequently
visiting these resorts; but when we have strained off the temperate,
there is invariably found a dark and dense deposit of drunkenness
and debauchery, fringed with want and wretchedness, recklessness
and idleness, and capped with crime.
But the most important source of the degraded morality found
among the operative class is the deficiency of religious and moral
instruction. A great portion of this class is not only unprovided
with the means of religious education, but it is inaccessible
to the majority of the means already in existence. It is
the deficiency of religious and moral instruction which makes
the influence of the agencies of which we have spoken so in-
jurious to the morality of' the operative class. The effects of
surrounding circumstances in depressing the standard of morality
among a class of people, is in direct proportion to the deficiency
ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON. 551
in tlie religious and moral training of the class. The highest
morality may coexist with the most unfavourable social conditions
for the preservation of morality; but when there is a debasement
of morality as a result of physical and social degradation, reli-
gious and moral instruction will prove of little benefit unless they
are combined with measures for the promotion of physical and
social improvement.
In 1848, an inquiry was made,-by a committee of Fellows of the Statistical
Society, into the condition of the labouring population of St. George's in the
East, this parish being selected as affording an example of the average con-
dition of the poorer classes of the metropolis. From the statistics obtained
during this inquiry we may gather several illustrations of the remarks we have
made upon the moral condition of the operative class of London. The total
population of the district actually examined was 7711, of which number 3345
were children under 15 years of age. The number of houses occupied by this
population was 1201, and the number of families inhabiting these houses, ex-
clusive of single men and women lodgers, was 1802. Of these families, G3G
occupied houses containing only one room, and 5G2 occupied houses containing
two rooms. The number of individuals living in houses having only one room
was 2025, that is 3'2 persons to each room ; the number of individuals living
in houses containing two rooms was 2"151, that is 2"2 persons to each room.
These figures indicate a considerable degree of crowding, but they convey but
a slight notion of the actual amount of crowding which occurs in sleeping
apartments where a family of several children exist. In the houses containing
two rooms, one room only is, as a general rule, used as a bed-chamber.
Evidence was sought as to the religious and moral character of the people
by an inquiry into the form of religion professed by the heads of 1951 families,
and by ascertaining the character of the literature principally used by them.
The heads of 1328 families professed to belong to the Church of England, 61
to the Wesleyau Methodist Society, 177 to other denominations of Dissenters,
168 to the Roman Catholic Church, 35 were Jews, 150 professed no religion, 2
were Maliomedans, and of 30 tlie religion was not ascertained. " This extensive
profession of attachment to the Gospel," remarks the Committee, " is a hopeful
sign, though the limited extent to which the Wesleyan and other denominations of
Dissenters appear to have penetrated into this mass of population, is rather
remarkable, and will justify a feeling of doubt with regard to the profession
made by some of belonging to tlie Established Church." This doubt is in a
great measure confirmed by the evidence upon the means of spiritual instruc-
tion in the parish of St. George's in the East, given by the incumbent of the
parish church and others before a Select Committee of the House of Lords
last session. It would appear that the number of sittings already provided by
the Church of England in St. George's in the East is 5,880, and that 18,019
additional sittings are required in order to provide for those who are not accom-
modated by any religious body. The parish church will seat about 1200 per-
sons, but the incumbent states that it is not well attended. The average
number of communicants at noon on Sunday is from 10 to 50, and the average
number of attendants upon the week-day evening services is from 20 to 30,
generally of the poorer classes ; indeed, of those who attend the whole of the
services, the larger proportion are, relatively, of the poor. The number of
attendants at two rooms, which have been licensed for Divine service in the
parish, would appear to be also small. At one service 30 individuals were
counted in one of the rooms, and 18 were present at another time.
In 1260 families the Committee of the Statistical Society ascertained that
the reading was confined almost wholly to newspapers, in 12 families only
were other miscellaneous prints taken in, and in 29 only no newspaper what-
552 ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON".
ever was taken. Upon these results the Committee remark, " This is not a
cheering picture; the great use made of the capacity to read being, as far as
this statement indicates, in ministering to mere excitement." The total number
of books found in the district was 13,992, and these were distributed among
1954 families, 564 appearing to possess no books. Of the books, 58 were
theatrical, 5,791 are classed as serious (including the Holy Scriptures and
books of prayer), and 8153 as miscellaneous. It is not possible to ascertain
statistically to what extent the " serious" books were read, but the impression
of the agents of the committee was that, "in far the greater number of families
which they visited, of all the books which they found in them, the Bible and
Testament were those least read."
Of the children, 12GG attended infant, dame, and day schools, and 571
Sunday schools, and the payments of 1012 families for the schooling of their
children did not exceed one shilling weekly.
In dealing with the moral pathology of the nether and opera-
tive classes of the metropolitan population, we have to do with
results which are, in the main, the direct consequence of the
social circumstances under which those classes are placed, and of
a lack of true moral knowledge. But when we come to consider
the indications of perverted morality which are found among the
middle and aristocratic classes, it might be supposed that we
should find that both crime and immorality had a more indivi-
dualized and isolated character?that, indeed, crime and immo-
rality would he seen rather as the result of individual depravity,
than as a consequence of general social conditions inducing de-
pravity. For the middle and higher classes do not lack, in ap-
pearance, either the means of both intellectual and moral know-
ledge, or the knowledge itself. When, however, we dip a little
below the surface, we shall find that, as among the nether and
operative classes, so among the middle and aristocratic classes,
crime and immorality are mainly but the scum which floats upon
the surface of loathsome pools of degraded and perverted social
conditions. There are doubtless many and grave instances of
individual depravity which have set at nought all training in up-
rightness, and that have broken through all the restraints of law,
human and divine; but, as a rule, we may trace Iioav acts of crime,
and open immorality are ordinary consequences of the social con-
ditions under which the individual has existed, and of a proclivity
to vice due to defects in early training, or to evil influences acting
in childhood and youth.
If we search into the method in which many trade transactions
are ordinarily prosecuted, we at once obtain an important clue to
the normal moral condition of many branches of the commercial
class. In the evidence given on the Adulteration of Food and
Drink before a Select Committee of the House of Commons in
1855, it was shown, with particular reference to London, that it
was almost a general rule among the dealers in many of the most
important articles of consumption to sell those articles in a more
ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON. 553
f
or less adulterated state, by which the value of the articles as food
was diminished. Again, the formidable commercial disasters
which have occurred during the last three or four years from
fraudulent bill and banking transactions, and from malversations
of funds, have shown that the lax principles of trading which
led to such frightful disasters during the " railway mania," were
no temporary principles, arising at the moment and disappearing
with the occasion which seemingly gave rise to them, but that
they were constantly present among the commercial class, and
that the railway, bill-transaction, and banking disasters were
epidemic manifestations of a low grade of trade morality.
It is not possible to state to what extent the degraded morality,
of which the transactions mentioned are examples, prevails
among the commercial class, but we know that men who have
stood high in their particular class of business, and who have
been esteemed of unblemished fame by the world,?men, indeed,
who have been
" Magnificently good,
And held their heads up liigli like a giraffe,"
have fallen from practices which have resulted from this low
grade of morality.
There is a common phrase in use among almost every section
of commercial men, the " custom of the trade," which, upon exa-
mination, is often found to apply to a custom which has for its
object the enhancing of the value of goods or property dealt in,
by some market or business sleight, totally apart from the value
of the goods or property. Several of these trade customs, as for
example, the adulteration of articles of food, and certain lax pro-
ceedings of the share-markets, and in the use of accommodation
bills, have become so rooted in many commercial transactions as
to have become truly legitimate acts of trade, according to com-
mon usage. Is ay, there is even an inner trade morality of these
customs of the trade by which it is commonly understood that
within certain limits only the trade practices referred to may be
earned out. Now it is just in these little trade customs which
have grown up from certain usages, and which are familiarly prac-
tised in many trades, that we have the germs of the majority of
the huge frauds which arise out of inordinate speculation. In
its ordinary form the little trade custom may be practised by
every member of a trade alike, and with the majority of those
who have been trained to this common morality of petty fraud,
the usage which has taught them to practise it, has also suffi-
cient power to keep them within the bounds which usage \is
pleased to dictate. But let inordinate desire for gain step in, let
speculation become rife, let a temporary difficulty stand in the
way which ordinary trade resources cannot remove, and the
554 ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON.
sleights legitimatized by the common custom of trade are apt to
come forth in their true light. The barrier set up by usage can-
not well withstand the pressure of necessity, and a " wicked
whisper " is never wanting to suggest that if the fraudulent trade
custom be right in principle in its less obtrusive form, it cannot
be wrong in a more fully developed character; and the " honeyed
hope of retrieving," (to use the words of John Sadleir's death
confession) ever brightens the downward path with a delusive
light.
The most remarkable study respecting petty fraud trade customs
is the fact of their being practised frequently by men of religious
habits. There is no doubt that there are many tradesmen who
practise sleights of trade knowing them to be dishonest and with
a dishonest intent; but there are also many tradesmen who prac-
tise sleights simply as trade customs in which they have been
brought up, and who seem to be utterly ignorant, or incapable of
appreciating their fraudulent character.
It would be painful to suppose that the wide-spread practice of
adulteration of articles of food, which was shown to exist in the
metropolis among all classes of dealers, by the Analytical Com-
mission of the Lancet, was in every instance a deliberate act of
dishonesty. The names and characters of many of the firms from
whom articles were purchased for analysis would not justify such
a supposition, unless we are prepared to adopt the conclusion of
a perverted condition of morality existing among the middle
class of London to which even that of the nether class is of a
secondary character. The truth is, we believe, that these men
have been taught from their earliest days to regard these prac-
tices as legitimate trade customs; they have grown up in this
belief; it has never been tested by any other criterion than that of
the trade; and the practice has become part and parcel of their
normal mental and moral state, casting no dark shadow across
their religious belief, and continuing until death, or until a popu-
lar outcry leads to an examination of the custom, or an Act of Par-
liament prohibits it, and so rouses, perchance, an individual to a
true knowledge of the petty fraud he has been practising. It is to
the existence of an insensibility to the fraudulent character of many
trade customs, that we attribute those distressing scenes in which
individuals who have brought upon themselves public obloquy by
a fraudulent trade transaction, and even, perhaps, have been tried
for it and convicted in a court of justice, have been retained in the
full confidence of the religious body they have been connected with,
and have received wide-spread sympathy from the branch of trade
with which they have been connected, because they have acted
simply in accordance with the " custom of the trade."
The habit of petty fraud which is but too commonly found to
ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON. 555
constitute the so-called " custom of the trade," forms frequently
the particle of ferment which is ever ready to ferment actively
under favourable circumstances, and to give rise to a more or less
abundant crop of fraudulent commercial transactions.
But the low grade of morality of which certain trade customs
are an indication is not manifested in those customs alone.
They are the natural result of a degraded morality, but they are
most commonly met with side by side with careless and indifferent
feelings towards the requirements of strict morality generally.
This indifference is indeed the main form in which a low grade
of morality is found among the middle and higher classes of
society. Conventional morality, that is, propriety both in speech
and manners, is now almost an essential requisite of every section
of the middle and higher classes of society, and formal religion
has become fashionable ; yet, with all this improvement, a vast
amount of immorality still nestles within the skirts of the middle
and higher classes, and is tolerated by them?nay, it would
appear to be expected by a considerable portion of these classes
that youth should go through a certain portion of immorality, as
a matter of course, before it comes to manhood, the so-called
" sowing of wild oats " being, in fact, regarded as a normal phase
of humanity.
The laxity of morals which exists among the youth of the
higher and middle classes of society is partly the result of the
indifference with which it is regarded by a large section of society,
and partly a consequence of the education given to the youth.
The education is directed more to the cultivation of the intel-
lectual than of the moral faculties. Such training as is given to
the moral faculties, when these are not altogether, as is often
the case, left to be formed simply by example at home or at the
schools, is almost invariably of a most imperfect character. It
consists usually in the teaching of the bare precepts of moralitv,
and it is rarely accompanied by any satisfactory training in the
application of those precepts. If the moral faculties, so far as
developed, have not already been perverted, as is not unfrequently
the case, before the youth has left school and commenced to
rough it in the world, he enters into the struggle of life almost
altogether ignorant of the peculiar dangers he is exposed to, and
consequently liable to become a prey to the first temptation that
falls in the way.*
" ? ' ' ' ?^e (my mother) brought me up to pray and hope that I might
some day be converted, and become a child of God And one could not
help wishing to enjoy oneself as much as possible before that event happened.'
' Before that event happened, my dear fellow ? Pardon me, your tone is some-
what irreverent.' ' "V ery likely. I had no reason put before me for regarding
such a change as anything but an unpleasant doom, which would cut me off, or
ought to do so, from any field sports, from poetry, from art, from science, from
NO. XII.?NEW SERIES. O O
556 ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON".
Abstract principles of morality, of wliicli the significance and
application are imperfectly apprehended, offer but slight obstacles
to the evil effects of sensual pleasures. Moreover, the practice of
morality being left to be formed chiefly after entrance into active
life, the youth is apt to take example from that form of practice
which is least exacting. A morality of this species sees no wrong
in those gambling transactions, so fruitful of ruin, depravity,
and crime, which constitute a marked characteristic of many of
the amusements of the higher classes, and particularly of those
connected with the so-called " sporting world," and it justifies a
special code of morality for the guidance of such transactions,
this code being the analogue of the " custom of the trade" among
the commercial class. But a main character of this low grade of
morality (which might with truth be termed secular morality)
is, that it nourishes an appetite for pleasure, using that word in the
conventional acceptation of the term as applied to popular amuse-
ments. Secular morality, however, offers but a feeble resistance
?nay, it too frequently co-exists with a tendency to succumb to
the more pernicious effects of pleasure. A striking example of
the insidious and dangerous character of this degraded morality
is witnessed at the present time, among the highest classes of
society, in the patronage and support which has been given to
the opera of " La Traviata," the " Street-walker." In this opera
is represented an episode in the life of a common prostitute, in
which an overweening attachment, less noble in character than
that of a dog to its master, is upheld to admiration and sym-
pathy ; and Christianity is parodied in a fashion little short of
being blasphemous, by this attachment being exhibited as a
sufficient justification for sin and preparation for heaven !
The commoner effects of the low grade of morality existing
among the middle and higher classes may be seen in their most
politics?for Christians, I was told, had nothing to do with the politics of the
world, ? from man and all man's civilization in short, and leave to me,
as the only two lawful indulgences, those of living in a good house and begetting
a family of children/ 'And did you throw off the old creeds for the sake
of the civilization which you fancied they forbid ?' ' No I am a
Churchman, you know, principally on political grounds, or from custom, or from
?the devil knows what, perhaps?I do not.' ' Probably it is God and not
the devil, who knows why, Templeton V 'Be it so Frightful as
it is to have to say it. . . . . I do not much care I suppose it's
all right; if it is not, it will come right at last. And, in the meantime, I com-
promise, like the rest of the world And so, I believe, I am going to
have no religion at all, and no substitute for it either. .... I am becoming
more and more of an animal,?fragmentary, inconsistent, seeing to the root of
nothing, unable to unite things in my own mind. I just do the duty which lies
nearest and looks simplest. I try to make the boys good, plucky, and knowing?
though what's the use of it ? They will go to college with even less principles
than I had, and will get into proportionately worse scrapes. I expect to be ruined
by their debts before I die.' "?Phaeton ; or, Loose Thoughts for Loose Thinkers,
by C. Kingsley, pp. 75?80.
ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON. 557
conspicuous characters in the casinos ancl principal haunts of
vice in the metropolis. These grand portals of iniquity are
crowded nightly with our youth. Here they graduate in sen-
suality and vice; and to the crash of music, and the quick paces
of the dance, they are whirled rapidly into a vortex of sin, in the
inner whirl of which is found a depravity which, sooner or later,
leads to ruin. But few may pass even into the outermost
whirls of the vortex and thereafter escape fully from the taint of
dark vice. The moral faculties are still further blunted by the
briefest acquaintance with these haunts, and the lessons of sen-
suality learnt in them are carried into domestic life, and the
terrible results of these lessons are from time to time made
known in the records of the Divorce, Criminal, and other Courts
of Justice.
The great number of splendid resorts for the mere gratification
of sensual desires which exist in London, are at once an indica-
tion of the extent to which a low grade of morality exists among
the middle and higher classes, and a cause of the maintenance of
that low grade. These resorts are not the less dangerous because
they are conducted, in the main, with due regard to external pro-
priety. The splendid drinking-saloon, with.its attractions of
song and music, most surely induces the insatiate craving for
strong drink, with the necessary concomitants of drunkenness
and allied vices ; and the dancing-saloon most certainly paves the
way to the innermost recesses of iniquity, though the externalisms
of decency may never be departed from within it. Nay, the very
aspect of grace which is thrown over these resorts adds but to
the subtlety of the evil:?
" The devil's most devilish when respectable."
Sensual gratifications and pleasures are at the best but trea-
cherous indulgences; and the man who has been most carefully
trained in the right may hardly at times hold his own against
them. But when these pleasures are heightened by careful
development, when they are divested of every moral check
beyond the ordinary requirements of secular morality, and when
their object is merely to minister to the gratification of the
moment, then they may become most pernicious.
The low grade of morality which pervades a large portion of
the middle and higher classes, is not shown alone in an undue
proclivity to sensual gratifications, and in the fostering of dubious
special codes of morality, of which the extreme results are crime
and overt immorality. These are its most prominent effects; but
its influence is also widely and most injuriously felt in an active
tendency to depress the standard of religious practice, and in a
lowering effect upon the morality of the operative and nether
class, by degrading the bonds of relationship between the master
o o 2
558 ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON.
and tlie servant, between tlie workman and his employer, and
between the landlord and tenant?these bonds being too com-
monly regarded as having no higher character than personal service
on the one hand, and pounds, shillings, and pence on the other.
Of the different results which arise from the low grade of
morality that prevails, to a greater or less extent, among all
classes of the metropolitan population, one only?crime?can be
estimated numerically. The amount and character of the crime
which occurs in London from year to year, as well as the number
of persons arrested, convicted, and punished, are recorded in the
returns of the City of London and of the Metropolitan Police
(the police of the metropolis consisting of two principal
divisions, the duties of one of which are confined to the com-
paratively contracted area of the City of London proper, while
the duties of the other extend to the remainder of the metropolis),
and in the " Judicial Statistics" which are compiled by order of
the Secretary of State for the Home Department.* From the
latter source it would appear that, in 1857, 8152 indictable
offences were committed in London, and that for these offences
GG18 persons were apprehended, of whom 2973 were discharged,
3 were bailed, 73 were bailed for trial, 24 were committed for
want of sureties, and 3545 were committed for trial. In the same
year there were arrested, also in London, for offences with which
the magistrates dealt summarily, 103,071 persons (71,975 males,
31,090 females), of whom 47,020 were discharged, and 50,051
convicted. The whole number of arrests for indictable offences,
and for offences with which the magistrates dealt summarily, was,
during the year, 110,289, which would give an average of some-
what more than 302 arrests daily. The character of the persons
arrested and proceeded against, as far as could be ascertained,
was as follows :?
Indictable offences
Offences summa-
rily disposed of
Known
thieves.
749
9,S98
10,047
P,o,U. V'H""
tramps.
tutes.
393
5198
5591
56
4107
4163
Suspi-
cious cha-
racters.
2,070
11,547
13,617
No
known
occupa-
tion.
82
1488
1570
Previous, Charac-
gooclcha- ter un-
racter. j known.
1,215 . 2,053
24,582 ! 46,851
25,797 ,48,904
* The writer of the article "On the Moral Pathology of London" would here
express his thanks to Sir Richard Mayne, the Chief Commissioner of Metropolitan
Police, and to Samuel Redgrave, Esq., the Criminal Registrar at the Home Office,
for their kindness in furnishing him with the criminal statistics made use of in the
article. To Mr. Redgrave belongs the honour of having drawn up, and, we believe,
also, suggested the series of returns published by Government under the title of
ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON. 559
Thus 1 in every 10"4 of the individuals arrested belonged to the
criminal class; 1 in every 4'04 was of had or indifferent cha-
racter, and 1 in every 4'07 was of previously good character.
Nearly two-thirds of the whole number of persons arrested were
formerly individuals of previously good character and of whom
the character is unknown ; and doubtless the greatest portion of
these are to be regarded as having for the first time committed
offences, or been suspected of having committed offences against
the law. The statistics of character are not applied to persons
actually convicted of crime, consequently we cannot estimate with
any nearer degree of correctness than that given in the foregoing
table, the number of new criminals added to the police-lists
during the year; but the data are sufficient to show the great
preponderance of persons who for the first time had brought
themselves within the grasp of the law. Perhaps the most re-
markable item in the table is the number of prostitutes arrested.
The number of prostitutes known to the police in 1857 amounted,
as has been previously stated, to 8GO0. It follows, therefore,
that more than two-thirds of the whole number were under arrest
during that year.
The "Judicial Statistics" for 1857 contain, for the first time,
the Criminal Returns of the London Police, consequently these
cannot be compared with any previous statistics of a similar
character. We have at our command the Criminal Returns of
the Metropolitan division of Police only, and the following data
are derived from this source. As these details apply only to a
portion, although by far the greatest portion of the metropolis, it
must be borne in mind that they show simply, approximatively,
the variation in amount and character of the crime of London.
In 1857 the Metropolitan Police took 79,304 persons into custody, of
whom 37,504 were discharged by the magistrates, 38,731 were summarily con-
victed or jield to bail, and 3009 were committed for trial, of whom 2400 were
convicted and sentenced, 502 were acquitted, and 107 were not prosecuted, or
bills were not found against them. During the five years, 1852-50, the
annual average of arrests was 72,580; of persons discharged by the magistrates
37,301; of charges summarily disposed of, or held to bail, 31,014 ; of com-
mittals for trial, 4210 ; of convictions, 3407; of acquittals, 024; and of charges
not prosecuted, or bills not found, 117. The gross amount of arrests and of
cases summarily disposed of and committed for trial in 1857 is, therefore, con-
siderably in excess of the gross annual average of arrests and of charges sum-
marily disposed of and committed for trial during the preceding five years;
and although a decrease appears in the amount of committals in 1857, this is
" Judicial Statistics. In the recently published volume of these statistics the
criminal returns only for England and Wales are given, but in subsequent volumes
it is intended to publish returns also of the proceedings in the Common Law,
Equity, Canon, and Civil Law Courts. When the whole of the returns projected
by Mr. Redgrave are completed and regularly filled up, the statistics of justice
in this kingdom will probably be more complete than those of any other kingdom.
560 ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON.
probably due to the larger number of cases disposed of summarily by the
magistrates. Does the increase in the amount of crime during 1857 above the
average of the preceding five years indicate an actual increase in the quantity
of crime in London, or an increase proportionate only to the increase of popu-
lation during that and the previous years ? Estimating the population roughly
by adding the excess of births each year to the population of the previous
years, commencing -with the ascertained population of 1S51, we arrive at the
following results:?
Population of London, according to the Census of 1851, 2,362,236.
Excess of
births.
Population.
Number
of arrests.
Proportion
to popula-
tion.
Number of
summary
convictions &
committals.
Proportion
to popu-
lation.
1852
1853
1854
1855
1856
1857
26,612
22,185
11,188
23,590
20,893*
20,893*
2,388,84S
2,411,033
2,422,221
2,445,811
2,466,704
2,487,597
73,257
72,316
75,614
68,505
73,240
79,364
1 in 32-06
1 in 33-03
1 in 32-00
1 in 35*07
1 in 33-06
1 in 31-03
34,985
34,695
35,245
33,655
36,689
41,800
1 in 68-02
1 in 69*04
1 in 68*07
1 in 72-03
1 in 67*02
1 in 59*09
* Average of the four years, 1852-55.
If these calculations be received as an approximation to the proportion of ar-
rests, summary convictions, and committals, to the total population for the
years 1852-57, it will follow that there was a considerable excess in the
amount of arrests, summary convictions, and committals during 1857. It would
also appear that in 1855 there was a considerable diminution as well in the
number of arrests, as of the summary convictions and committals.
The offences which come unde,r the cognizance of the police are divided
in the official returns into six categories. In the first category are enumerated
"Offences against the person;" to wit, murder, attempts to murder, man-
slaughter, rape, bestiality, and other libidinous crimes, extorting money under
threats of violence, common assaults and assaults on the police, attempting to
commit suicide, &c. The second category contains " Offences against "property
committed with violence;" for example, burglary, breaking into dwelling-houses,
shops, &c., robbery, assaults with intent to rob, &c. The third category con-
tains " Offences against property committed without violencefor example,,
larceny, cattle, sheep, and horse stealing, embezzlement, receiving stolen goods,,
unlawful possession of goods, &c. The fourth category contains " Malicious
offences against property ;" to wit, arson and wilful damage. The fifth cate-
gory contains " 1 orgery, and offences against the currency." The sixth category
contains " Other offences not included;in the foregoing categories;" for example,
drunkenness, drunk and disorderly characters, vagrancy, disorderly characters,
offences under the Metropolitan Police Act, the Hackney Carriage Act, the
Juvenile Offenders Act, &c.
The number of persons who were (a) summarily convicted or held to bail,
or (b) committed for trial, in each of the different categories in 1857 was as
follows: I. Offences against the person (a 7750, h 281) 8034; II. Offences
ar/cdnst property committed with violence {b) 293; III. Offences against pro-
perty committed without violence (a 9417. b 2143) 11,550; IY. Malicious
offences against property (a 1941, b 15) 195G; V. Forgery and offences against
the currency {b) 292; YI. Other offences not included in the above classes
(ia 18,403, b 32) 18,435. The annual average of the number of persons sum-
marily convicted and held to bail, or committed for trial in the different classes
of offences, during the five years, 1852 to 1856, was as follows: Class L.
{a 6146, b 267), 66S3; Class II. (b) 255; Class III. (? 6046, b 3409), 9455 ^
ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON. 561
Class IV. (a 1448, b 7), 1495; Class V. (i) 306; Class VI. (a 17,462, 6 25),
17,487. In each class of offences, with the exception of the fifth class
(Forgery and offences against the currency), there was an excess in 1857 above
the mean of the previous five years.
The total number of persons who were upon trial, convicted and sentenced
in 1857 was 2460; the mean annual number of convictions upon trial during
the five years, 1852-56 being 3467. On the other hand, however, the
number of offenders summarily dealt with, or held to bail, by the magistrates
in 1S57, was 38,731, while the annual mean of the preceding five years was
31,014; showing, as has been previously intimated, that the diminution of the
amount of convictions after trial was due to a larger number of charges being
dealt with summarily by the magistrates.
The crimes which seem to be most influential in determining the increment
or decrement of the amount of crime, are those which are dealt with summarily,
as may be gathered from the following statement of the number of individuals
summarily convicted or held to bail, and committed for trial during the five
years, 1853-57:?
1853
1854
1855
1856
1857
Summarily con-
victed or held
to bail.
30,327
30,911
29,796
33,451
38,731
Committed for
trial.
4368
5159
3859
3238
3069
Convicted and
sentenced.
3613
4304
3169
2587
2460
The annual average of summary convictions during the five years is 32,649,
and the greatest excess above the average (in 1857) was 6082; but the dif-
ference between the lowest number of convictions in the period and the
highest is no less than 8935, the variation in the number of committals being
2090, while the annual average of committals was 3938.
The offences for which the greatest number of persons were convicted in
the six years, 1852-57, are set forth in the following table :?
1852.
1853.
1854.
1855.
1856.
Mean of
the five
years.
1857.
Drunkenness and drunk )
and disorderly charac- > : 8366
ters J j
Disorderly characters and ) 3949
disorderly prostitutes. |
Vagrancy 1 2168
Suspicious characters ) ggg
and reputed thieves . J
Common assaults and as- ) (3435
saults on the police . jj
Larceny  2491
Unlawful possession of) 3094
goods )
Wilful damage . . . 1357
8240
3955
1860
830
6188
3170
4317
1382
7273
3630
2065
798
6280
3772
5765
1435
6376
3562
1628
6305
4008
1956
871 i 1025
6921
2755
5019
1504
6138
1907
8160
1742
7312
3820
1936
678
6392
2819
5551
1484
7759
4889
2485
1099
7505
1765
8817
1941
The greatest number of convictions for particular offences occur for drunken-
ness, drunk and disorderly conduct, common assaults, assaults on the police, the
unlawful possession of goods, and disorderliness.
562 ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON.
The drunk, and drunk and disorderly characters hold the most prominent
position in the list of offenders,* but the figures in the foregoing table give but
an imperfect notion of the extent to which the vice of drunkenness prevails
openly. The following table shows the number of arrests and convictions for
drunkenness, and drunk and disorderly conduct during the ten years, 1848-
57, as well as certain incidental data which will aid in the formation of a
better comprehension of a few of the evils which arise from habits of indulging
to excess in spirituous liquors:?
1848
1849
1850
1851
1852
1853
1854
1855
1856
1857
Drunkenness & drunk & disorderly conduct.
Arrests.
16,461
22,027
23,897
23,172
23,640
23,652
22,078
19,297
18,703
20,047
Summary
convic-
tions.
4956
6849
8342
8027
8366
8240
7273
6376
6305
7759
Males.
3185
4457
5586
5129
5526
5464
4806
4025
3796
4790
Females.
Illicit dis-
tillation.
1771
2392
2756
3898
2840
2776
2472
2351
2509
2969
46
89
100
100
90
50
56
65
27
18
1848
1849
1850
1851
1852
1853
1854
1855
1856
1857
Number of public-houses and
beer-shops summoned by the
police, and the number con-
victed and dismissed.
Convicted. Dismissed. Total.
762
1125
1085
960
1293
1138
1067
718
881
917
158
247
269
226
321
263
290
256
229
235
920
1372
1354
1186
1614
1401
1357
974
1110
1152
Deaths
from in-
tempe-
rance.
57
62
74
64
73
73
84
83
Deaths
from deli-
rium tre-
mens.
141
164
157
136
148
152
174
164
The following table shows the number of convictions during the ten years,
1848-57, for several of the most serious offences against the laws
* The offence for which the greatest number of persons were arrested, in the whole
of England and Wales, during 1857, was assault. It must not, however, be in-
ferred, therefore, that there is an excess of drunkenness and drunk and disorderly
characters in London as compared with other districts, or with the whole of the
kingdom, for the arrests for drunkenness, and drunk and disorderly characters
will depend upon the activity aud efficiency of the police, and will be greater in
proportion in cities and large towns than in country districts. It is not improbable
that when the arrangements for the rural police have been fully carried out, we
shall find an increase in the number of arrests for drunkenness, and drunk and
disorderly characters, in the criminal returns for the whole kingdom.
ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON. 563
Murder,
Com. Conv
Attempts to
murder.
Com. Conv
Manslaughter.
Com. Conv,
Rape, and
assaults with
intent to com-
mit rape.
Com. Conv,
1848
1849
1850
1851
1852
1S53
1854
1855
1855
1857
13
17
6
13
11
7
10
12
11
13
78
80
73
74
72
64
46
60
62
71
60
65
56
55
60
47
36
56
50
62
14
21
18
21
15
10
13
18
8
13
3
11
9
13
6
5
6
6
4
5
37
27
32
49
45
21
28
15
19
31
29
17
18
32
29
16
12
9
11
18
1848
1849
1850
1851
1852
1853
1854
1855
1856
1857
Burglary, and
breaking into
dwelling,
houses, &c.
Com. Conv
188
188
195
162
187
166
196
151
276
218
154
156
162
131
149
138
168
132
239
192
Robbery.
Com. Conv,
100
48
65
79
46
42
54
56
98
73
82
37
44
54
35
33
39
42
76
55
Forgery and
ofl'ences against
the currency.
Com. Conv
208
447
154
290
315
300
377
251
289
302
190
120
136
190
282
277
366
216
237
246
If we divide this table into two quinquennial periods, and ascertain the
mean number of convictions for the different offences enumerated in each of
the periods, we shall find that, during the five years, 1853-57, the mean
number of convictions for all the offences, except burglary and breaking into
dwelling-houses, &c., and forgery and offcnces against the currency, is less
than in the five years, 1848-52 :?
Attempts to Man- Burglary, Forgery,
Murder. murder, slaughter. Eape, &c. &c. Robbery. &c.
Mean. Mean. Mean. Mean. Mean. Mean. Mean
1848-52 ... 6-3 ... 59*1 ... 8-2 ... 25* ... 150-2 ... 50'2 ... 183-3
1853-57 ... 5-3 ... 50*1 ... 5'1 ... 13-1 ... 173'4 ... 49* ... 222*1
If these figures might be taken as indices by which to measure the actual
quantity of oltences committed, they would show a gratifying decrease in the
amount of serious crime in the metropolis. In the absence, however, of data
showing the actual number of grave offences which have occurred, conclusions
derived from the number of convictions, as to the amount of crime, must be
received with caution.
The ages, sex, and degree of instruction of the persons convicted during
th e five years, 1853-57, are set forth in the following tables:?
564 ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON.
AGE.
r Under 10
years. 10 to 15. 15 to 20. 20 to 25. 25 to 30.
1853-57
1853-57 i
518 12,299 34,480 39,349 26,308
60 and
30 to 40. 40 to 50. 50 to 60. upwards.
I 36,179 19,086 7891 3409
SEX.
Under 10
years. 10 to 15. 15 to 20. 20 to 25. 25 to 30.
M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F.
465 53 11,158 1141 25,985 8495 27,389 11,960 16,621 966
60 and
30 to 40. 40 to 50. 50 to 60. upwards.
M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F.
22,304 13,075 11,686 7400 5078 2840 2215 1194
INSTRUCTION.
Total. Neither read ^fandwnTe Bead and Superior
nor write. imperfectly. wrlte "well, instruction.
M. F. M. F. M. F.' M. F. M. F.
1853-57...123,781 55,598 21,410 13,230 91,823 40,997 9424 1327 1124 44
The ages of 20 to 25 and 30 to 40 include the greatest number of persons
convicted; and, of the whole amount of criminals, the largest number were
under 30 years of age. The increase and decrease of crime in a district is
due principally to the criminality of individuals of mature years?of those, in
fact, who have arrived at an age when they become most fully exposed to the
vicissitudes of life. The proportion of female criminals is large, being somewhat
more than one-third of the whole amount. The bulk of the criminals con-
sisted of persons who had received an imperfect education. This is the rule
among the criminal class. A vast amount of instruction of a most unsatisfac-
tory character, and in which the moral faculties, in particular, are neglected,
prevails among the lower classes and also amon^ the middle class ; and it is from
individuals who have received this spurious education that the criminal class
chiefly derives its additions.
The statistics of felonies against property constitute a very interesting
portion of the Police Returns. In the following table is given a summary of
the number of felonies which occurred during the five years, 1853-57, the
number of convictions for felony during the same period, the first amount of
loss, the amount recovered, by the police, and the total amount of loss:?
1853
1854
1855
1S56
1857
Number of
felonies.
11,699
13,765
14,175
15,621
16,551
Number of
persons tried
and con-
victed.
2728
3341
2535
2029
1808
Amount of
first loss.
?41,988
49,898
49,996
53,193
51,832
Amount Amount of
recovered. total loss.
?12,458
9,780
10,216
11,363
10,577
?29,530
40,069
39,780
41,830
41,255
ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON. 565
The particular felonies of which summaries are given in the foregoing
table form a curious list. The following table shows the number and cha-
racter of the felonies committed iu the Metropolitan Police district during the
year 1S57:?
Description of Felony.
Burglary
With violence to persons ...
By lifting windows or enter- ">
ing doors not fastened ...J
Breaking into a dwelling-)
house, &c    $
Building, shop, &c. ??.
?Embezzlement ...
?Forgery ... ?
*Fraud ...     ...
Bobbery on highway
Horse stealing
Cattle stealing
Sheep stealing
Dog stealing   ...
/Goods, &c. exposed for sale...
I Tools, lead, glass, &c. from \
unfinished houses  j
^Common -< From carts or carriages
Linen, &c. exposed to dry ...
I Poultry, &c. exposed in an")
V outhouse  .)
fBy false keys only
*By lodgers
*By servants
. In a I By doors being left open
Larcenies.-4 dwelling. J *By false messages, &e.
house, ' By lifting up windows or)
&e. breaking glass  $
By attic windows, through )
empty houses  J
i^By means unknown
/"Picking pockets
From the j "From drunken persons
?person j From children
V.*By prostitutes
Larcenies on the River Thames
Total
129
40
107
209
20
522
21
21
9
30
17
2300
975
351
350
817
229
1550
1781
2570
632
611
30
119
1608
146
106
854
228
Hc s
2 8
127
2
26
39
21
101
36
92
4,4
16
5
239
72
24
20
64
20
74
140
209
29
30
249
10
2
79
23
Amount of loss.
?
2004
1042
490
685
1531
263
2783
47
488
90
84
99
1908
768
833
255
735
1753
4019
10,385
5890
1835
2603
900
336
5229
688
59
3542
488
16,551 1808 51,832 10,577 41,255
?
618
134
112
192
14
319
12
401
74
44
28
760
168
230
32
167
65
768
3017
9S5
184
196
15
1138
83
4
561
197
?
1386
356
573
1339
249
2464
35
87
16
40
71
1148
600
603
223
563
1688
3251
7369
4905
1651
2407
900
321
4091
605
55
2978
291
It is evident that the eases marked thus (*) could not have been prevented by the police.
The number of convictions for felony during the years 1853-57 was
12 441; the ascertained loss of property from felony, in the same period,
amounted to 192,464i. If we suppose that the whole of this sum (which
would not be the case, as stolen property, except when money, can only be got
rid of for sums much beneath its value) was divided solely among the number
of individuals convicted for felony, 15?. and a few odd shillings only would fall to
the lot of each person ! Crime is, indeed, a most unprofitable occupation.
Of the 12,441 individuals committed for felony during the quinquennial
period, 1853-57, 3180 had been in custody for felony twice previously, 6S9
thrice, 147 four times, and 53 five times and upwards.
The great increase in the total amount of offenders, as well as in the num-
ber of arrests and convictions for several of the slighter offences, which is shown
by the preceding statistics to have occurred inl8o7, and the decrease of arrests
and convictions in 1855, are not susceptible of explanation by the information
566 ON THE MORAL PATHOLOGY OF LONDON,
which we at present possess. Perhaps the most important conclusion which
may be derived from the criminal statistics of the metropolis is, that the
greatest number of convictions and arrests occur for ofFences which arise from
a low grade or a perverted state of morality, rather than from more deliberate
criminality. This conclusion affords additional support to the propositions
which we have endeavoured to set forth in this article.
In addition to the returns of the number of persons taken into custody,
the offences for which they have been arrested, and the results of the arrests,
the police also make certain " Miscellaneous returns," among which is included
a report of the "Number of suicides committed, and the number attempted and
prevented by the police and others."
The numerical records of suicide form a terrible illustration of the acute-
ness of the misery and sin which exists in the metropolis. The statistics of
suicide are doubtless incomplete, as it is not improbable that many of those
deaths, upon an inquiry into the cause of which a jury returned a verdict of
" Found dead," have resulted from suicide. The number of instances in which
a verdict of ' Found dead' was returned, in the county of Middlesex last year,
was 535. The following table shows the number of suicides and attempted
suicides in the Metropolitan Police District during the ten years 1S4-S-
57:?
1848
1849
1850
1851
1852
1853
1854
1855
1856
1857
Number of suicides committed, and the number
attempted and prevented by the police.
0 . j Suicides attempted
Suicides and prevented by
committed. t?e police.
100
131
140
120
109
131
11
15
10
8
7
7
118 14
116 13
127 i 12
154 | 6
Suicides at-
tempted and
otherwise pre-
vented.
67
60
78
67
74
110
72
60
66
87
We may add, as a pendant to this melancholy table, that in the eight years
1848-55, 242 persons died in the metropolis from privation of food, 49 from
neglect, and 109 from cold.
In the preceding article our object lias been to show the chief
points connected with the etiology of a low grade of morality
which we believe to exist exteusively among all classes of the
population of London (and, indeed, of the kingdom), and which
we consider to be the substratum of crime and other forms
of immorality. We have attempted to indicate the most pro-
minent causes which, acting upon this substratum, determine
overt acts, not only of crime, but of vice generally; and we have
given a summary of the crime which has occurred in London
during the last five years, as an illustration of one of the effects
of the low grade of morality existing among the metropolitan
population.
