Tendency f Misdirected Education and The Unbalanced Mind to Produce Insanity
=============================================================================

Akt. III.?

BY EDWAED JAEVIS, M.D.,
Dorchester, Mass.
Almost from the "beginning the risen generations have done what
their intelligence, their means, and their conscience allowed them,
to aid in the development and training of those who were to come
after them, and to lead children and youth through their narrow
paths to the highway of manhood. In the way that seemed to
them best they have endeavoured to show what should be done
with the untaught human mind, as it comes originally from the
Creator,?the raw material of thought and intelligence, as it is
delivered by Nature into the hands of its rightful possessor or his
friends,?and how this should he wrought, shaped and furnished
with knowledge of facts and principles, and fitted to bear the
responsibilities of mature life. Many have given to their thoughts
on this subject a visible form, and sent forth to the broad world
treatises on Education, for the benefit of as many succeeding
generations as will read them. These have all done, or are doing,
their appropriate work, each in its due manner and degree.
Generally they have one quality in common,?they treat of man
as an integer, an identity composed of body and mind, and pre-
suppose that all have similar powers and similar wants, and are
to be educated in a similar manner. Most of them regard the
intellect almost exclusively, and pi*opose to fill it with knowledge
of various kinds, which may be used for the various purposes of
after-life. They propose by proper training to develop, and by
suitable exercise to strengthen the mind, and give it power of
concentration, energy to grapple with the subjects that may he
AND THE UNBALANCED MIND TO PRODUCE INSANITY. 425
presented to it, and a capacity to add to its stores of knowledge
through its coming years. In this way the perceptive and the
reasoning faculties, the memory and the imagination, are cultivated
in various degrees, and gain thereby a varied measure of force.
This is the usual extent of the plans of education. Even those
which are called liberal, and are supposed to be expansive, are
commonly limited to the development, cultivation, and discipline
of these elements.
In as far as these plans of education are not founded on a
proper and comprehensive view of the whole nature of man, and
of the great and entire object for which he is placed in the hands
of the educator, they fall short of their fulness of purpose; they
overlook some of the parts or elements of the human constitu-
tion ; they leave some of these undeveloped, some untrained, and
others undisciplined. The teachers, wanting a thorough know-
ledge of the material on which they are to operate, and of the
fabric which they are to create from it,?without a complete con-
sideration of man in his natural and uneducated state, and of
what he may and should be, of the dangers to which he is to be
exposed, the burdens he must bear, the responsibilities he may
be required to sustain, and the ends he may accomplish,?too
often send their pupils forth to the world unfitted to sustain their
part in its movements. And these youth, with a disproportionate
development of their powers, and without a complete control of
their own forces, with minds unbalanced, and wrong conceptions
of their relation to society, err in their self-management; they
fail to realize their own ideals of life, and are in danger of being
overwhelmed with mental disorder.
Comprehensive Plan of Education.?A rational and a natural
plan of education looks upon man not as a simple, but as a com-
pound being,?not as a single integral power, but as composed of
many and various powers. Among his elements are included not
only the body and the mind, but the moral faculties and the appe-
tites, the passions and the propensities. All of these together
make up the man. Each has its own definite station to fill, and its
special part to perform, in the human economy. In the perfect and
healthy man these are all arranged in suitable proportions, and
act in unvarying harmony. Each has its predominant, mediate,
or subordinate place; each does its own work, and no more; and
all co-operate for the good of the whole,?the health of the body
and of the mind,?the elevation and happiness of the being to
whom they belong.
In this perfect arrangement the moral power, the nobler ele-
ment, stands above all the rest, and superintends the actions of
the whole. The mental powers, like an intelligent overseer of a
manufacturing process under the general charge of the proprietor,
search out the ways, lay the plans, they direct all the organs and
426 TENDENCY OF MISDIRECTED EDUCATION
operations of tlie body, and control the appetites, passions, and
propensities under the guidance of the conscience.
The powers that belong to the body are all necessary for the
healthy operation of the whole corporeal frame, and for the sus-
tenance and action of the mental and moral faculties here on the
earth. Of these all are, in some degree, and a part of them are
-wholly, under the control of the mind, and to that extent they do
Its bidding. The aj>petites, the lower passions, and the propen-
sities are active, or ready to be active, from the beginning. They
crave indulgence, and, if left to themselves, they hardly know a
bound to their gratification. But, being under the control of the
higher powers, they are, or should be, restrained within their
proper sphere. There seem to be several and various moral and
mental powers and faculties, eacli of which has its special purpose
to fulfil in the human economy, and all of which act in concert.
Each performs its own appointed work, and no other and no
more. Each has its due position and its due influence, govern-
ing, aiding, or obeying, according to the law prescribed to it.
All of these attributes, or their germs, are given to man at birth,
but not to all in the same proportion. Yet, with some excep-
tions, they are given to all in sufficient degree for the mainte-
nance of health, and the fulfilment of the responsibilities of their
present being. Some of the powers and attributes, as the appe-
tite for food and drink, and the digestive function, are bestowed
in full measure at the beginning of life. Of others only the prim-
ordial element is given, and these are subject to growth and
development from infancy to maturity.
Purpose of Education.?It is the true purpose of education to
draw out, cultivate, and strengthen the mental and the moral powers,
and to subdue and discipline the appetites and passions. As in
the healthy physical frame, the various organs of digestion, respi-
ration, and locomotion,?the skin, brain, and nervous system,?
are all in vigorous condition and action, none doing too much, and
none coming short of its requirements, each receiving its part, but
none demanding too much of the nervous influence, and each con-
tributing its part to the sustenance and health of the whole; so,
in the mental and moral constitution, the perceptive faculties, the
reason, the memory, the imagination, the conscience, and all the
lower powers, should each have its due development and influence,
each its due energy and position, each be predominant or subor-
dinate according to its office for the time being, and all act in
concert for the good of the whole.
Wcll-balanccd Mind.?This due development of each and all
the mental and moral faculties, and their proportionate and har-
monious action, constitute that which is called a well-balanced
mind, such as belongs to one whose judgment is sound and reli-
able in all common affairs of life; who, from any given facts or
s
AND THE UNBALANCED MIND TO PKODUCE INSANITY. 427
propositions, is sure to come to just conclusions; who lays liis
plans of action in accordance with the measure and kind of his
own strength, and with the circumstances amidst which he must
i operate; and who is certain, under any conditions, to do that
which is right and appropriate. This well-balanced mind consti-
i tutes perfect mental health. It comes from original harmonious
endowment, and proportionate development and discipline; that
is, from appropriate education of all the powers. To this point
it is desirable that all should arrive when they reach maturity,
and are ready to enter upon responsible life, to take upon them-
selves their own self-management, and to perform their several
parts in the affairs and duties of the world.
Laiv of Growth of the Powers and Elements of Man.?But
the education of man is not finished, nor does the necessity of
discipline cease with his youth. The growth of the bodily organs
alone ends with that period. All the other powers?the mental
and moral faculties, the passions, appetites, and propensities?have
no such limit to their expansion. They may grow indefinitely
even to the end of life, in old age. They may grow with accelerated
and accelerating force, each step in the progress increasing the
facility of taking another. Every one of these faculties and attri-
butes of man increases in strength and activity by exercise, by
use, by indulgence. The growth of the human powers by culti-
vation is a fixed law ; yet it does not operate equally and in the
same degree at all times, but with a constantly increasing force
by successive repetitions. The longer the cultivation of any
faculty or endowment is continued, and the more vigorously it is
pursued, the easier its action becomes, and the greater is its acces-
sion of strength. The increase is added to the capital already
existing, and the augmented capital allows still more rapid in-
crease. As in the progress of fortune all the previous accumula-
tions of money, property, or credit, become capital, by which
more and more can be gained, so in the constitution of man all
growth of any of the faculties, every new acquirement, every in-
crease of force or discipline, every new elevation of purpose, is a
new means of gathering more and more of the same kind; for
the universal law of both nature and revelation, that " Whosoever
hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance,"
operates in the intellectual and the moral constitution of man, as
well as in his outward condition.
On the other hand, as in the decline of fortune every pecuniary
loss, and every neglect to secure due and honourable advantage,
increases the danger of another sacrifice, and diminishes the
powTer of preventing it, so in the mental and moral constitution
every neglect of study or discipline, every misapplication of
intellectual force, every perversion of any of the faculties, every
undue indulgence of any appetite or passion, every error or sin,
428 . TENDENCY OF MISDIRECTED EDUCATION
increases the danger and the chance of the repetition of the same
mistake or fault, and diminishes the securities against their
influence; for " Whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken
away even that he hath."
The practical operation of this law, hotli of growth and of
decline, is manifested everywhere and among all men, and few are
they who cannot trace it in some form or other, even in them-
selves, in the cultivation of any or all of the intellectual powers,
in the study of language, mathematics, natural history, or any
other branch of literature or science, in the cultivation of the
moral and spiritual affections, the religious element, the con-
science, the sense of right and wrong, regard to truth, love of
man.
In the intellectual progress, the more one learns, the greater is
his power of acquisition, and the taste for and the facility of
acquiring increase with it. In the moral progress, the more the
heart is warmed, the greater warmth does it demand to satisfy its
desires; the more the spirit is elevated, the higher are its aspira-
tions towards the true and the infinite. We see the same law in
the cultivation of the tastes, the love of nature, of the beautiful,
of music, of painting, of any of the fine arts. In these, indul-
gence creates strength, and strength gives enjoyment and a
craving for more and more, and with these come the means and
resolution to obtain greater gratification.
All the other faculties and powers, every appetite and passion,
all the lower propensities, are subject to the same law of growth.
Among the bodily appetites, the fondness for food, if gratified
beyond the natural and healthy wants of nutrition, increases with
indulgence; and this goes on, day by day, year by year, until the
appetite may become the ruling element, and prevail over dis-
cretion and reason. The use of tobacco and opium is a still more
marked illustration of the law of growth; for at first there is not
only no desire for and no pleasure given by these, but even an
absolute aversion to them. The mouth loathes, and the stomach
is nauseated by them. Yet this aversion is overcome by per-
severing cultivation, and then a positive appetite for these nar-
cotics arises, and this increases by fostering, until it becomes
strong enough to govern those who use them, and to make them
dissatisfied with everything else so long as this their ruling taste
is not gratified. The desire for intoxicating drinks grows in the
same manner, from small and apparently harmless beginnings, to
great and even destructive power, when it subdues the whole
man, body and soul, and compels the reason and the will to
minister to its purposes. The sensual appetites, and all the lower
propensities, obey the same law of growth, when indulged beyond
the limit assigned to them by the reason and conscience. The
and the unbalanced mind to produce insanity. 429
passions, of whatever nature, the likings and the dislikes, the
sympathies, antipathies, and caprices, all come under the same
law, and, when left to follow their own course, uncontrolled by
the higher element, they tend to expand and gain power beyond
their healthy limit.
As the clay is in the hands of the potter to be moulded into
such shapes as may please him, so the plastic elements of man
are at first in the hands of his teacher, and afterwards in his
own, to be formed and shaped as.they may desire and direct. By
cultivation of some of these elements, and by neglect and repres-
sion of others, one can make himself to be what he pleases. He
may give his intellectual, his moral, or his animal nature a pre-
dominance. He may become a thinker, a reasoner, a senti-
mentalist. He may be a philanthropist or a misanthrope, an
enthusiastic religionist or a cold-blooded atheist, a wise and
sagacious statesman or a crafty politician. He may be a man of
serene temper, generous, affectionate,?or he may be irritable, pas-
sionate, suspicious, hateful, selfish, miserly. He may be an
eater, a drinker, a sensualist in any form, the slave of any
appetite, the manifestation of any vice. He may be, almost
entirely or principally, any one or number of them in various
degrees, according to the way and extent his manifold powers
and elements are educated by his teachers, by the influences that
bear upon him, by his own self-management.
This Balance of the Powers and Elements must be Maintained
through Life.?Each one of the powers, attributes, and endow-
ments of man, being given to him for a definite purpose, each
having a special station to fill and part to perform in the work of
life, and the co-operation of each being necessary at all times for
the proper and vigorous action of all the rest, it is requisite for
mental health, and for the preservation of a well-balanced mind,
? > not only that the appropriateness of position and a due proportion
of all the intellectual and moral powers should be established
during the process of development and growth in youth, but that
they should be maintained during the whole of life. From the
beginning to the end, each faculty and power should be cul-
tivated or chastened in its due degree. None should be allowed
to become excessively strong and active, while others are weak
and dormant; none should absorb the force that rightfully
belongs to the rest. The higher elements, then, should always
be sustained in their commanding position, and the lower should
be kept subordinate. The appetites should be indulged, and the
propensities allowed to act, only at such times, and in such
periods, and so far, as the health of the system requires; and all
the passions and the moral affections should be.applied to their
NO. xr.?NEW SERIES. F F
430 TENDENCY OF MISDIRECTED EDUCATION
legitimate purposes, and to no other. All should he measured,
directed, and controlled by the reason, which should reign para-
mount over these, and yet, in its turn, he the faithful servant of
the conscience, rendering it a never-failing and implicit obe-
dience.
This condition of mental and physical health requires?1.
Great discretion to determine what the proper arrangement of
the faculties or elements of power is, and what their several
forces should he, in order that they may make up the perfect
man; 2. Constant self-analysis through life, to see whether this
due order and proportionate power is maintained; 3. An un-
faltering self-supervision and self-discipline, to maintain, in their
proper position and relation, all the elements of our constitution
and frame, encouraging the higher, directing the mediate, and
chastening the lower.
Balance of the Poivers Disturbed in some.?In manifold ways
men fall short of this perfect standard of mental condition. In
some, the deficiency is so slight as to produce no apparent effect
on their soundness of mind; in others, it is so great as to produce
manifest insanity; and between these two extremes there are all
intermediate grades of unsoundness. The slighter variations
from this normal standard are very frequent. Even after one has
been properly educated, and enters upon maturity, there may be,
and there commonly is, some one or more of the powers developed
and strengthened beyond the rest, in connexion with some special
employment, in the pursuit of some study, in the cultivation of
some salutary taste for good, or in the indulgence of some passion
or appetite for evil. Thus, in one man, the perceptive faculties
are prominent and most active; and he has a quicker eye or ear,
and more readily understands what is presented to him, than the
average of men. In another, causality or the reasoning faculty
prevails, and he quickly sees the relations of things. He traces
events back to their causes, and follows causes onward to their
results. In a third, conscientiousness predominates, and he is
scrupulously fearful of doing wrong. In a fourth, benevolence is
the favoured faculty, and he sympathises with suffering more
keenly and readily than others. In another, wit is cultivated and
made more active than the other powers, and he has a quick per-
ception of the ludicrous, and of singular and droll analogies and
relations.
All these, and all the other powers or modifications or com-
binations of powers, may and do receive in different persons
extraordinary cultivation, development, and strengthening, in
addition to the original and appropriate education of the whole.
Thus men qualify themselves for, and become expert or skilful
in, the various professions and arts of life, without diminishing
AND THE UNBALANCED MIND TO PKODUCE INSANITY. 431
their good sense in the common affairs of the world, or impairing
their balance of mind. Nevertheless, although these minds act
well on ordinary subjects, yet they act better on those to which
they are frequently directed, and on which they are habitually
employed. The mind always runs more readily and easily in its
most accustomed channel.
We not only labour more easily and effectually on those sub-
jects and in those ways which habit has made familiar to us, but
there is a degree, and in some a great degree, of danger that the
tone or character of the thoughts applied to these will tinge or
modify those which we apply to other subjects. It may control
the associations of ideas, and give its peculiar colouring and
estimate to all others.
The imagination is naturally among the most active elements
of the mental constitution. It tends to influence the associative
faculty, and govern the inlets of ideas. It is the foundation of a
great variety of mental error, and often at variance with discipline.
It is therefore a very unsafe guide to life and principles. It
needs the constant aid of the perceptive faculty to correct it, and
of the reason to control it. The law of association is a mani-
festation of its power; circumstances, things, and ideas are
suggested according to their natural or artificial connexions. The
habit of associating them together gives them an affinity, so that
they rise up in the mind in the same series of thoughts. When
one is presented, the others follow ; and the whole of a familiar
scene, or train of circumstances, or range of ideas, follows the
presentation of one of their elements or parts. Thus we are
reminded of tales, events or trains of facts, by the mention of
some single incident similar to any one connected with those that
are thus suggested. In such cases, the memory and the asso-
ciative faculties, which are required to move or act only in an
old and familiar course, are more active and energetic than the
perceptive faculties, which are acting or endeavouring to act upon
a new subject.
While, therefore, the perceptive faculties are trying to present
to the mind certain new images, the associative faculties present
some old images, and these, mingled together, form a compound
idea, consisting in part of the object last presented, and in part?
perhaps in great part?of old and remembered objects, which are
sufficiently similar to the new to be suggested by it. In these
cases the perceptive faculties recognise and convey to the mind
so much of the new image as is similar to old and familiar
images; but at that point their action ceases, and the mind
receives no more ideas through them, but the memory and the
imagination fill up the rest of the picture.
From this cause we readily discover resemblances in things
F F 2
432 TENDENCY OF MISDIRECTED EDUCATION
which we see for the first time, or with which we are hut little
acquainted, to those with which we are familiar. Thus, when
one goes lrom his father's house, and dwells among strangers, he
meets many persons who look to him like others whom he has
left behind, and he is continually reminded of his home by their
similarity. But, after he becomes familiarly acquainted with the
new people and circumstances, he fails to see the resemblance,
and wonders how lie could have seen it before.
This is easily explained by the law of suggestion and the
activity of the associative faculties, the memory and imagina-
tion, which is greater than that of the perceptive faculties. The
home-sick boy's mind is filled with the objects that he left behind ;
their images are familiar and dear to him, and the slightest
prompting calls them up. Meeting a stranger, he sees some
feature, expression, or manner,?like a feature, expression, or
manner in some one at home. All the features, person, and
manners of the absent are associated with this single feature
which is thus presented, and are suggested to him by it. Here
the perceptive faculties stop, and the imagination fills up
the rest of the picture ? not with the other features of the
person before him, but with those which are familiar to his mind,
and dear to his heart.
But after he becomes acquainted with persons of the new place,
and his heart is reconciled to those who are about him, and weaned
in some degree from those with whom he lived before, the per-
ceptive faculties become more, and the associative and suggestive
faculties become less, efficient. Then, when he meets these
persons, he sees more and more of their real features, and thinks less
and less of those who seemed to resemble them. The outline is
filled with the things before him; and that point which alone he first
noticed, now bears so small a proportion to those which he now
sees, that he finds none of that resemblance which he saw so
readily before.
The Ruling Feeling or Interest Colours l\ew Ideas.?Accord-
ing to the same law, any ruling feeling or interest directs or con-
trols the perceptive faculties in greater or less degree, and infuses
itself into, and modifies, the images that are received from any
sources. The same object, presented to several men who have dif-
ferent predominant feelings or interests, will suggest as many and
as various images. In the same landscape, the arrangements of the
fields, the gracefulness of outline and detail, present to the
painter a fit subject for a picture. Its soil suggests to the
farmer the idea of its fitness for cultivation of various crops;
the speculator sees its appropriateness for building lots ; the
geologist, the composition of the earth; the botanist, the various
kinds of plants that grow upon it.
AND THE UNBALANCED MIND TO PRODUCE INSANITY. 433
In all these and similar cases, the ruling idea, whatever it may
be, directs the perceptive faculties in some degree, and compels
the eye to see, and the ear to hear, and the mind to perceive,
that which is in accordance with itself, and prevents them from
recognising that which is not in harmony with it. More than
this?it accepts the suggestions of the memory and the imagina-
tion in place of the present realities which the perceptive faculties,
uncontrolled by such influence, might have discovered.
For this reason, witnesses, who testify for opposing parties
and interests in courts, may very honestly give very different
accounts of the same occurrences or things which they both had
seen. Each one saw and perceived the most readily that
which was most consonant with the previous feeling or interest;
and these modified the remaining perceptions, and controlled the
inferences.
Even philosophers, or those who intend to be philosophers,
are sometimes subject to this error in their investigations. If
they adopt a theory on any subject, its influence, to a greater or
less extent, controls their perceptive or reasoning faculties. The
former most readily, and perhaps exclusively, recognise those facts
which are in harmony with the preconceived idea; the latter
draw conclusions corresponding to it; and the imagination fills
up all the vacancies in the picture. Hence, these men are apt
to find confirmation of their doctrine in their discoveries. And
even men having opposite theories of the same subject are in some
danger of confirming each his own from the examination of the
same facts.
The moral affections and the passions have a more powerful
influence in controlling the perceptive faculties and the reasoning,
than even the pre-occupation of ideas. We delight to clothe
those whom we love with the raiment of beauty. We see in
them virtues and powers which less partial friends cannot dis-
cover. The evil passions have more absorbing power, and a
more complete government of the channels of ideas. When one
is excited with anger, or when he permanently hates, the eye is
slow, and even blind, to discover virtue, propriety, or reasonable-
ness in the object of his ill-will. Seeing through the pre-
conceived idea, he clothes this object with evil and wrong;
then reason is suspended, or made to subserve the passions, and
to aid in establishing conclusions corresponding with his pre-
dominant emotions, and these compel him to utter language
he would not have spoken, and to perform deeds he would not
have found a motive for doing, when not under the influence of
passion.
Effect of Habit on Mental Action.?Whatever power or ele-
ment is accustomed to action, acts more easily than such as have
434 . TENDENCY OF MISDIRECTED EDUCATION
lain comparatively dormant; and in whatever way any of the mental
or moral powers are used most, they find more ready action there
than otherwise. This is the most agreeable, as well as most
easy, and our feelings prompt us unconsciously to let our thoughts
run in this course.
These imaginative habits sometimes become very powerful,
and require vigilance and self-discipline to control them, and
prevent their controlling us. The mind of a student,
who has great facility in making puns, runs so readily and
insensibly in this way, that sometimes, when he attempts to
study, he finds it difficult to prevent his analysing words, and form-
ing new combinations of syllables, to make out some new and
strange meaning.
Unbalanced Mind.?Although all of these are consistent with
what is usually called mental health, yet such men have a dispro-
portionate distribution of mental force; some ruling idea has
undue prominence in, and often undue control over, the mind,
and they are, in certain ways, unbalanced; still, as they retain their
reason, and can correct their error of judgment by comparing their
false perceptions and conclusions with those which they know to
be true, they are presumed to be sound in mind.
Danger of its Growth.?As all habits and powers, all passions
and propensities, are liable to grow by exercise, every one of
these irregularities may, by cultivation or indulgence, become
so strong as to overcome the reason, and cut off the means of
correcting mistakes in judgment, and thereby establish insanity.
It is the first step that costs; the others are most easily taken.
The only absolute security'for the mental balance is in the utter
avoidance of even the least perversion of thought or feeling.
Some are led to begin this course of error by distinct and well-
marked tastes for it. In others, a feeling is accidentally excited ;
it may be very slight at first, but by repetition it gains strength,
and ultimately becomes powerful. This is remarkably manifested
in the caprices and perversities. The mind capriciously deter-
mines to be pleased with a small point, and through this sees all
the rest. This prepossession compels the perceptive faculties to
present the acceptable trait first to the mind, and put it in good-
humour to see those associated with it, and then it looks upon
them at least with toleration. By repetition, the toleration
becomes satisfaction, and approbation follows after. At last, the
whole mind is brought under the power of the caprice; then
opinions are formed, and a course of conduct pursued, from which
the reason at first would have shrunk; but being disarmed and
made the servant of passion or caprice, it goes to strengthen the
error and overthrow the judgment.
Day-Dreaming.?The day-dreamer loves to form an ideal
and the unbalanced mind to produce insanity. 435
image of that which lie would like to be, and of that which
he would wish others he, or of what he would like to
have done. For this purpose, the images derived through his
perceptive faculties are only used as suggestions of better images,
or better arrangements of facts and circumstances; something
unreal indeed, but more satisfactory than that which is presented
to his senses. In this the reason is suspended, for there is no
wish to make the ideal image correspond with any rule of truth.
Comparison is set aside, for no known standard is to be the
measure. But the dreamer is at liberty to create whatever he
will, and this he does in a form and manner most agreeable to
his taste and his ruling element. Thus he improves upon the
circumstances, or acts, or speeches that are presented to him,
and frequently makes himself the principal actor or speaker in
the scene of liis new creation.
This habit belongs to those who have large self-esteem, or large
love of approbation, more than to others ; they love to form desir-
able scenes of distinction, of influence, or even of glory, in which
they place themselves. From the little boy who delights to ima-
gine himself the drummer of the train-band, up to the man who
indulges the dream of his being a commander, an orator, or philo-
sopher, there are all stages of progress, and all grades of imagi-
nary life and position.
At first, and in some, this may be an honest conception of im-
provement upon that which is seen and heard. When one sees
some work performed, he may readily imagine a better way, and
think that he would do it according to the ideal. If he hears
a speech, he may conceive of a better argument and an improved
series of ideas, and he would so present them if he were the
speaker. It is a reasonable gratification to conceive of images
of perfect virtue or noble action. One, therefore, easily allows
himself to create this ideal of life and thought, and even to place
himself in the centre. It is so pleasant to see one's self in a
satisfactory position, that the dream is again indulged. By re-
petition it becomes more and more easy, and even attractive, and
then those who have fallen into the habit find it difficult to escape
from it. It is hard to fix their attention exclusively upon the
realities of life, and prevent their thoughts from wandering to
imaginary scenes, where all is satisfactory, but where none is
actual, and but little is true.
Knowledge to be Acquired in Youth. ? Beside the work of
development and discipline, of harmonizing the several elements
of the mental and noral constitution, of establishing each in its
due position, and giving to each its proportionate and appro-
priate force, it is the farther purpose of education to instruct the
youth in facts and principles, to teach them their own nature,
436 TENDENCY OF MISDIHECTED EDUCATION
their relation to the world and to outward things, and their
responsibilities in their several positions, and to fit them to
discharge the duties that must come upon them. It should
also prepare them to exercise a constant self-control, and to
apply their powers, on all occasions, to proper and desirable
purposes.
Defective Plan of Education.?Notwithstanding this plan of
education seems not only reasonable, but absolutely necessary for
the fulfilment of its object, yet many come short of it, and in-
clude only a part of these requisites; and others are still more
meagre, and include within their scope none of those things which
are the support and direction of every man and every woman, in
their true and successful walk through the earth. However
valuable the knowledge they impart may be, still the one thing
needful?the knowledge of themselves and of life, of external
nature and of man, and the i*elations of these to each other?is
not given; and the pupils who are thus trained are sent forth to
grope their way through the world, without that light to guide
them, and to struggle under their responsibilities of life, without
that strengthening and discipline which they should have re-
ceived at school in their early years, and the forming period of
their existence.
In these systems of education, it is interesting but painful to
see how many needless things are carefully provided, and faith-
fully done, and how many necessary things are entirely omitted;
and when the teachers have finished their work, and the pupils
have acquired all that is offered, it is mortifying to see how little
it can avail them in bearing the burdens and discharging the
duties of life. In these schools the scholar may accumulate the
vast treasures of knowledge, and yet be poor indeed in all that
will establish and sustain him in the position of life, health,
success, and happiness, for which he seems to be destined. He
may fathom the depths of chemistry, and analyse all compound
substances of earth, of vegetation, of animals, and spread before
his clear vision their secret elements. He may know of what
the mineral, the plant, and even flesh and blood are composed,
and yet be ignorant of the elements of his own constitution?of
the nature, extent, uses, limits, and liabilities of his own powers
of body and mind, of emotion, and of passion. He may compre-
hend all the principles of material philosophy, and the measure
and character of the natural powers, and understand how to bend
them to his purposes. He may master the elements, and compel
the waters, the air, steam, gases, electricity, to lend their forces
and labour at his will: he may make them bear his ships, turn
his machines, and carry his messages, and yet know not the
nature and use of his own vital machinery, nor how to apply liiat
AND THE UNBALANCED MIND TO PRODUCE INSANITY. 437
own internal forces, to control his appetites, and govern his pas-
sions. All external nature may be made to serve him, and do
the work of his bidding, and he is successful in his plans con-
nected with it; but the elements of his own being, body and
spirit, are not at his command, and in his endeavour to use them,
and gain and enjoy health, and sanity, find duration of life, he
fails, because for these he was not prepared.
There are other plans, or rather customs of education, far
worse than these. Their sins are not merely those of omission.
They teach not merely facts that are useless, and principles that
have no practicable use, but they teach positive error. They
give wrong notions of life. They excite expectations which
cannot be realized, and lead their pupils to form schemes incon-
sistent with the circumstances which must surround them. One
of the common faults of such education is to develop and culti-
vate unfounded hope and ambition, rather than discipline and
laborious patience. Under this system, youth are induced to
form purposes which they have neither the strength nor the in-
dustry to accomplish, and for which they have made and are
making no suitable preparation. They are encouraged to look
for a degree of success in life, a measure of prosperity, of respect,
and of influence, which they have neither the talent, nor the
wisdom, nor the power of adaptation to obtain. Their expecta-
tions are rather in accordance with their desires, and perhaps
their self-esteem, than with the fitness of their plans, or their per-
severance in accomplishment.
Starting with wrong notions of life and of their own relations
to the world, and with false conceptions of things as they are,
they err in their purposes and expectations of present existence,
and in their ideas of self-management, and fail to adapt their
plans of action to the opinions and customs of other men, and to
the circumstances of the world amidst which they live. Deficient
in that good common sense which would always establish and
maintain a true and certain relation between their own ideals and
the realities of the world, they frequently fail in one unsuited pur-
pose, only to enter upon another alike unsuited. Of course dis-
appointment follows them, because they expect impossible results,
or neglect to use the due means and energy to obtain them. Ex-
perience does not teach them wisdom, and they do not learn, from
one failure, how they may avoid another. Successive defeats dis-
tress and confound them more and more ; they become less and
less able to adapt themselves to things as they are; until, at length,
some of them sink into hopeless confusion, and others into mental
disorder.
Want of Plan of Life.?There are some who have no settled
plans of life to follow?no determined purpose to fulfil. They are
h
I
438 . TENDENCY OF MISDIRECTED EDUCATION
deficient in firmness, and unwilling or unable to persevere in
what tliey undertake. They enter upon schemes without a clear
conception of what their ends should be, or how they should be
accomplished. They are often weary of their purpose, and leave
it even when it may be approaching a successful issue. Wanting
a balance-wheel in their mental machinery, they are governed at
one time by one motive, and at another by a different one; or,
undecided which of two or more diverse motives to obey, they
follow one in part, and another in part, but yield fully to and
derive advantage from neither. In their indecision, they some-
times adopt several contradictory or irreconcileable plans, and of
course they fail in all. Thus they are turning from purpose to
purpose, floundering amidst difficulties and unyielding circum-
stances, striving in vain to make opposing plans and. conditions
harmonize together.
Indiscretion.?Akin to the last class are the indiscreet, who
likewise labour under a disproportion of mental development and
action. They have indistinct perceptions, but are impatient of
investigation. They have active imaginations, which to them
seem to compensate for the want of persevering cultivation of the
perceptive faculties and of cautious comparison. They have a
habit of rapid deduction, and draw ready and bold inferences from
few and insufficient data. They are the people whom the philo-
sopher describes as learning a few facts, guessing at many more,
and jumping at a conclusion. They form their opinions without
knowing or considering all, and perhaps not even the most im-
portant, facts that should be regarded. They arrange their plans
and conduct their business, they manage themselves and their
affairs, with the same imperfect regard to the facts and circum-
stances that should govern them, as they manifest in the forma-
tion of their opinions, and they are necessarily unsuccessful.
On account oftheirloose habits of reasoning, and proneness to
form hasty opinions, these are considered by their associates as
men of unreliable and even unsound judgment. Their mental
condition is not insanity, but, in some of its phases, there is a
great similarity between them. There is a want of a due distri-
bution of force and activity among their mental faculties. They
especially lack the necessary activity of the reason to correct their
errors of judgment. And though their opinions may be often
changed, they discover no mistake in the process through which
.they are formed. This class, therefore, rarely improve. On the
contrary, there is danger that this disproportionate activity of
their imagination and slowness of their reason will increase, dis-
turbing the balance of their minds more and more, and rendering
their judgment less and less sound through the progress of
?years.
4*/>
AND THE UNBALANCED MIND TO PRODUCE INSANITY. 439
Love of Excitement. ? The unbalanced mind is sometimes
manifested in love of excitement?in the uneasy restlessness of
those who do not find sufficient motive of action in the ordinary
affairs of life, and the usual interests and affections of home.
These persons crave something out of the common course. As
the intemperate want alcoholic drink to stimulate their bodies to
action, and feel languid without it, so these desire some enlivening
circumstance, event, or company, to give activity to their minds
and buoyancy to their feelings.
At their homes, and in their own families, they are compara-
tively languid and listless. Some of them are not interested in
domestic affairs ; and, when no strangers are with them, some are
careless as to their manners, and negligent as to their dress.
Interested in no occupation, they dawdle away their time, which,
for the want of satisfactory employment, passes wearily onward
from one opportunity of indulging their excitability to another.
When in company or abroad, they are lively, bright, and joyous.
Their spirits are full of energy, and their minds are active, and
they are acceptable companions in society. But when they
return to their homes, or when their company departs, they sink
again to their usual languor and indifference. Many of these are
fond of amusements, and especially those of a public nature.
They love the theatre or concerts; they frequent the lecture-
rooms, or other places of general gatherings of the people ; they
are found in places of public promenade; they take advantage of
whatever opportunity may be within their reach to indulge their
taste for new means of excitement.
Some demand even greater changes than these: they want
changes of home. At one season, they go on distant journeys ;
at another, their dwelling is at the sea-shore; and anon they visit
the mountains. They go from the city to the country, and from
the country to the city. These changes, which the well-balanced
mind only wants as occasional relaxations from protracted labour
or care, seem to the restless lover of excitement to be necessary
aliment of satisfactory life. Others are more quiet in their phy-
sical habits, but yet have the same mental restlessness. Some
find means of gratifying their excitability in reading novels and
tales of thrilling interest, some in reading newspapers, some in
the agitations of politics, in hearing and telling news, in the gos-
sipry of the neighbourhood.
This varying course and habit of life, the alternations from
excitement to languor and from languor to excitement, succes-
sively, is exhausting to both the physical and mental constitu-
tion. If the excitability is indulged and cultivated, it grows
more and more; the mind becomes more dependent on some
external and stimulating influence for its lively enjoyment, and
440 TENDENCY OF MISDIRECTED EDUCATION
grows more languid in tlie interval, and then the ordinary
affairs, the humdrum of every-day life, grow less and less inte-
resting, and even burdensome; the mind is dull, and the temper
may become irritable and peevish.
After years of this indulgence, in some persons, pleasures,
company, and novelties pall upon the heart; the mind is wearied
with that on which it feasted before, and sinks into permanent
languor, or becomes so unstable in action that reason loses its
power by any effort to direct it.
The frivolous have similar elements of error. They have no
elevation of purpose, no stability of character, nor perseverance
in action. They are satisfied with small and temporary matters.
They are unwilling to take upon themselves the heavy responsi-
bilities of life and society. They trifle with serious things, and
treat grave interests with levity. Their delight is in present
amusement, the idle occupation of the hour, and beyond this
they feel no anxiety. Their unbalanced minds wither with tlieir
exhaustive activity, and they faint beneath any burdens that may
be laid upon them. The pursuit of pleasure and all amusement,
when followed as a principal object, and not as an occasional
relaxation from the business of life, both tend to the same result
?they waste the mental powers, and exhaust the moral force,
and leave their devotee in a state of helpless imbecility.
Eccentricity.?A fondness for notoriety is a tempting passion
for some, but it is dangerous to the balance of mind, and often
destructive to mental soundness. A perverted taste, a false esti-
mate of themselves and of mankind, or a desire in some way or
other to be noticed, leads some to assume habits of thought, or
speech, or of body, which will distinguish them as different from
the world amidst which they live. From the man who burned
the temple of Epliesus that the world might know and remember
him, to the College youth who kept a coffin in his room to make
his acquaintances stare, men have sought, in manifold ways, to
attract attention, and to impress themselves upon others. One
is habitually gruff in his manners; one violates the ordinary forms
of politeness. Another is peculiar in the form, or colour, or
material of his clothing. One affects to be remarkably sincere,
and gives opinions and states facts out of place and out of season;
or he loves to differ in opinions on ordinary matters, and to say
strange and startling things, or, by some other singularity of
thought, or language, or conduct, he manifests his eccentricity to
the little or great world who surround him.
The greater part of these peculiarities are voluntary, at least in
the beginning, but they are established by repetition; habit
makes the eccentric mode of speaking, or thinking, or action, the
easiest, and then, perhaps, without intention, or even thought,
1}
1
AND THE UNBALANCED MIND TO PRODUCE INSANITY. 441
tlie odd man presents liimself in this manner to his associates,
with little power to control and direct his thoughts and actions
as other men do. In this class there is a want of mental disci-
pline, a defective action of the reasoning faculty. They do not
compare themselves with others; or, if they do, they do not see that,
although they attract observation, they fail to secure respect and
confidence. They do not discover that the world values its own
opinions and customs most, and that whosoever violates the least
of the requirements of the average common sense makes himself
suspected of a liability, at least, to violate any or all of even the
greater matters of that law, and is to that extent unsound in
mind.
There is a natural and a just ground for distrusting the sound-
ness of the judgment of those who allow any sort of oddity in
themselves, or in whom it is even involuntarily manifested. If
the reasoning faculty is resisted and set aside in one thing, it
may be in another. If self-esteem, will, or caprice, rise above it
at any time, and claim to interfere with the balance-wheel, they
will do the same at any other time, whenever occasion may seem
to them to require. The reason which is dethroned, or the judg-
ment which is impaired, in connexion with any eccentricity that
is adopted or allowed, loses the certainty of its paramount autho-
rity, and may fall again at any time.
Self-esteem.?Self-esteem in many ways disturbs the mental
balance. It makes self the most active principle of faith and
action. It gives a value to whatever proceeds from, or is con-
nected with, self. It makes the perceptive faculties and the
reason alike its servants. It allows the one to discover so much
as is in harmony with it, and the other to make only such com-
parisons as will exhibit self to the best advantage, and never
that which would mortify it.
Believing in themselves first, those in whom self-esteem is
active are averse to laborious investigation and the slow process
of reason, for they feel that they are sure to be right in their
conclusions, whatever may be their foundation. They therefore
draw inferences boldly from new facts, and form opinions freely
upon subjects of which they have but little knowledge, and ad-
here to them with firmness, and speak of them with confidence.
They are opinionated, and love to talk oracularly. They are
sometimes fond of argumentation, and desire to impress their
opinions upon others ; and thus they become dogmatists. But
their careless habits of reasoning and induction fail to convince
others of that in which they have undoubting confidence.
They are impatient of contradiction, because that is an im-
peachment of their fundamental principle?faith in themselves.
They are apt to become boasters, for they think their own acts
/fu
442 TENDENCY OF MISDIRECTED EDUCATION
and acquirements are as important to others as, in their own
eyes, they seem to be. Striving thus to grapple with subjects
which they cannot understand, or which they do not use the
proper means to master, struggling in positions where they must
often fail, their minds sometimes stagger, their mental balance
may be entirely lost, and need a healing process to restore it.
Malignant Passions.?All the evil passions?anger, violent
temper, hatred, malice, envy, and jealousy?are even more inju-
rious to the balance of the mind than any of the merely mental
disproportions. While these are in action, they absorb the whole
man, his emotions and mind. They direct the perceptive facul-
ties, they control the reason, and subvert the judgment. A man
in a passion sees in the object of his anger those qualities, and
only those, which he wants to see, and his imagination fills up
the rest with such as correspond to his own state of feeling. He
clothes his antagonist in a garb of his own creation, and then
finds undoubted proof that he is wrong. The one offensive point
stands for the whole, and those which are true and acceptable are
overlooked. The paroxysm of rage may be but momentary, yet
it is violent, and gives a shock to the whole mental and moral
constitution. The feelings remain disturbed, the reason does not
at once regain its ascendancy, but continues, for some time, the
servant of the exciting and the maddening passions.
Malignity, hatred, jealousy, and envy are less violent, but
more abiding. They have the perceptions and the reason less
exclusively under their control, yet they have these powers more
or less at their command, and influence the judgment. They
enter into, and form a part of, the estimate of objects. They cer-
tainly disturb the balance-wheel of the mind, and leave it to run
irregularly and uncertainly.
Let us now hear the conclusion of the whole matter. All the
original and natural endowments of humanity, the mental and
the moral powers, are distributed unequally among men. These
are frequently irregularly developed, disproportionately exercised,
and are often misapplied; they therefore need great discretion for
their education in the beginning, and constant watchfulness and
discipline for their government through life. The lower powers?
the appetites, the passions, and the propensities?are by nature
sufficiently active, and constantly seeking gratification. If in-
dulged, they grow to an unhealthy extent. In some they grow
exorbitantly, and even destructively. Therefore, they constantly
need the control of reason and the supervision of the con-
science to restrain them within the bounds appointed to them
for the good of the whole.
From all these catses, singly or combined in many complica-
AND THE UNBALANCED MIND TO PRODUCE INSANITY. 443
tions, there arise manifold varieties of waywardness, which we
meet, in some form or other, in every society.
In all these persons the balance of mind is more or less dis-
turbed, and the soundness of judgment is more or less vitiated.
From all proceed at times, opinions, language, or acts, that,
taken by themselves, would be deemed insane.
All these perversities are subject to the law of growth by in-
dulgence and cultivation, all disturb or weaken the reason in
various degrees, and all tend to overthrow it completely and pro-
duce an acknowledged insanity. The danger of those who allow
them is not outward, but inward. Their enemies are they of their
own household. They go from strength to strength of wayward-
ness, and from weakness to weakness of judgment, until it is lost.
The whole of these classes which we have here described con-
stitute a pyramid of error. The lower stratum, or larger class,
is composed of those who are educated imperfectly, or for undue
purposes of present being; in whom some of the mental or moral
elements are left dormant, and others energized and quickened to
a disproportionate action; whose education either negatively fails
to fit them, or positively unfits them, for the world and its un-
avoidable circumstances. The next stratum is composed of those
who start with, or at any time adopt, wrong notions of life and
of its responsibilities?of what they may gain, and of what they
must endure.
After and above these are those whose minds, in the progress
of life, from manifold causes, and in numberless ways, become
unbalanced to a greater or less extent; who are struggling to
accomplish impossible purposes, or to gain things beyond their
reach; of whom some are quailing in'disappointment or wither-
ing into weakness, and others are approaching, or even standing
upon, the confines of mental disorder.
The apex of the pyramid is crowned with those whose reason
has fallen in the straggle, and in whom insanity is established.
Considering how richly nature has endowed humanity, and
how long, perfect, and happy a life she has offered to man and to
woman the means and the opportunity of obtaining, by educa-
tion, by instruction, and by self-discipline, it is melancholy to see
how many there are who belong to this pyramid of error, of weak-
ness, and of perversity. There are few persons of so limited
observation as not to find within their own range some who are
walking in these dangerous paths of waywardness?whose minds
are in some measure unbalanced?who are in some degree the sub-
jects of passion, and temper, and propensity?who are more or less
influenced or even governed by caprice, undisciplined feeling, or
unfitting desires.
Some of these have little or no firmness of purpose?some are
444 ON THE PARALYSIS OF THE INSANE.
immovably obstinate, wilful, and headstrong?some have no
plans of life, and others have plans that cannot be reconciled to
the circumstances that must surround them. In some there is a
restless seeking for that which they cannot obtain, or which they
cannot enjoy when they reach it. Some give an undue impor-
tance to whatever interests their feelings, and make mountains of
molehills; others frivolously trifle with grave matters, and make
molehills of mountains. But they are all travelling in that road
everywhere strewed with error and failure, and where insanity often
lies; and although, perhaps, only a small portion of them may
arrive at that terrible end of reason's reign, yet they are all, in
greater or less degree, unsound in mind; they are all, more or
less, prominent candidates for lunacy ; and no one is safe who
thus allows his mental balance-wheel ever to be disturbed.
The general attention is so little directed to these dangers?so
few are educated to meet and escape them?the public conscience
is so little trained to feel responsible for mental health, that when
insanity, through any of these ways, comes upon one, the friends
are taken by surprise ; they speak of the mysterious ways of Pro-
vidence, and wonder that one so gay, so hopeful, should be bereft
of reason.
But, as the abundant weeds and the stinted grain in the
farmer's field are plainly chargeable to negligent or unskilful
cultivation, or as spendthrift habits lead to poverty, so the in-
sanity of many is plainly referable to the misdirected education
which their parents gave them, to the unfitting habits which
they established, or to the unbalanced mind which they culti-
vated.
