The Condition of the Insane
=============================
-
:Author:  JOHN HAWKES, M.R.C.S., ETC.

If one particular feature of the epoch in which we live deserves
to be characterized as a " sign of the times," there can he no
hesitation in denoting the general attention and almost universal
sympathy with which our insane are regarded as a striking
circumstance in the history of this present age, directly pointing,
as it does, to the influence of increasing Christian civilization in
ameliorating the condition of all mankind, and of promoting
among its different classes a kindly spirit of mutual regard,
leading to the exercise of those heaven-born virtues through
which man, not content with raising himself, stretches forth his
hands to lift his fallen brother to the dignity of a lord of the
creation.

We need not the perusal of reports to assure us how heavy
must be the burden of insanity to a nation; but those who least
regard the matter may well be appalled to hear that in England
and Wales there are 21,311 insane persons under treatment in
various asylums; there are some, perhaps, besides these, beyond
the cognizance of Government inspectors, and, in addition, it may
be feared many mental aliens are at large on society. It is
therefore almost impossible to arrive at a positive appreciation of
the amount of insanity existing under different forms throughout
the country. It will suffice, however, for my purpose to consider
this army of insane under two chief divisions?first, those that
are met with in the hands of private individuals; and, secondly,
such as are treated in the wards of public asylums. Of the
former, we are informed by the last Report of the Commissioners
in Lunacy, there are 2578 in metropolitan, and 2598 in provincial
licensed houses. Out of one hundred and sixteen private asylums,
not more than forty-six are entrusted to the hands of persons
destitute of any professional qualification; these are doubtless
humane and enlightened men and women, whose high aim it is
to promote the restoration of reason to their unhappy patients,
and to "comfort the feeble-minded," quite irrespective of any
other considerations, though there may be some cause for appre-
hension that, amidst the anxieties attendant on so important a
charge, precepts of trade are not wholly ignored, nor a little
brisk business, strongly partaking of speculation, altogether disre-
garded ; that even under luxurious refinement lurks gilded
misery, and in the chambers of first-class patients the air of a
commercial enterprise;?else why these advertisements setting
forth in glowing eulogy the sweet Elysium, or why the trumpet-
tongued announcement bidding patients walk up hither ? It is
scarcely affirming too much to say that the greater number of
such establishments are little short of private hotels, and that
the benevolent proprietor or landlord sees no harm in mixing
up philanthropy and trade; indeed, if he can lay claim to a
slight degree of taste, it is even possible his house may possess
external features, at least, rather pleasing, provided the illusion
is not too abruptly dispelled by some enormity in the decorative
department; for there can be nothing more painful to look upon
than one of these houses "licensed for the reception of the
insane," plastered and painted in the highest style of embellish-
ment, and surrounded by gaudy flowers, while through the
narrow, small-paned windows come groans and sighs, or curses
long and loud ; pale, speechless faces peering through iron bars,
and restless eyes, which once shone with love and gladness,
gleaming forth in frenzied woe. Equally sad, perhaps more so,
to witness a place of detention for the mental afflicted, in that
state of dilapidation which says so plain "'tis not worth laying out
a sixpence on the property, for the sombre, damp-stained walls
are half-concealed by straggling, ill-grown trees, and all around
an air of desolation. The " large and extensive pleasure grounds,"
overrun with nettles and long rank grass, and the paths, untrodden
by human feet, are green with moss and slime. Could we get
round to the back of the premises, more than one window would be
seen boarded up to within a foot of the top, while a few remaining
fragments of glass testify to the raving madness of some former
occupant of that dreary apartment. And though, for the sake of
humanity, we may hope such establishments are few and far
between, it is well to remember that till within the present half
century this was by no means the case; and much as we have
advanced in the treatment of our insane, both in public and
private asylums, there yet remains a great deal to be accom-
plished before we can be beyond reproach. Let us never forget
the debt we owe to the early champions of reform. Under their
gallant leadership, the onward current of public opinion has swept
away many foul and cruel abominations, which full long held
their sway; but the name of Pinel will remain to future
ages emblazoned, with undying lustre, in his country s scroll
of fame. Genius alone may command respect, scientific skill
90 the condition of the insane.

may claim admiration, but philanthropy that spends and is
spent in the cause of humanity deserves our highest praise. It
is, indeed, refreshing to turn for a moment from considering
the wretched shifts and unprincipled expedients of worthless,
low-minded men, who traffic in the harrowing misfortunes
of madness, and drive bargains with friends hardly less to be
pitied than the miserable objects of peculation?it is, I say,
delightful to turn away from such as these to contemplate the
pure, unselfish devotion of those influenced by higher and purer
motives; but though the vast results of their humane exertions
are readily obtained by the wealthy, and are even consecrated
to charity, a large and important section of the community,
known as the middle class, is placed in some degree beyond the
direct influence of good which ever surrounds, as a halo of light,
the labours of the true physician. It should be remembered,
until of late years, how large a proportion of the licensed houses
consisted of second-rate establishments?mere lodging-houses for
the moral restraint of the insane. Their inmates are generally
respectable tradesmen, or professional men of reduced means :
occasionally, persons of considerable property are placed by
considerate friends within their walls. The proprietor, if not
himself a tradesman?either a retired victualler, gardener, or
ambitious cobbler, as I have known to be the case?will probably
be a member of the medical profession, who, from psychological
zeal, broken health, or disinclination for more arduous profes-
sional pursuits, has applied himself to this calling. I cannot
help thinking, if all proprietors were required to possess a
medical education, it would be better for those consigned to
their care. However this may be, it was seldom that men of
great psychological talent, or otherwise highly gifted, were at the
head of these establishments ; indeed it is well when the medical
officer, or superintendent, was not simply a puppet in the hands of
an unscrupulous speculator, who really managed the asylum.
From the consideration of these facts, a forcible argument can be
deduced in favour of ameliorating the condition of middle-class
patients, by placing them, at moderate charges, under the care
of able men, qualified by education and experience, and chosen
in virtue of their high attainments, for the discharge of this high
function. The best method of effecting this object will next
engage our attention. An establishment calculated for the
reception of insane persons from the middle ranks of society,
formed on a similar plan to that of a proprietary college, with
working regulations, somewhat in the manner of our best public
asylums ; the whole invested in the hands of shareholders, or
subscribers, who would govern by a committee of directors,
having, as above stated, a resident medical superintendent, with
additional officers as in other institutions. Here is a step from
the narrow despotism of an ignorant or unprincipled proprietor
to the comparative freedom and wholesome management of a
little republic. One individual mind would no longer be per-
mitted to cramp the healthy working of the whole, nor to fetter,
with jealous regulations, the energetic will of an earnest and
devoted officer ; but all may " work together for good/' inspired
by unanimous principles, and having one end in view. Indeed, I
am of opinion that the plan here advocated, viz., a large pro-
prietary institution, containing three or four hundred souls?not
more, perhaps less?is the best, under certain conditions, that can
be devised for the required purpose. In an asylum of this kind
every guarantee must exist for the right treatment of its
inmates : there can be no attempt at dishonesty, if the reports
of its committees'are duly submitted to public inspection; neither
can inefficient medical aid be a hindrance or defect, if the
managers take pains to select an officer of reputed acquirements
in this department of his profession. And here I may take
occasion to suggest an alteration in the titles affixed, in the
present system of asylum government, to the principal officer of
the institution. The term " Superintendent," though good
enough in the days of leg-locks and keepers, seems hardly in
accordance with the duties of one whose special province it is to
" Fetter strong madness in a silken thread?

Charm ache with air, and agony with words ;
and I have reason to believe it is indirectly repudiated by some
?f the most enlightened physicians in charge of public asylums.
" Principal," or " Senior Medical Officer," is more in keeping
with the views of the present day. The latter implies that
another medical officer is resident in the house. AA ith t lat
liberality of sentiment characteristic of a learned profession, the
second, or junior officer, may aptly be termed " V lce-rnncipa ,
?.r " House Surgeon." In very few asylums, the questionable
title of " Medical Assistant" is assigned him, as though under
any other name he would approach too near the dignity of the
chief m command. The more general title of Assistant
Medical Officer" is, however, less objectionable. Some^ exception
has been taken, I believe, to the name of " Matron, but it is
difficult to find a better ; perhaps that of " Mistress, or in some
cases " Lady Superintendent," may be considered preferable.
alter all, it matters little?

" A. rose by any name would smell as sweet.
Lastly, the appellation of " Steward" may advantageously be
exchanged for " Manciple," as strictly in keeping with ancient
92 the condition of the insane.

custom, and equally applicable to the duties . of his office. I
shall not venture further to sketch the outlines of a system such
as now suggested, but will rather quote a striking and interesting
account of an asylum, somewhat of this kind, in Flanders, taken
from a review by the talented pen of Dr Lockhart Robinson, in
a late number of the " Asylum Journal?

" It is an old and picturesque building, and part of it being castel-
lated and constructed on a bridge which crosses the canal, it has the
appearance of an ancient fortress. One side rises from a green turf
bank on the water's edge, and the old dark, russet wal1 is partly covered
with ivy, from which peep out the battlements crowning it. The gate
is studded with nails, but scarcely in consequence of the present use of
the house, as kind and gentle usage of the mental afflicted has here
entirely superseded force and restraint. Nevertheless, there are up-
wards of three hundred alienees in this house, under the superintend-
ence of forty sisters. The patients are of three classes or grades in
society. The most numerous is, of course, that of the indigens ; next
in number is that of the bourgeoisie, or middle class, who pay a mode-
rate sum, and enjoy the advantage of semi-private apartments; and
lastly, that of persons of family and fortune, who can, if they please,
be accommodated with salons, cliambres a couches,and cabinets de toilette,
as elegant as anything to which they have been accustomed in their
own luxurious abodes. Besides these divisions, there are special wards,
padded rooms, and private gardens for those whose condition renders
them dangerous and undesirable companions for the rest. The house
is very extensive, and we were occupied a long time in merely walking
over it. Above the cloister, which, as it were, lines the quadrangle,
is an outer gallery, very prettily trellised and intertwined with creepers,
serving both for ornament and security. There is an aumonier, and
mass is said daily in the chapel, to which the inmates are allowed
access at all times Of the lower class of patients, those who
are sufficiently sane are employed in various ways in the menage. A
large number were employed in washing in the laundry Of the
second class, about forty were manufacturing lace, and appeared per-
fectly rational; this lace is all sold for their own benefit, and the pro-
ceeds serve to supply them with such little douceurs as the charity
cannot afford them. In another room, some were making clothes for
their own wear, while parties of others were amusing themselves with
cards or dominoes. Of the upper class, many remain in their own
apartments, either from choice or because they are not fit to leave them ;
but about half-a-dozen were seated in an arbour formed in their own
private garden, which is very tastefully laid out. One or two were
engaged in fancy work, two were conversing apparently very rationally,
and another was reading. A sister was with them. The Rev. Mother
told me these were all jpersonnes de consideration. There is a common
dining-room for these patients, where all who are not confined to their
own apartments meet for meals, unless, as in some cases, they prefer
solitude.

* " Flemish Interiors." Longman. 1856.

However peculiar this picture may appear to our English
notions, there are many points therein shown which deserve our
imitation. I will say nothing of the laudable devotion of these
Sisters of Mercy. Our own country has evinced her ability to send
forth women no less distinguished for the highest attributes of their
sex, as for every Christian virtue ; and we may be sure if ever a
cry should be raised from the dwellings of those afflicted with the
direst of human calamities?if it shall be proclaimed that the
nursing hand of woman must distinguish the treatment of the
insane?then we shall witness a spectacle such as described in the
passages above quoted, where religion, self-devotion, and heroism
of no common type, combine to render the weaker sex ministering
angels of God. It must have occurred to those who entertain
feelings of pity and sympathy for their poorer neighbours, that
many, from inability to maintain a relative as they could wish
under private treatment, are constrained to consign that beloved
one, whether parent, husband, or child, to the wards of the county
asylum, where he is left to struggle through the fell disease,
associating with others below him in social standing, and who are
little disposed to make allowance?if, poor souls, they could?for
his sensitive or sorrowing mind. I have known some instances of
this, where the affliction must cut, if possible, with a double edge?
wounding the self-respect of the patient, who feels his degradation;
and galling to the proper pride of his relatives, who for the first
time become dependents on public charity. To meet this evil, I
particularly uphold the system of proprietary asylums, as one
under which those who are much above pauperism, and yet, from
some circumstances, are unable to bear the expense of a good
private "retreat," may be admitted to the advantages_of skilful
medical aid, with liberal and humane treatment, without the
pain of losing caste, or suffering the additional pang which a
pauper's dress may entail. This will appear at first ratliei a
difficult problem \ let us see how it may best be solved. ^ The
simplest plan for affording accommodation to non-paying residents
in any community, must evidently be by placing the burden of
their keep on the shoulders of the rest; and, in an establishment
of the kind we are now considering, this could be easily managed
by common foresight and judgment, in so arranging the scale of
charges that a certain number, say five per cent., should receive
themselves the gratuitous benefit of the institution. In course
of time, we may reasonably expect charitable persons, governors
and others, would bequeath sums of money for the purpose of
creating, by endowment, additional freeholds, as they may be
termed, to be filled by deserving cases, answering very much to
scholarships in our universities, by aid of which many a pooi
scliolai has become a great man, and lived to bless the foundei.
What an opportunity for the noble employment of wealth ! what
ripe occasion for putting one's hand and seal to a life of good
works, would such a scheme afford !?opportunity and occasion
that many a dying man would grasp with joy, over whose tomb
should be shed the grateful tears of the afflicted and destitute,
to whom he had shown himself a brother and a friend. The
middle class, when overtaken by insanity, is, as a rule, more to be
pitied than the poor; for the professional man must then ex-
change the comforts of his home, and the kind attention of friends,
for the barren consolation of strangers and the discipline of a
madhouse. Even where no real cruelty exists, there is too often
the painful apprehension present, and the feelings of enforced
subserviency to the dictum of a master whose humanity is sus-
pected or questioned. On the other hand, the labouring man is
removed from his squalid home of sorrow to a clean, well-kept
asylum; trained attendants, carefully watched, wait upon him;
full meals of well-cooked food are supplied him, and some
degree of cheerfulness reigns around. While mixing with the rest,
he has opportunities for forgetting, in part, his trouble. The
social and domestic habits of this latter class are also very much
in his favour. Accustomed to render obedience to the authority
of their employers, the discipline of asylum government, rigorous
though it may be, is no fresh trial; and, moreover, habituated
as the poor are to holding their griefs in common, it becomes a
less difficult matter to find some among his new comrades who
will listen to his tale of tears, than in the case of the better
educated, more elevated member of society, who, from the common
exclusive habits of our Saxon race, is little wont to make others
companions to his distress, or to pour his complaints into the ears
of strangers. Thus the latter is more isolated, and less disposed
to forget his melancholy by mixing in the crowd; while from his
position, hard labour, as husbandry and other useful occupations,
which can be rendered to a certain degree compulsory in a pauper
asylum, must be mainly left to his natural taste or disposition.

Therefore the position of the insane pauper, supposing him to
rank rightly in the lower, or labouring class, is in some respects
essentially superior to that of the more educated man, especially
if the latter has not the means of diverting his mind by those
pastimes and indulgences which the affluent can alone enjoy.
Here we see the want of suitable accommodation for the mentally
afflicted in the middle class of society?a want, the pressing re-
quirements of which are such, that neither time should be lost
nor expense spared in removing the evil and reproach. It is time
indeed that the middle classes should protect themselves from evils
which by sufferance must increase. It is vain to wait while all
around are bestirring themselves and girding on their armour;
while the luxurious tendencies of the wealthy are inducing their
own sure results, the natural appetites of the lower classes are
becoming daily keener and less readily satisfied. Their intellects,
sharpened by want, and a high-pressure system of education
such as our fathers never dreamed of, must sooner or later
bring them in collision with those immediately above them.
But already the warning note has sounded; the slow upheaving of
society has excited general attention; and a safety-valve has been
opened, whereby the dangerous pressure on the condensed
middle class ?will be for a while obviated or lessened. We
now hear everywhere of " middle class educationthe uni-
versities, those elderly maiden sisters who have so long guarded
the keys of knowledge, begin to take alarm. Awaking, they ask,
"What is this ? "What must we do ? Yexatious and absurd regulations
that have effectually barred the profession of arms from the
sons of poor gentlemen, seem now about to be removed ; while the
opening out of our colonies, and the increased accommodation
of the world, to speak metaphorically, must serve to relieve a
dangerous plethora throughout all branches of the community.
Another and still more forcible argument for the erection of
proprietary asylums, in which the treatment of mental diseases
shall be conducted on a system superior to any at present in
vogue, will conclude this part of my subject. It is a fact, only
too well known to those who are conversant with the practice of
insanity, that many cases which, by early'and judicious treat-
ment, might have been restored to health, have, through neglect,
or the untimely employment of remedies, degenerated into
chronic mania and imbecility. This truth, which cannot be too
widely disseminated, has again and again been brought forward
to show the penny-wise and pound-foolish policy of poor-law
guardians, who too frequently neglect placing a patient in the
county asylum till his malady has become confirmed, while by
heed to the early symptoms, and with due treatment, the indi-
vidual might have been saved to his country and friends. But
if instances of this woeful or wilful negligence are occasionally
brought forward at the committees of public asylums, who can
tell how many hundreds or thousands of private esses have, for
want of timely recognition and the adoption of prompt measures,
been irrecoverably lost ? The desolate and empty mind, like
some ruined castle abandoned to decay, that once by the em-
ployment of common skill might have saved from destruction,
is now, alas ! too far gone. Never can architect's hand replace
that gilded capital; the ornate hall may never smile again.
Who has not seen, and almost wept to view, that marvellous
piece of creation, the human eye, marred by disease ? The
delicate and transparent cornea, through which has poured in
by-gone days visions of light and beauty, now clouded and dull;
the inner chamber a wreck, like the boudoir of a palace with its
mirrors broken, its tapestry torn, its costly graces dimmed ; and
this sad havoc from no sudden, fierce invasion of disease, nor the
fatal injury of a moment, but slow, continued, prolonged, and
perhaps untreated because unrecognised. Such has been the pro-
gress of events which have ended in total ruin. And thus with
the mind : that wondrous web of fine-spun fibre which Ave term
the brain, has received, unknown, and hence unheeded, a fatal
strain; or, in the natural progress of disease throughout the
system, it becomes the seat of mischief, though the nature of this
change, at once subtle and mysterious, is not, I may almost say
cannot, be known ; but now events occur which, to the educated
eye, bespeak the presence of disease?-just as the foul tongue or
accelerated pulse tell of a vitiated or feverish body, so the wan-
dering eye, the failing memory, the muffled speech, tell of
causes at work which may end only in death. But what if, by
early treatment, the dread result be changed to life and health ?
"What if disease be driven from its citadel, and forced to evacuate
its hold ? What, in short, if man has it in his power to turn
nature backward, and to keep, for a season, death itself at bay ?
Is this nothing ? Is it not rather everything ? and should we not
hasten to avail ourselves of the advantage which a timely inter-
ference will give us for quelling, perhaps for ever, the direst of
human disorders ? It is only by the early treatment of insanity
that we can reasonably hope to effect a lasting cure : vain
is our attempt to pull down what fell disease has reared,
should we come late to the task. Here, as everywhere,
we must begin in time. It is not the fault of medicine if
the public, from mistaken motives of economy, or a desire to
keep well in spite of their malady, refuse to seek medical
relief till the hour for active treatment has passed. Too often the
hapless patient lies prostrate under the shadow of the grim king,
the physician meanwhile seeking in vain for aught but a Eutha-
nasia, In diseases, so called, of the mind, this most pernicious
delay often results from a wish to keep the poor sufferer at home,
under the impression that if removed to an asylum his recovery
may be indefinitely postponed; or from a conscious inability on
the part of his friends to place him in skilful hands. Here the
talent and resources of a first-class institution, with the moderate
charge of an ordinary second-rate one, would afford no excuse,
and probably none would be wanted, for delaying to begin the
cure. Much more may be added to this argument to prove the
moral obligations under which we all live, not only to assist, but
also to provide for and against common disasters and affliction to
which, as one family, we are liable; let it suffice, however, that
we bear in mind the consideration of our duties as neighbours,
one to the other, and remember that in providing for the safety
and well-being of others we provide for our own. A change
is urgently required, and the sooner it is brought about the
better for us all.
