Lunacy Legislation
===================

THE JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE AND MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
| j' ^ OCTOBER 1, 1858.
Art. I.?

:Author: Forbes Winslow, M.D., D.C.L.

Being the Valedictory Acldress at the Meeting of the Association of Medical Officers of Asylums
for the Insane at Edinburgh. July, 1858.
Before proceeding to the consideration of the special subject of
my address, and resigning into the hands of my illustrious suc-
cessor the distinguished office with which you honoured me when
we met in 1857, at Derby, I would beg to congratulate you on
our holding this year our usual annual meeting in this justly
renowned and classical city.

I cannot conceal from you the great pleasure and gratification
which I feel individually, and in which I am sure you all parti-
cipate, in having this opportunity of meeting on their own native
soil not only the members of this, but of the British Medical
Association residing north of the Tweed, but of having the pri-
vilege of renewing acquaintance with the many distinguished and
honoured members of our profession living in this illustrious and
far-famed seat of learning.

Gentlemen, we tread on sacred and hallowed ground; we
breathe an atmosphere redolent of sweet poetry and of wild, fas-
cinating romance; we hold sweet communion and holy converse
with art, literature, and science, in their most exalted types and
noblest forms. A halo of genius gilds and encircles every object
upon which we fix our attention; associations of the most
touching and thrilling character gush upon the mind wherever
we turn our steps; we are in the cradle of genius, the emporium
of science, the great school of art, the Academic groves of lite-
rature and philosophy?

" Hail, Caledonia, name for ever dear,
Before whose sons we're honoured to appear;
Where every science, every noble art,
That can inform the mind or move the heart
Is known *

Philosophy, no idle pedant's dream,
Here holds her search, by Heaven-taught Reason's beam."
Need I say more to awaken .in your minds the warmest enthu-
siasm, than to remind you of the fact that we are in the country
rendered immortal by the resplendent genius of a Burns and a
Walter Scott? How often have Ave confessed ourselves spell-
bound by the magic wand of these great and illustrious poets!
How much of our fondest hopes, our boyish affections, our yearn-
ings after the good and the beautiful, our aspirations for worldly
fame and distinction, are closely interwoven with the wonderful
creations of these mighty gifted men ! How the mention of their
names brings back to the heart the earliest of our most pleasing,
and perhaps sad and painful associations! As we thread our
way through this city of enchantment, and gaze on our right and
on our left, to the
" Distant hills,
From hidden summits fed xoiih rills"
to those many sacred spots enshrined by genius, the memories of
the glories of the past rush back to the heart with all the fresh-
ness of an early spring. Bidding adieu to the realms of sweet
poesy and romance, and considering graver matters of contem-
plation, the renowned names of Robert Bruce and William Wallace
suggest themselves instinctively to our minds. Great, brave,
illustrious, and generous warriors, we now pay homage to your
"virtues and your valour, and worship at your slirine!
Turning from the contemplation of martial glory to the more
unostentatious cultivators of science and philosophy, we find in
the annals of their great country the names of men pre-eminently
?distinguished as mathematicians, natural philosophers, logicians,
?statesmen, geologists, metaphysicians, historians, and jurists,
'both among the professorships and students of the University.
I will take the liberty of referring to a few of the more distin-
guished men who have either held office in the University of
Edinburgh, or have been educated within its walls. Among the
renowned students and graduates of the University of Edinburgh
?connected with our own profession are the following:?Dr John
Brown, founder of the Brunonian system of medicine; Dr.
'George Cheyne; William Hunter, brother of the late John
Hunter ; Sir John Pringle ; Dr James Abercrombie ; Sir Gilbert
Blane; Dr Andrew Combe; and Dr John Eeid. Among the
celebrated professors, we find the names of the great Cullen,
author of the " First Linesthe two Duncans, one Professor of
Mathematics, and the second of the Institutes of Medicine; Dr.
Hope, Chemistry; Sir E. N. Sibbald, Practice of Physic; the
two Hamiltons, Alex, and James; Dr Plummer; John Thomp-
son, Professor of Military Surgery; Dr James Gregory, Profes-
sor of the Practice of Physic ; the Monros, primus, secundus,
and tertius; Dr Black, immortalized by his discoveries of latent
heat; Sir Charles Bell; and Robert Liston. The latter, although
not officially connected with the University, was a distinguished
surgical lecturer in this city. In the list of eminent and illus-
trious men who were educated in this University, I find the names
of Dr Hugh Blair; James Boswell, immortalized by his "Life
of Johnson ;" Sir W. Scott; Professor Wilson, known to the
public as Christopher North, who was Professor of Moral Philo-
sophy; and Francis, afterwards Lord Jeffrey. Among the cele-
brated historians are David Hume; Henry; Robertson, made
famous by his celebrated " History of America and Scotland," as
well as the "Life and Times of Charles the Fifth of Spain;" and
Sir Jas. Mackintosh, author of the " Political History of the Last
Century." Among the metaphysicians were Reid, Drs. Tlios.
Brown, Dugald Stewart, and Sir W. Hamilton. In divinity, Dr.
Chalmers stands prominently forward; and as a celebrated jurist
the name of Erskine, the author of the " Institutes," is entitled
to our profound respect. Among the eminent natural philoso-
phers, statesmen, and others distinguished in literature, the fol-
lowing honoured names maybe mentioned:?Adam Fergusson,
Professor of Natural and Moral Philosophy, and author of the
" History of the Roman Republics;" Lord Kames; Alex. Murray,
Professor of Hebrew, and well known as the author of the " Phi-
losophic History of the European Languages," and Lecturer on
Oriental Literature in this city; John Playfair, Professor of
Natural Philosophy and Mathematics; Hutton, the celebrated
Geologist; McLaurin, the great mathematician; David Gregory,
Professor of Mathematics; and Sidney Smith, Professor of Moral
Philosophy. Among the distinguished statesmen who were edu-
cated at this University, are Lord Lyndhurst, Lord Campbell,
Lord Palmerston, and Lord John Russell. If I were entitled to
allude to illustrious living men educated in this great school of
medicine and the collateral sciences, I could easily cite a number
of names familiar to us as household words and of European
reputation.

I do not consider that we sufficiently appreciate in England
the immense influence which the Edinburgh, and in fact the
whole Scotch, schools of medicine have exercised over the desti-
nies of our profession.

Until the establishment within the last thirty years of three
or four great seminaries of medical instruction in England, we
were almost entirely indebted to Scotland for the medical educa-
tion of youth. Nearly all the celebrated English physicians, and
many of our distinguished surgeons, undoubtedly acquired in
this city and in this country the knowledge which enabled them
afterwards to occupy positions of great eminence in our own
country.

Let us admit with gratitude the benefit which the Scotch
schools of medicine have conferred upon our noble science. Let
us never forget how much of the respect in which our professional
body is held in all parts of the civilized globe, is mainly owing
to the flood of light which has emanated from the men whose
genius has made renowned and celebrated this great school of
medicine. Can we ever forget the names of the eminent medical
luminaries to whom I have called your attention ? The recollec-
tion of these justly celebrated men will cluster about our memo-
ries as long as the mind retains the power of reviving mental
impressions.

The great and illustrious never die. Death has no power and
dominion over the genius of man: it is made of imperishable
materials. The soul bids defiance to dissolution, and refuses to
yield submission to the laws regulating physical decay. Can the
great, the good, the intellectual, the noble, ever cease to exist ?
Can such?

" .... be left forgotten in the dust;
When Fate, relenting, lets the flowers revive,
Shall Nature's voice, to man alone unjust,
Bid him, though deemed to perish, hope to live ?
Is it for this fair Virtue oft must strive
"With disappointment, penury, and pain ?
No ! Heaven's immortal spring shall yet arrive,
And man's majestic beauty bloom again,
Bright through tlx' eternal year of love's triumphant reign."
It is impossible to exaggerate and over-estimate the influence
which this city has exercised over the moral, political, and social
progress and character of the British nation. It has always been
considered as the great centre and fountain-head of modern
refinement and civilization.

The men who have been educated in the University of Edin-
burgh, whose minds have been formed and disciplined in this
school for the great battle of life, have in many instances risen
to the highest positions at the bar and in the senate. It was in
this city that Henry Brougham, in conjunction with Sidney
Smith, Jeffrey, and Leonard Horner, conceived the idea of the
Edinburgh llcvieiv, a journal which may be considered to have
led to the establishment of our own national Quarterly Review,
and which has always advocated liberal enlightened opinions in
literature, art, science, and politics?exercising, consequently, a
great influence upon the political, social, and literary relations
of our own country.

Independently of the pleasure which we all feel in having this
opportunity of enjoying social communion with our medical
friends residing in this country, I think we have, altogether apart
from such enjoyable considerations, an additional source of con-
gratulation at heing enabled at this time to assemble in this por-
tion of the United Kingdom.

The legislative settlement of the long-agitated question of
medical reform is a significant fact in the history of modern
medicine. It constitutes beyond all question one of the most
important epochs within the memory of living medical men.
Should not this be a subject for our mutual rejoicing and con-
gratulation ?

In the address which I had the honour of delivering in London
at our annual meeting last year, I dwelt at some length on the
grave responsibilities attaching to those delegated by the Legisla-
ture with the legal custody, care, and treatment of the insane.
It is not my intention now to revert to this subject.

Dismissing this topic, I propose to submit to your considera-
tion and for your approval certain suggestions that have occurred
to my mind relative to a modification of the laws regulating the
care and treatment of the insane.

Mr. Tite, the member for Bath, having in a short speech
during the present session of Parliament, brought under the
notice of the House of Commons the existing state of Chancery
lunatics, with a view to the appointment of a committee to inquire
into their condition; and having, on the suggestion of Govern-
ment,, withdrawn his notice of motion, on the promise that in the
ensuing session the whole state of the law affecting the care and
treatment of the insane would be made the subject c? strict Par-
liamentary inquiry, and, if necessary, legislative interference, I
do not think I can more usefully occupy the time of the Asso-
ciation than by calling its attention to what I conceive to be the
right basis upon which all legislation regarding the insane should
rest. This will open the question for the careful consideration
of the Association, and will, I hope, justify the organization of
an acting, and of an active, committee in London, to watch the
progress of future legislation 011 this important subject?one of
all others in which we are personally and collectively deeply
interested.

In all legislation relating to the insane it is most desirable that
?certain first principles regarding the nature of insanity should be
freely and fully recognised. I11 the preamble to every legislative
enactment referring to the care and treatment of the insane, the
various phases and types of mental disease should be viewed as
the effects of certain deviations from a healthy and normal con-
dition of the brain, the great nervous centre, curable by a well-
directed course of moral, medical, and hygienic treatment.
Asylums, whether public or private, licensed or unlicensed,
whether for one or more patients, ought to be considered as
hospitals for the treatment of a form of brain disorder, only to
be successfully grappled with by educated and experienced
medical men.

Much of the mysticism, the superstition, tlie illusion, and
popular fallacy, still unhappily enshrouding the subject of in-
sanity, arises from an indisposition to liberally acknowledge this
great and essential first principle.

In my former address I made some allusions to the provisions
of the Lunacy Act now in operation; I called the attention of
the Association to one of its clauses relating to the unjust exclu-
sion from the office of Commissioner in Lunacy of all who were not
in a position to affirm that they had within the previous two
years ceased to have any interest in the confinement of persons,
alleged to be- insane. By this clause every member of the
medical profession connected with and having an interest, be it
ever so infinitesimal, in any private asylum, is virtually excluded
from holding office at the Board in Whitehall-place, not having
undergone two years' quarantine, and not being in a position to
present to the Lord Chancellor (in whose hands are vested the-
patronage of the office) a clean bill of health,?such being the
qualification required by the English legislative enactment for
the post of one of her Majesty's Commissioners in Lunacy.

This casual reference to what I had the honour of alluding in.
my former address brings me at once to the consideration of the
constitution of the Board of Lunacy Commissioners, and opens
the question, whether it is so organized as to fully meet the
requirements of the Act of Parliament, and so selected as to
guarantee for it the public and professional confidence ? It is not
my intention to criticise the proceedings of the present Board
of English Commissioners in Lunacy. Like most public bodies
delegated by an Act of Parliament with extraordinary power, they
may not in every instance keep strictly within their legitimate
boundaries. They may occasionally appear to act in an arbitrary
and unjust spirit. Nevertheless, I believe they are most anxious
to discharge conscientiously their important functions. Con-
sidering the extent of their jurisdiction, and the number of in-
sane entrusted to their legal protection, it is a question whether it
is not desirable either to add to the number of the existing Board
of Commissioners, or to appoint in association with them a body-
of sub-inspectors or commissioners, with the view of carrying out
a more perfect supervision of the insane, in public as well as in.
private asylums. In any future legislation on tlie subject of
Lunacy, I think it would be desirable to define with more pre-
cision the precise legal powers of the Commissioners; and in all
cases of serious dispute between the proprietor of an asylum and
the Commissioners of Lunacy, I consider it but an act of justice-
that he should, if he desired it, have the advantage of legaT
assistance when summoned to appear before the Board to answer
any charge which the Commissioners may consider it their duty
to bring against him.

Having made these few observations respecting the constitu-
tion of the Board of Commissioners, I proceed in the next place-
to a consideration of the provisions of the existing Act of Par-
liament relative to the preliminary measures required previously
to the confinement of persons alleged to be of unsound miud.
I refer to the medical certificates which are imperative in order
to justify any kind of restraint, medical or general supervision,
on the ground of insanity.

We cannot disguise from ourselves the fact that this part of the
Lunacy Act is far from being in a satisfactory condition. There
always has been a great outcry against the power which the law
places in the hands of two qualified medical practitioners.
Prima facie there are undoubtedly grave objections to this clause^
If we always could guarantee the respectability, the intelligence, and
the practical experience of the members of the medical profession
called upon to certify to the mental condition of a person prior
to his being placed under legal restraint, no possible objection
could be raised to the law as it at present exists; but unfortu-
nately it does occasionally happen that very incompetent men-
are called in to certify, and by doing so without sufficient ground
or reason, serious odium is brought upon all persons associated
with asylums for the treatment of the insane. The force of
public opinion is beyond all doubt against this part of the legis-
lative enactment ; and we had better therefore, with a good
grace, bow with submission to the vox populi, and consent in
this particular to some modification of the law.

It is urged by those who object to the power delegated by
the act to two qualified medical practitioners, that it is not right,
because the insane are no longer treated with great harshness,
cruelty, and brutality, not being chained, whipped, and tortured5
as they were in the barbarous times long since passed away,,
that therefore any man should be subjected to restraint in an
asylum conducted by men of unquestionable respectability, and1
in conformity with the most enlightened and humane principles
of treatment, on the simple written testimony of two apothecaries
who may never have had any previous experience in the investi-
gation of cases of imputed insanity. I consider it to be our
bounden, our sacred duty, by some amendment of the law, to
fully satisfy the public mind that every safe and proper precau-
tion has been taken to thoroughly examine, in the minulest par-
ticular, the mental condition of every person represented to be of
unsound mind, and a fit subject to be deprived for a time of his
civil rights.

From what I know of the existing state of public feeling upon
this point, I feel assured that it would be unwise on the part of
those personally interested in the confinement of the insane to
offer any opposition to an amendment of the law relative to
medical certificates. It has been proposed, with a view of ob-
viating this difficulty, and bringing the Act of Parliament more in
harmony with the force of public opinion, that a (j'uasi-judicial
investigation should be instituted in every case previously to
confinement. The Law Amendment Society suggested that an
inquiry, similar to a commission of lunacy, should take place
prior to the exercise of restraint, and advised that no person
should be removed to a lunatic asylum who had not been pro-
nounced by a competent jury to be of unsound mind, and in a
condition to justify this mode of treatment. I am sure I need
not occupy your valuable time in pointing out the absurdity and
impracticability of this suggestion. With a view to the consti-
tution of a less exceptional and incorruptible tribunal, it is pro-
posed that a Court of Commissioners of Insanity should be
formed, consisting of six or seven experienced men of high
repute, who should be empowered to decided on the necessity of
restraint in every case of alleged insanity. This Court is to be
delegated with the authority of examining medical men upon
oath, and if necessary, seeing the person presumed to be insane.
Were such a preliminary course necessary in order legally to con-
fine the insane, I very much fear it would greatly add to the
statistics of chronic and incurable insanity. I think it would be
most unwise, injudicious, and impolitic to throw any very stringent
or vexatious impediments or obstructions in the way of con-
fining the insane. Sensible, as all must be who practise in this
department of medicine, of the enormous curative advantages which
result from the immediate removal of cases of acute insanity from
the associations of home to a well-organized and humanely-con-
ducted institution for the treatment of morbid conditions of mind,
it behoves us to sanction no alteration in the law that would
obviously and seriously interfere with this important principle of
treatment. What is the alteration, it may be asked, that I
would suggest to meet the difficulties referred to ? The law at
present requires that two qualified medical men should personally,
and apart from any other practitioner, examine the patient, and
certify to tlie fact of insanity, specifying at the same time the
facts upon which they have based their opinion.

It has been proposed, with a view to altering the law and satisfy-
ing the requirements of public opinion, that instead of two medical
certificates, three, or even four, should be required in every case
previously to the imposition of restraint, and that at least one or
two of the certificates should bear the signatures of physicians of
high character and of known repute and experience. I am
bound, however, to confess, from what I know of the state of
public feeling on this point, that even this great concession to
the popular outcry would not be satisfactory. To meet the objec-
tions raised, and to place this matter beyond all further cavil and
dispute, I would suggest the appointment of educated, respect-
able, and experienced practitioners, delegated with guasi-judicial
and magisterial functions, to be summoned for the purpose of
counter-signing the certificates of the medical men, thus sanc-
tioning, if they thought proper, the proposed measure of confine-
ment. These Inspectors of Lunacy, or medico-legal jurists,
might be appointed to preside over certain districts in the metro-
polis as well as in the provinces. Being unconnected with and
unknown to the relations and friends of the patient, and strictly
independent of the medical men called in by the family to certify
to the fact of insanity, I feel assured that the signatures of gentle-
men holding such independent official appointments would relieve
the public mind of all undue anxiety relative to the unjust con-
finement of persons alleged to be insane. I think, also, it would
be considered as a boon to the medical men certifying to the fact
of insanity, as well as to the family of the invalid, by placing their
conduct in the matter beyond all doubt and suspicion.
There are one or two other points in connexion with the
medical certificates to which I would beg to call the attention of
the Association. Having dwelt upon the importance of adopting
efficient measures of protecting the alleged lunatic from unjust
confinement and detention in an asylum, I would suggest that in
some cases of mental disorder, and mental disorder of such a kind
and degree as to justify residence in an asylum or private house,
the certificate of insanity should, under specific and peculiar cir-
cumstances, be altogether dispensed with.

In the existing state of the law, no person alleged to be of un-
sound mind can be placed under medical, moral, or general super-
vision in an asylum, or in a private house or lodgings (the party
keeping such house or lodgings receiving payment for the board
or maintenance of such patient), without two certificates of in-
sanity. The Act of Parliament makes it also imperative on the
part of the person admitting such patient into his private dwelling,
to make an official return to the Commissioners in Lunacy of the
fact, accompanying such representation with a copy of the certifi-
cates ancl order upon which he was admitted.

In common with many medical men engaged in the treatment
of the insane, I viewed this provision of the Lunacy Act as an
obvious and important improvement upon the previously existing
statute. I consider, however, it now to be my duty to state that
I have seen good reasons for modifying my opinion of this sec-
tion of the Act of Parliament. I think the law with regard to
the confinement of persons in private lodgings and in unlicensed
houses is too stringent in its operation.

There is a vast amount of incipient insanity and morbid con-
ditions of mind connected with obscure brain disease, that re-
quire, with a view to the adoption of efficient medical curative
treatment, to be removed temporarily from irritation and excite-
ment, often necessarily incidental to a continuance among
relations and' friends. In many of these cases no progress
towards recovery can be made until the patient is removed from
home, and ceases for a time to be a free agent. Under kind and
skilful treatment these patients rapidly recover; but in order to
effect so desirable a consummation it is essential that they should
be placed among strangers and under judicious control. Is it
not unwise, I would ask, that the law should make it imperative
that this class of mental invalids should be formally certified to
be insane, and registered as such at the office of the Commis-
sioners in Lunacy ? The fact of a patient being placed under
temporary restraint whilst suffering from an attack of transient
mental aberration, does not at all affect his social position should he
recover and return home to his family, but the position of this
patient would be materially altered if he had been certified to have
been insane, and visited as such by the gentlemen appointed by
the Act of Parliament to examine all persons legally confined
as lunatics. I am quite satisfied that there are many patients
who are kept at home under great disadvantages, as far as the
question of recovery is concerned, in consequence of this strin-
gent provision of the law.

So great is the horror which some sensitive persons exhibit at
the bare mention of a certificate of lunacy, that they have con-
fessed a determination, rather than submit to what they conceive
to be a seriously damaging stigma, to abandon all idea of bring-
ing those near and dear to them within the range of remedial
measures.

Could not some modification of the law be suggested to meet
this class of case? Would not the public be sufficiently pro-
tected from the interference of their friends and relations, if every
person admitting such uncertified cases into his house or lodg-
ings were compelled to make a return of the fact to tlie proper
authorities, viz.: the Commissioners in Lunacy, or the district
medical inspector, medical jurist, officer of health, or by what
other name it may be thought proper to designate these official
personages ?

There are numerous cases that require, for their own safety as
well as the securityand happiness of others, to be sent from home
in consequence of some apparently trifling mental infirmity. It
is often essentially requisite that such persons should be placed
under the control and supervision of strangers. In this type of
case no kind of justification can be urged for having them certi-
fied as lunatics. Again, I would suggest an alteration in the
certificates required for the admission of private patients into
licensed establishments for the treatment of the insane.
It has often occurred to me, and I have no doubt to all officially
associated with private asylums for patients conscious of their
mental disorder, fully recognising the loss of self-control, bitterly
bewailing being the prey to morbid impulses, to express a wish
to be placed under restraint. I have known patients to drive up
to the door of the asylum and beg to be received within its walls,
being painfully and acutely conscious of the necessity of close
supervision. Great have been the lamentations when they have
been informed that they could not be admitted even for one night
into the asylum, without being certified by two medical men to
be in an insane state of mind. I have known such persons take
the printed form of admission, and go themselves to medical men
in the neighbourhood, and beg them to sign the legal certificates
of insanity. Why should there not be some alteration of the
legislative enactment to remedy this defect ? If a person reco-
gnising his morbid condition of mind, and anxious to subject his
case to medical treatment, voluntarily offers to surrender his free
agency into the hands of the medical head of a lunatic asylum,
the law should not force him against his will to be formally cer-
tified and registered as a lunatic. In such cases I would compel
the patient to sign, in the presence of a justice of the peace or
magistrate, a paper, to the effect that he, in consequence of mental
indisposition, freely, voluntarily, and without compulsion, places,
himself in a licensed asylum for the treatment of the insane. A
copy of this document, with all the particulars of the case,
should be transmitted to the Commissioners of Lunacy within a
few hours of admission.

If it were thought desirable for the protection of the public that
these patients should go to the Commissioners themselves, and
obtain their authority for entering the asylum as patients uncer-
tified to be insane, no possible objection can be made to this
course of procedure. In all legislation on the subject of lunacy,.
it is most important to studiously avoid throwing any vexatious
impediments in the way of bringing the insane as speedily as
possible within the reach of curative agents.

A full and liberal recognition of this great principle of treat-
ment is quite consistent with the adoption of very stringent
means for the protection of the public against all unjust inter-
ference and confinement on the ground of insanity.

It was my intention before concluding this address, to have
called the attention of the Association to some other suggestions
that have occurred to my mind relative to the state of the lunacy
laws, not restricting my remarks to the Act of Parliament which
takes special cognizance of the insane subject to restraint in
licensed and unlicensed houses. I was anxious to make some
remarks respecting the defective state of the law bearing upon
cases of alleged mental unsoundness and incapacity which so
often come before our courts of law in the form of commissions
of lunacy.

I am of opinion that the law relating to these cases requires
careful revision.

At present, no condition of mental incapacity is recognised by
the jurists of this country apart from actual unsoundness of mind
in its legal signification; and such a condition of the intellect
must be established by evidence before the Court of Chancery
will appoint a guardian or a committee to administer to and pro-
tect the property of the person alleged to be of unsound mind,
and thereby incapable of managing his own affairs.

The writ de lunatico directed by the Court of Chancery to the
Masters in Lunacy, authorizes these judicial functionaries to
inquire into the insanity, idiotcy, or lunacy of A or JB; and no
type of case can be legally dealt with by the Master which is not
embraced within one of these three divisions. It is true that the
modified and less offensive phrase, " unsoundness of mind" (which
never yet has been satisfactorily defined by lawyers or physicians),
is adopted during the proceedings preliminary to the issuing of the
writ de lunatico, and at the time of the judicial inquiry; but if
the party be declared to be of " unsound mind," either by the
Master or by the jury, he is in all the subsequent proceedings
designated as a " chancery lunatic," and in the eye of the law he
is so considered, should he not recover, until the day of his death !
But may not a person be quite incompetent to take care of
himself and manage his property, without being either insane or
a lunatic ? and would it not be a gross, unjustifiable, and cruel
misapplication and perversion of language, so to consider and
designate those who, either from cerebral disease, an accidental
cause, or premature decay of intellect, are reduced to this sad
condition of physical and mental helplessness ? There is a vast
body of persons in this state of infirm and enfeebled mind who
are entitled to and who should have extended towards them legal
protection.

Men in this state of quasi-insanity contract foolish and im-
provident marriages ; are facile in the hands of designing domes-
tics and unprincipled knaves; they are persuaded to squander
recklessly their property; large sums are often exacted from
them ; they are induced to make testamentary dispositions adverse
to the claims of relationship and the ties of consanguinity, and
in conformity with the wishes and interests of those who have
obtained improper and undue influence over the poor broken-
down and impaired intellect. k

To meet the exigencies of this numerous class of cases, there
should be some short, summary, inexpensive mode of legal pro-
cedure, quite distinct in its character from ordinary commissions
of lunacy. Persons so enfeebled in mind as to be palpably unfit
for the management of their property, might be placed under the
guardianship or tutorship of one or two members of the family,
by some simple judicial process, without rendering it necessary
that they should be formally declared to be of unsound mind by
the judge, and registered in the records of the Court of Chancery
as lunatics.

Protect the property and persons of these unhappy individuals
by the most stringent means that can be devised and concocted,
but save them and their families from the social disadvantages
that would result from their being declared to be insane !
I am satisfied that an alteration in the law similar to that I
have suggested is imperatively demanded, and would, if carried
into effect, be productive of a vast amount of good to the com-
munity.

I fear, gentlemen, I have exhausted your patience. I had
much more to say to you on this important subject, but at present
I shall not further trespass upon your valuable time. Thanking
you most sincerely for the confidence which you have so gene-
rously extended towards me during my period of office, 1 now
resign my post into the hands of one much more competent to
discharge its duties than the humble individual who now has the
honour of addressing you.
