The Juridical Society, and the Criminal Responsibility Of the Insane
=====================================================================

-.
(From a Correspondent.)
No well-wisher to his species can fail to rejoice that the ice'
which divides the medical and legal professions on the subject of
the Criminal Responsibility of the Insane, has at length been
broken. It were hopeless to expect that the imperfect exposi-
tions of what they imagine to be the views entertained by medical
men on the subject of insanity, that barristers are in the habit of
making on occasions when they defend prisoners charged with
criminal offences, could ever dissipate the dense obscurity which
surrounds these subjects in the public mind. The legal profession
generally, and especially the judges, have so little practical
acquaintance with insanity, that their minds are absolutely unable
to comprehend vast truths which are familiar enough to medical
men. Examinations in courts of justice are peculiarly unfavour-
able to the diffusion of just ideas on these matters, and the
medical witness consequently- gives his testimony amidst an
amount of-prejudice, arising from ignorance, which is too often
fatal to the best interests of humanity and of justice. The
existence, then, of the J uridical Society, composed as it is of the
most eminent members of the legal profession, and of a few other
persons distinguished for their attainments in literature and
RESPONSIBILITY OF THE INSANE. 167
jurisprudence, is a fact calling for devout thankfulness on the
part of those who look for free discussion as one of the best means
of eliciting truth and of diffusing knowledge. Monday, the 14th
of December, will henceforth be considered a great day in the
history of criminal jurisprudence ; for upon it there met together
a large number of eminent lawyers, and eminent medical men, to
discuss the subject of the criminal responsibility of lunatics.
Dr Forbes Winslowread a paper on " the Doctrine of Responsi-
bility in Cases of Insanity connected with alleged criminal acts/''
which was followed by an interesting discussion, in which the
Vice-Chancellor, Sir John Stuart, who was in the chair, and Mr.
Baron Bramwell, took an active part. We desire, in the following
remarks, to direct the attention of our readers to what we conceive
to be grave and fundamental errors in the reasoning, especially
of Mr. Baron Bramwell, on that occasion?because, if our views
are correct, the doctrines laid down by the learned Judge strike
at the root of the theory upon which all punishment is based. If
Baron Bramwell be wrong, then are his errors the most serious
and vital that it is possible to conceive in one whose function it is
indeed to administer the law, but who would very imperfectly fulfil
the duties of an English Judge if he did not also endeavour to
improve the law. We have no reason to suppose that the learned
Judge is not sincerely desirous to amend what may be defective
in the laws; 011 the contrary, his frequent attendance at the
meetings of the Juridical Society shows a desire to advance the
science of jurisprudence, which cannot be too highly appreciated
oy the public. We shall endeavour to reproduce the chief argu-
ments of Baron Bramwell with scrupulous accuracy, and we have
no fear of not doing so correctly, i'or his words fell with painful
distinctness upon our ear, and have been very faithfully reported
in some of the daily papers. It would be almost an insult to
assure the learned Judge that our remarks are made in a spirit of
sincere and profound respect for his judicial position and attain-
ments. The truth is that at which we aim, and we are sure it is
the truth alone that Baron Bramwell seeks.
The learned Judge observed that "the question to be dis-
cussed was not the relative amount of pity which we should feel
for the sane or the insane, but how is the law to deal with the com-
mission of an act which it prohibits ? To solve this question, it
is necessary to go back to the true theory of punishment, which
is, that pain, being in itself an evil, society has no right to inflict
it upon an individual, except for the purpose of preventing crime*
by the fear of it on the individual punished, and by the spectacle
of it on the lest of the community. The cevto.inly, therefore,
with which punishment follows crime is of the last importance in
teaching men to respect the law, and to abstain from breaking
168 THE JURIDICAL SOCIETY, AND THE CRIMINAL
it; for since the law threatens all mankind, it would be a mere
brutumfulmen if it did not also punish those who violate it. The
madman, amongst others, is threatened by the law ; why then
should he escape if he infringes the law ? and why destroy that
certainty of punishment following crime which is the very
essence of its preventive power ? For his part, he could conceive
an argument being maintained to show that even idiots should
be punished when they break the law; but in such an opinion,
if held by any one, he did not share. If you do not punish the
madman, you hold out a premium to the commission of crime ;
for every man would calculate that he would be fortunate enough
to escape by some one proving that he was mad, on the same
principle as that on which people lead a forlorn hope, or put into a
lottery, not calculating the chances against them, but trusting
that they will be the fortunate ones to survive or to win the
prize." Baron JBramwell made some further remarks in reference
to cases which he had tried within the last two years, and also
enunciated the astounding opinion that he doubted the existence
of moral qualities in the mind. Our concern, however, just now
is with the theory of punishment set forth in the above quota-
tion from his speech. It is not the first time that we have heard
these doctrines; but we believe them to be utterly erroneous and
untenable, and to arise chiefly in consequence of persons confound-
ing together punishments following infractions of the physical laws
of nature with those which follow violations of the laws of society.
The two classes of penalties stand upon totally different grounds,
although it is not uncommon to hear the remark that crime
would be most effectually put down if punishment followed 011
its commission with as much certainty as it does on the breakage
of physical laws. It is not the mere certainty of a particular
punishment following a particular crime that constitutes the effi-
cacy of the penal code; but it is the certainty that a right
measure of 'punishment, adapted to the peculiarities of each
individual case, will follow upon conviction. Public opinion
must go along with and support the administration of justice, or
that very element of uncertainty which Baron Bramwell so
highly deprecates is at once, and as a direct consequence, intro-
duced into the working of the law. Severe and unjustifiable
penalties carry with them the elements of their own failure;
they are conceived in ignorance, and cannot stand the light of
day. It is for this reason that the numerous executions which
formerly disgraced the history of jurisprudence in this country
were found wholly inefficacious in diminishing crime. Juries
would not convict persons who were proved to have forged or
uttered one-pound notes, or stolen to a trifling amount from a
dwelling-house; and although the Judges recorded the sentences
RESPONSIBILITY OF TIIE INSANE. 169
of death, and the Government carried them out with unsparing
severity whenever they had the opportunity, the very certainty
with which an unjust penalty would be inflicted on conviction,
proved the safeguard to prisoners, and the means of their
escaping from any punishment at all. Whence, then, arises
a result as uniform in the history of the laws as we must
suppose it is surprising to Baron Bramwell ? Why, from what
else but from that very moral sense inherent in all man-
kind, the existence of which the learned Judge calls in ques-
tion ? It is because society feels and knows that all its
punishments are inflicted under direct and fearful responsibility,
and must be proportioned to the degree of guilt of each criminal,
lest they become, not punishments, but acts of cruelty, and crimes
themselves. In this respect they differ altogether from the
blind unreasoning penalties that attach to violations of physical
laws. If a sane man or an idiot, a reasoning being or a child,
wilfully or accidentally jump or fall out of a window, physical
injury is the consequence ; and in this case, as a general rule, the
certainty of the penalty suffices to make men conform to the
laws of nature. But the penalties inflicted by society are volun-
tary on its part, and awarded under a sense of responsibility; for,
as Baron Bramwell remarks, pain being in itself an evil, we are
only justified in occasioning it to another for some good and
substantial reason ; in other words, we punish, because the balance
of convenience is in favour of punishment for the repression of
crime. The law itself fully recognises this principle, in the
gradations of punishment which it prescribes for the same offence,
and the application of which it leaves to the J udge. There is no
mere blind penalty attaching to the infraction of any law ; the
circumstances of each case are to be taken into account the
amount of temptation, the position and opportunities of the
criminal, and the consequences of his crime. To make murder
an exception to these principles is impossible, because the punish-
ment of murder is inflicted under just the same kind of re-
sponsibility as the most trifling imprisonment. It is not the
mere act of depriving another of life that in practice ensures the
penalty of death?for even those who consider that the putting
of a murderer to death is based upon a direct divine command,
would no more execute an idiot than Baron Bramwell himself.
\ou have not, therefore, and cannot have, a certainty that even
the highest crime known to the law shall, on the conviction of
the perpetrator of it, be followed by the exaction of the highest
penalty. To hang an acknowledged idiot would, under any
circumstances, so shock the public mind, that it would be con-
sidered as tantamount to deliberate murder. Here, then, lies the
very gist of the subject. It being shown, then, that the penalty
170 THE JURIDICAL SOCIETY, AND THE CRIMINAL
even of murder does not follow on its commission as a matter of
logical and inevitable necessity, like the penalties attaching to
violations of physical laws, the question arises, Who are idiots ?
and why are they to form the subjects of this exception ?
This is an inquiry more easily made than satisfactorily answered;
and yet it must be answered, if jurisprudence is to have the
slightest claim to be regarded as a science.
Idiots, as is well known, vary in their salient characteristics.
Some of them, besides being destitute of the smallest glimmerings
of reason, are also sunk into the lowest depths of physical dis-
ability. "Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything,'"
they are apparently wholly without mind?they could not, there-
fore, commit murder, from their state of bodily infirmity, even if
mentally they could conceive the crime. Other idiots, again,
like to the former class as to their mental powers, are yet en-
dowed with great bodily strength, so that they may become exceed-
ingly dangerous to those whom they dislike, and are known not
unfrequently to have deliberately murdered them. For what
reason, then, are they exempted from execution ? Plainly because
of the condition of their minds. Where, then, is the line to be
drawn which separates the imbecile who forms a fit subject for
execution, from the imbecile whose execution would be considered
as a murder ?
Notwithstanding the dicta of the Judges in the House of
Lords, in the case of MacNaughten, it will be found that practi-
cally there are no general rules on the subject?each case is in
reality determined 011 its real or supposed merits. Juries may be
misled into giving a verdict?guided they are not?by what is told
to them about a knowledge of right and wrong on the part of the
prisoner ; but they convict or acquit him just according to their
own preconceived notions of insanity. If they believe the
accused person to be so mad that he would have formed a fit
inmate of a lunatic asylum, they acquit him on the ground of
insanity, without ever troubling their heads as to whether he
knew the distinction between right and wrong, or was or was
not conscious that he was doing a criminal act when he com-
mitted the murder. In this they act rightly, and in accordance
with the dictates of common sense, guided by their ideas of moral
responsibility to the Almighty?for, as every one knows, except
perhaps lawyers, the test of a knowledge of right or wrong is
utterly fallacious. The maddest lunatic confined in Bedlam acts
from motives, and does wrong knowing that it is wrong, just like
any sane and reasoning sinner.
In cases in which the test that juries apply in their own minds
has already been brought to a practical issue, and the accused
person is confined in an asylum, a conviction for murder is
RESPONSIBILITY OF THE INSANE. 171
impossible, 110 matter how deliberate and cruel the circum-
stances attending it may have been. Amongst the blackest
murders that have ever been committed, are those per-
petrated by the inmates of asylums; yet they go unpunished,
because the moral sense of mankind revolts against the punish-
ment of a being deprived of the guidance of reason. Who will
deny that there are beings going freely about the world who are
just as mad as others who are under restraint in asylums? Why,
then, is a clumsy test of this kind, which depends upon the
local and peculiar circumstances of the lunatic, to form a guide
in the case of an issue so awful as that of life and death ? Be-
cause a poor creature is so unfortunate as to have no friends
able or willing to take the somewhat complicated steps neces-
sary for securing him in an asylum, is that any reason why,
when he commits a crime, he is to be subjected to penalties
which humanity forbids to be applied to his brother lunatics in
asylums ? We put the question in this way, not because we do
educated men the injustice of supposing that they would know-
ingly sanction any such doctrine as that referred to, but in order
to show that there is an inherent necessity that each case, where
insanity is pleaded as an excuse, shall be judged and disposed of
exclusively upon its own individual merits; and we have the
further object of showing that it is because the test supplied by
the law?the knowledge of right and wrong?is insufficient, that
juries take these matters into their own hands, and often acquit
prisoners in the teeth of the directions of the presiding Judge.
Having got thus far, we are now in a position to answer the
question as to what should be the course to be practically
adopted in these distressing cases; and we have no hesitation in
expressing an opinion that the same species of test should be
applied here as is by law imperative before any man can be con-
signed to the custody and refuge of an asylum?viz., an inves-
tigation into the mind of the alleged lunatic by scientific
examiners. The facts of the case are matters for the jury to
determine; the law and the facts are for the Judge; but the
question of the infliction of the appropriate penalty should be
for the executive, aided by skilled witnesses, or, as they are called
on the Continent, " Peritii."
A lule of this kind works admirably in the State of Maine.
In cases of insanity alleged as an excuse for criminal acts, the
person implicated is remanded to safe custody, and carefully
watched and examined by eminent medical men, who have made
the diseases of the mind subjects of special study, and are ap-
pointed to their office by the State. At the expiration of a cer-
tain time, having taken into their consideration the facts proved
in evidence, and associated them with the results of their own
172 THE JURIDICAL SOCIETY, ETC.
observations, they make their report, and upon that report the
defence of insanity stands or falls. If a similar plan were adopted
in this country, there can be little doubt in the minds of those
who take an enlarged view of the subject, that the administration
of justice would be rendered much more certain than it is at
present; defences grounded on presumed insanity would be less
frequent, because they could never prevail except upon just and
equitable grounds; the penalties of the law would be inflicted
upon intelligible data, and, by commanding the assent of the
public mind, would act to a far greater extent as preventive
spectacles than they do now.
What can be more disgraceful to a civilized community than
that the most subtle of all questions, the sanity of a human
being, should be left to the decision of a petit jury, composed of
men who are often as illiterate as they are prejudiced, and who
are guided much more by feeling than by reason ? And this
leads us to remark, in conclusion, that great injustice is often
done to prisoners by the way in which these subjects are argued
at the bar. Instead of trusting to the truth, and carefully
making themselves masters of the facts of the case, counsel who
undertake to prove the insanity of a prisoner are too often in the
habit of treating the whole matter as one of sentiment, which it
is not at all, and of making compassionate appeals to the feelings
of the jury, in the hope of averting the capital sentence. It can
hardly be wondered at that, under these circumstances, the feel-
ings of the bench and the public are excited against defences on
the ground of insanity, and that they come to regard them merely
as tricks of counsel, analogous to the technical pleas of a special
pleader. We trust, however, that, through the medium of
the Juridical Society, the Judges and the Bar may now be led
to regard the question in its philosophical bearings; and we enter-
tain no fears of the result, so soon as they begin to argue it as a
logical problem, to be determined by considerations of abstract
justice, based upon experience, and guided by a sense of moral
responsibility.
