Foreign Psychological Literature
=================================

Our quarterly resume of Foreign Psychological Literature will em-
brace an analysis of tlie following interesting subjects :?

1. On the Physical Symptoms of Insanity.
2. On the Responsibility of the Deaf and Dumb.
3. Singular Case of Insanity. Cysticerci in the Brain. .
4. Pathological Anatomy of the Obliteration and Aberration of the
Relative Functions.
5. Case of Sporadic Cretinism.
6. Somnambulism and extraordinary Neuroses generally.
7. On Disordered Sentiments and Affections.
8. Case of Mania with Homicidal Tendency.
9. On the Pathogenic Influence of Loss of Sleep.

On the Physical Symptoms of Insanity. By M. Sauze.
M. Satxze is of opinion that the physical symptoms of mental aberra-
tion have been much neglected, and agrees with M. Aubanel that if
we could always observe the patient accurately, or if we could receive
a trustworthy account from him of all his sensations, we should gene-
rally find irrefragable proof that some organic clianye is taking place in
the brain of the person about to become insane. " Some alienistes only see
in insanity an intellectual disorder independent of any material lesion.
This is a grave error, which must lead to serious consequences. It
would lead us to neglect the physical signs which constantly precede,
and which accompany the outbreak of different mental affections ; and
which are the source of most valuable indications. Insanity is not a
malady independent of organization. Although, as M. Leuret says,
we are completely ignorant of the nature of the cerebral alteration, it
is not the less true that this alteration does exist. Between the cause
which produces the derangement, and its actual outbreak, there
passes a series of phenomena, constant and invariable, which indicate
with certainty that the organization participates in the production
of the mental phenomena. We have never seen these physical signs
wanting."

Before the delirium commences, there exists physical derangement,
the importance of which is often overlooked. There is headache, and
spinal sensations, such as of compressing or tearing the head?of empti-
ness or cold in the cranium. At the same time there is obstinate
insomnia, which gradually undermines the strength. The digestive
functions present noteworthy irregularities,?there is loss of appetite
and constipation?the tongue is white and thickly furred. The general
sensibility is modified by vague pains in the limbs ; the mobility by
spasms and tremblings : at the same time the intellectual and moral
nature continues intact. " If you add to these symptoms, the flush-
ing and heat of face, and the injection of the eyes, you can only
see in this array of physical phenomena the symptomatic expression of
a pathological change in the brain." Sometimes there is a true febrile
action. The skin is hot, the pulse frequent and full, the tongue white,
and the limbs painful; and the condition is mistaken for that of
ephemeral fever.

At other times we may notice a state of dulness or somnolence
which precedes the outbreak of the delirium. The patients have not
their ordinary activitv; they sleep often without any fatigue to ac-
count for the tendency. Sometimes they complain of heat in the
head, and experience momentary relief from cold and wet applications.
(An illustrative case is given in which these last symptoms continued
for six months before the disorder of the intellect appeared.)
" This initial period of insanity, which has been designated as the
period of incubation, is constant. It is observed generally 011^ the
debut of monomania, of mania, of paralytic insanity, and of stupidity
or dementia: the physical symptoms are the same; the duration
variable, from a few days to several months." These symptoms, like-
wise, continue after the actual accession of the mental disorder; but
if overlooked before, they are still more likely to be so now, when other
phenomena of so marked a character have appeared. " If, however,
we cannot always trace them, we must not too hastily conclude that
they do not exist; they are often only marked by agitation and de-
lirious ideas; and whenever calmness and lucidity supervene, we can
always detect incontestable traces of the physical disorder." It is
not infrequent to observe at the cessation of the delirium, the same
train of physical symptoms as those which preceded and attended the
outbreak. The case given as illustrative of this position is interesting.
A female, aged fifty-two, had disturbed sleep, and symptoms of lum-
bago ; also headache, excessive weariness, fever, and gastric derange-
ment. In about a month agitation and delirium supervened. She
was subject to continual fears, heard divers noises, and voices which
said unpleasant things. The treatment was exclusively physical, and
lasted three months; the cure was complete ; but at the decline of the
malady, when the delirium disappeared, the affections of the head and
stomach reappeared for a certain period.

" Experience tells me that a cure is not to be looked upon as solid
and durable until these remaining physical symptoms disappear. Baths
in the evening, purgatives, and local evacuations of blood, have given
me the best results in these cases." M. Sauze views these bodily
symptoms as more characteristic of the disease than even the mental
disorder; for he observes that these latter are the first to disappear,
and the last to be developed. These symptoms are clearly the ex-
pression of a cerebral affection, and appear to bespeak a " sort of state
of irritation of the encephalon, a congestive or subinflammatory con-
dition. Not that I would deduce from this necessarily the desirable-
ness of a strictly antiphlogistic treatment in all cases; yet I think,
judging from the results of my practice, that at the period of the debut
of the affection, some few applications of leeches to the anus or the
mastoid regions, with purgatives and revulsives, will often be followed
by favourable results." These remarks are not, however, to be ap-
plied to all cases; there are those in which the physical signs are
those of depression and an anaemic, or cachectic state; then the treat-
ment must be completely changed, and we must depend upon good
nutriment, with iron and other tonics.

The conclusions of M. Sauze are as follows:?
1. Insanity is a cerebral affection, characterized by headache, sleep-
lessness, disorder of the general sensibility and the digestive functions,
and by trouble of the intelligence.

2. The two orders of symptoms, physical and moral, are equally in-
dispensable to characterize insanity. Every definition which would
exclude either, would be incomplete, inexact, and would give a false
idea of the malady.

3. Until our own times, insanity has scarcely been studied in any
save its intellectual aspect: the physical symptoms have been mistaken
and neglected.

4. The physical symptoms are especially manifest in the commence-
ment ; but they are manifest both during the course and in the decline.
They always precede for some time the actual outbreak.
5. Insanity being a cerebral affection in all respects like any other
organic malady, requires in like manner physical treatment.
6. This treatment ought to be applied at the beginning. At this
epoch insanity is almost always curable.
7. Moral treatment must be considered only as an adjuvant?as
the hygiene of the brain.
8. Insanity only becomes incurable because the proper physical
treatment is neglected at the proper time.
9. The first origin of insanity is often connected with the various
forms of degeneration of the human race, and with the existence of
neuroses.
10. It is not sufficient to study only the treatment of insanity in
its actual state. It is especially necessary to study the means of pre-
venting it, and to establish the laws of prophylaxis.

[These views are highly important, both in themselves, and as ema-
nating from such high authority. Yet we can scarcely accord that
> the physical aspect of insanity has been so entirely overlooked as is here
presupposed, nor that this branch of the treatment has been so neg-
lected. Kecognising the necessity for the strictest attention to the phy-
sical treatment of the disease, we must not overlook, nor put too much
in the background, that of a moral nature. Granting even that the
bodily functions were always disordered, it cannot be forgotten that
in many instances the affection is induced, proximately at least, by
moral influences ; and the force which has been powerful for evil may
in many cases be counteracted, and its effects neutralized by the same
order of forces, otherwise applied.]
On the Hesponsibility ancl Legal Belations of the Deaf and Dumb.
By Dr Jendritza. (Zeitsclirift, Jan. 1858.)
S , born deaf and dumb, now twenty years of age, of powerful con-
stitution, was brought up without any education or instruction by his
parents, poor country people, who supported themselves by day-labour-
ing, and was from early youth made useful in many branches of their
arduous occupation. As his bodily powers seemed completely developed
when about seventeen years of age, he was fully employed then by his
father in heavy work. After two years and a half of this, the father
died, and the widow, fearing that she should not be able to support
r-f herself, only aided by the deaf and dumb son, took a situation which
then offered itself; whilst a distant relative, N , who kept a small
inn in the country, became guardian to the son, and took him to
assist in the hostelry. After some time N had much reason to
be dissatisfied with him, partly on account of extreme laziness and
awkwardness, which showed itself in many duties; and, on the other
hand, on account of sudden ebullitions of anger after reproof or punish-
ment, during which he would throw down anything with which he
might be engaged, and run away.

On the 2nd of November, S was engaged in harnessing the
horses to the wagon. One of the horses had only been for a short
time so employed,and was every day very awkward about the harnessing and resisted the attempts of S , by jumping about, and lasliing out
his heels, so that S 's wrath was roused, and he was soon engaged
in a formal contest with the horse, and struck him violently and re-
peatedly. N , hearing the uproar, looked out of his window, and
was very angry on seeing the horse so ill-treated. He seized a stick,
and rushing upon S , he pulled him away, and struck him
again and again. S , still in the greatest excitement about the
horse, was still further exasperated by the unexpected punishment.
Smarting from the blows on his back, he turned to the wagon, and
seizing one of the bars, he flew towards N , threatening him with
it. He, perceiving the intention of S , had taken a few steps in
retreat, calling loudly for help. But S speedily overtook him, and
striking him on the head with the iron-bound bar, smashed in the
skull, so that N fell dead at once, without a cry. Upon the call
for help being heard, the maid-servant hastened to the scene, but only
arrived in time to witness the completion of the murder ; she saw the
blow struck, and N fall. S threw away the bar, and fled
across the fields. Examining more closely, the servant convinced
herself that INT was dead. Called together by her outcries, the
neighbours arrived, and being informed of what had happened, they
pursued S , and soon brought him back and bound him. He was
on the same day committed to legal custody.

On the first hearing he was convicted of the murder through the
testimony of the girl, who understood how to communicate with him
by signs,- and informed him that she had been a witness of the blow.
Afterwards his mother was employed as interpreter by the judge; and
after speaking with him in his manner, alleged on his behalf, that for
a long time he had 'been very much irritated against N by often
repeated punishment; but immediately before the fatal blow, having
been roused to fury by the unmanageable horse, he had been driven
to perfectly uncontrollable rage by the severe punishment that followed,
and wished at last to revenge a long series of injuries ; but added that
he did not intend to kill N . Hereupon the judge requested an
opinion as to the responsibility of the accused, which here follows:?

The deaf and dumb man, S , cannot be viewed as a responsible
person in respect of the manslaughter of the innkeeper N , on ac-
count of being born deaf and dumb, and as the evidence shows, from
not having received the least instruction or education.
In justification of this view, it is necessary to bear in mind the dis-
tinction between those deaf and dumb who are born without hearing, or
lost it in early infancy before they had learned to speak ; and those who
had once possessed those faculties, and had lost them after the recep-
tion of some education. The former are truly the deaf-mutes ; the latter
may be called simply deaf and dumb. These have some responsibility
in the eye of the law ; but the former, inasmuch as for the comprehen-
sion of social and civil relations hearing is necessary, remain ever irre-
sponsible. Such of these as have received no education, as is the
case with S , lack the faculty of communicating or exchanging
ideas, except through the medium of certain signs. Even those who
have received some degree of education must still be considered as
only endowed with a limited and relative responsibility; as, through
the failure of hearing and speech, the development of the mind and
soul must necessarily be imperfect.

This opinion is founded on the observation, that even in the best
educated and most talented among the deaf-mutes, during their
whole life traces remain of their former early condition, which are
outwardly manifested by certain abnormal physical manifestations ;
and which remind the careful observer of conditions which were ob-
vious at the earlier periods, before education commenced
Under the most complete system of education of the deaf and dumb,
we must yet doubt whether they can arrive at any deep practical
comprehension of right, obligation, duty, necessity, and ideas of the
like nature Again, all deaf-mutes, however educated, l'etain
a persistent proclivity to sudden accessions of rage which are some-
times uncontrollable. Also all their passions and appetites are more
strongly developed than in those of sound senses. Control of emo-
tions and instinctive propensities cannot be taught in the same full
and practical manner that the knowledge of physical objects, and
even arts and sciences may be conve}red For these and other
reasons, the deaf and dumb cannot be compared as to responsibility
with those of perfect senses; nor can they ever merit the full punish-
ment of crime, the justice of which should involve a comprehension of
moral relations of right and wrong, much deeper than that of the dog
which fears and flees from the whip, and which it may still remain a
matter of doubt whether the deaf and dumb comprehend.

Whilst the educated deaf-mutes only possess a relative and limited
responsibility, those who, like S , are utterly without any instruc-
tion, possess none whatever, and are merely in a state of nature.
Such a man is of the lowest grade of humanity, and can be held as
little higher than the beasts which perish. Without any conscious-
ness except that of his natural inclinations, he wanders amongst men,
incapable of communicating with them, and cannot, from sensuality,
raise himself up to any idea of virtue.

S , roused to anger by long ill-treatment, and immediately by the
horse, and the punishment succeeding, committed an act which would
be murder in one endowed with perfect senses. He thought not
?of the consequences nor of the meaning of the deed, but only obeyed
the blind impulse to revenge his injuries. In the eye of science and ot
the law, he must be considered as irresponsible. His removal to an
asylum for deaf-mutes is advised, in order to his receiving some edu-
cation ; and afterwards it is recommended that, to avoid future evil, he
should be placed under competent surveillance.

Singular Case of Insanity. Cysticerci in the Brain. By Dr Czekiiack.
(From the Corres^ondenz-Blatt.)
Marie Iv x, born in 1818, the third child of healthy parents,
bodily and mentally normally developed, was in the condition of a
useful servant for house and field work. She menstruated regularly
from her twelfth year. She was married at the age of twenty, and had
three sons.

In the autumn of 1853, she complained of a violent pain at the
crown of the head, and dragging and tearing pains in the left side of
the face, and in the left arm and shoulder. There was no visible
change in the painful localities. This affection was treated by various
physicians for rheumatism, but without effect. The pains continued
more or less violent for more than a year. She was during this time
for the most part confined to her room and bed, and could not follow
her usual avocations.

She was patient and composed during the most excruciating pains;
but was sullen, impatient, and peevish ivhen the pains were relieved.
By degrees she complained less of pain, but grieved to be so long
disabled; the consciousness of the necessity of looking after the house
was a trouble to her. The gloomy aspect increased, and the pains by
little and little vanished entirely. She withdrew from the family,
would allow no one to trouble themselves about her, and took little
nourishment?at times, none ; if urged, she would grow angry.
She began to walk rapidly up and down her apartment, and to talk
aloud to herself, gesticulating energetically. She began to complain
of having brought all kinds of evil upon her family, and upon the world
at large; she was the vilest of creatures, not fit to live. Her nights
were for the most part sleepless.

One day she left her chamber and threw herself into some neighbouring
water, but was taken out by her sons. She was then quiet a few hours,
after which she flew at one of them, saying that she must kill him,
that she herself might die. On this day, two years after the com-
mencement of the pain, Dr Czermack first saw her. (Here follows a
description of her personnel and general aspect). The tongue was
loaded, the respiration quickened, the pulse 120, and the general heat
increased; food and drink were refused, the bowels were confined, but
urine passed copiously. She took no notice of any questions, but
screamed and talked incoherently. There often seemed to be a ten-
dency to rhyme and rhythm in her expressions. She fought and bit con-
stantly, and sleep was entirely absent. After six days these prominent
symptoms disappeared; emaciation increased, the muscular system
relaxed, the expression of the countenance became heavy and immov-
able, the eyes half closed, the pupils dilated, the reaction of the iris
slow, the glance feeble and anxious, the tongue dry, the thirst increased,
the pulse 70, the temperature of the body was diminished, the bowels
confined, and the urine scanty. She complained of faintness and
occasional vertigo; she felt very sad and depressed, and had a confused
idea that she was "changed into another person."

She sat shrunk together in the darkest corner of the chamber; she
trembled over the whole body if any one approached or spoke to her.
She answered with feeble voice only such questions as related to her
own condition, and took no notice of any other observations. Her
movements were slow and uncertain. She only took food after much
persuasion, but allowed herself readily to be washed and dressed.

In the course of about ten weeks, the countenance became smiling,
but the glance staring j the right pupil was much dilated, and did not
answer to the stimulus of liglit; the left pupil was contracted, and did
not dilate when light was withdrawn. The fibrillse of the muscles of
the body, face, and tongue trembled. The pulse was 96, the tempe-
rature of the head slightly raised ; the emaciation was increased.
She remained in a corner of the chamber, and played with toys or
pieces of wood; she replied to questions by a laugh, swallowed greedily
her food, and attempted to make her wants known by loud inarticulate
sounds. Her gait was uncertain, and she dragged the right foot
slightly. She was indifferent to surrounding circumstances, and
'eglected cleanliness entirely.

This condition lasted two years, after which she died of pneumonia.
These are the principal morbid changes found on examination forty-
eight hours after death:?
The dura mater was tightly stretched,very much injected,and between
it and the inner membranes was a large quantity of yellowish transparent
serum. The inner membranes were dull and milky over the whole
hemispheres, containing fluid, thickened, here and there injected, and
easily separated from the substance of the brain.
On the inner surface of the pia mater, and between the convolutions
were found fifty-seven clear roundish vesicles, twenty-nine as large as
millet seeds, seventeen as large as peas, and eleven as large as beans.
Each of these vesicles contained a worm-like entozoon (Blasen-
schwantzwurm). Most of these were on the right side, but some
also on the left. The greater number by far were on the middle lobe.
On this point some of the concluding observations of Dr Czermack
are noteworthy:?

"As, according to Professor Husclike, tlie ccntral convolutions constitute
the ' point of indifference' (Indifferenz Punkt) of the brain, and may, physio-
logically, be viewed as the ' plastic expression of the soul' (fur den plastischen
Ausdruck der Seele), and of self-consciousness; so we must regard this part of
the brain as that especially affected in all cases of mental derangement. In all
such cases, where the consciousness and personal disposition, and the sense of
individuality (the I) is affected, there are always morbid changes in this locality.
This observation has been confirmed by me, in conjunction with Director
Kostl, by examinations made on many hundred cases of insanity, and I add
it to the comments on the previous case, without going further into the
detailed arguments."

On the Pathological Anatomy of the Obliteration and Aberration of
the Relative Functions. By M. Follet, M.D.
M. Follet, in the outset, points out forcibly the necessity for ana-
lysing well the morbid changes found in the brain, and the errors
committed in too hastily concluding that these changes are the cause
of the foregoing phenomena.

" After having demanded of these examinations what there may be palpable,
tending to explain the derangement of the intelligence, we shah show that the
alterations remarked in the membranes, or the substance of the brain, appear to
us not as the first cause of the discord produced in the instrument, but as an
effect of the degeneration consecutive to those morbid modifications which, in
a latent and gradual maimer, have troubled the equilibrium of the hemispheres
if as to their innervation. It is time tliat this principle be recognised, and that
the observer, because he has found here an inflamed membrane and there a
softened patch, be not reduced to suppose that there is nothing beyond that;
and, taking the effect for the cause, pass in silence the nervous disorder {trouble),
which has from the beginning dominated over the vital powers. If, like the
unknown quantity in a problem, this trouble is not in itself recognisable, it
assuredly is so through the secondary alterations, which pass from the blood to
the viscera, and affcct in a tertiary manner the nutritive and assimilative func-
tions, and so produce those morbid changes which, instead of being viewed as
a result, are so often considered the primary cause of mental affections."
M. Follet weighs and measures each brain. In weighing, the cere-
bellum, the cerebrum, and each hemisphere are weighed separately.
From this mode of examination, it has been shown that epilepsy-
coincides, with a difference of weight between the two hemispheres,
the equality of which varies but little in the other types of alienation.
In measuring, the thickness of the white matter, from the bottom of
the convolutions to the surface of the ventricles, and the chord of the
ventricular arch, are always taken?the latter measurement, in order
to appreciate the dilatation of the ventricles. This has also brought
to light an interesting fact?viz., that the thinning of the white sub-
stance is proportional to the degree of dilatation; and that this is a
vice of structure inherent to congenital obliteration of the faculties,
the conditions of which are more or less reproduced in all the forms of
acquired obliteration. M. Follet considers the loss of equilibrium
between the hemispheres as the point of departure of all mental
pathology.

As to the cerebellum, " an organ quite independent of the cerebrum,"
we remark that, in middle age, its weight is correlative with the height
of the subject; before twenty years of age, it is proportionally greater;
after seventy years, much less.
M. Follet considers the alterations in the cranium and membranes
to be produced in proportion as
^ Under the membranes there is condensed an excess of caloricity, by the ab-
normal disengagement of that nervous influx, of which the rupture of the equi-
librium between the hemispheres will be, sooner or later, admitted as the latent
cause and primordial element in all mental affections. And by reason of the
solidarity between the nervous and the vascular systems, it will be recognised
that this inter-hemispheric disturbance, after a period of incubation, reacts
upon the blood, which thence becomes elevated in temperature, and, acting
upon the membranes, constitutes a state of cerebral febricity
An action is also instituted upon the vessels themselves, sometimes
obliterating them ; and thence results the softening of the subjacent
tissue. Much of M. Follet's analysis of the changes of the membranes
(in which nothing particularly new appears) is devoted to proving
that those changes are only secondary.

On the alterations in the brain-substance, M. Follet holds the same
opinions :?

" Having shown that the changes in the membranes are an effect, not cause of
the mental alienation, we add that the same is the case as to the brain itself.
It is in the inner structure of the brain, serving for the manifestations of the
soul, in the secret and mysterious play of that nervous influx, in the disturbance
of its equilibrium, that we must look for tlie essential cause of tlie trouble which
grows and progresses in the relative life. The nervous and sanguine elements
are so intimately connected, that if the first oscillates, the second participates in
the febrile state; and it is only after a series of actions and reactions between
these two powers, that first the pia mater, and afterwards the other membranes,
become affected; and that, under the influence of this physical aggravation,
atrophy and softening of the brain substance takes place."

M. Pellet lias no hesitation in considering the white matter of the
brain as the seat or organ of attention and memory; and its thickness
varies inversely as the dilatation of the lateral ventricles, as measured
by tlie chord of their arc.

The general conclusions from several hundred examinations are as
follows:?

1. Obliteration of the relative faculties is incurable, whether con-
genital (idiocy) or acquired (dementia). General or partial aberration
is susceptible of cure, if treated in time.

2. All subjects that have preserved any intellectual aptitude, have
presented a thickness of white matter of from 10 to 15 millimetres
(about -y- to \ an inch), and the chord of the ventricular arc has pre-
sented a medium of about 10 centimetres (nearly ly inch). During
life we have the exact condition of idiots, imbeciles, and the demented,
defined by the amount of attention and memory; and these psy-
chopathic lesions are in strict relation to the thinness of the white
matter and the dilatation of the ventricles. There is always by so
much the more loss of memory and general intellectual enfeeblement,
as the thickness of the white matter declines below 5 millimetres and
the ventricular chord exceeds 10 centimetres. These observations bring
us to the conclusion that the attention, which is the generative prin-
ciple of the ideas, and the memory, are inherent to the white matter,
which seems to us not to be a simple conducting substance, but the
centre of reflection and the common seat of memory?the source of our
intuitive impressions, whence arise our metaphysical ideas.
3. The absolute weight of the encephalic mass does not correspond
with intellectual power or adaptability. Were it so, the idiot would
sometimes take first rank. The structural conditions with which
intellect seems to correspond are?

A. The development of the anterior lobes.
15. The symmetry of the convolutions, giving extended surface to
the cortical matter, the seat of sensibility, of intelligence,
and of will.
C. The thickness of the white matter?the seat of memory.
D. The narrowness of the lateral ventricles.
E. The equality of structure and of weight in the cerebral hemi-
spheres, conducing to the equilibrium of their innervation.
4. The cause, the march, the complications, and the degeneration of
mental aberration may be thus formulated :??
A. Interhemispheric nervous disturbance of equilibrium (from
moral or physical causes) acting at first in a latent manner.
At this period peculiarities of manner, character, or actions
show themselves.

33. A febrile state, consecutive to tliis breach of equilibrium. This is
the period of illusions, hallucinations, and increase of delirium.
C. An inflammatory condition of the pia mater, frequently ter-
minating in death.
D. A chronic form, in which the capillaries of the pia mater are
obliterated, and the brain-tissue begins to be atrophied.
E. There may arise a corresponding pathological condition of
thorax or abdomen, which dissolves the vital unity.
E. The cerebral innervation is lowered, relative life is obliterated, 4
and physical life is extinguished in general progressive
paralysis. 

5. Epileptic attacks repeated often in the day may correspond with
a difference in the weight of the hemispheres to the extent of 200
grammes (nearly 7 ounces). These frightful attacks are due to a loss
of equilibrium in the innervation of the hemispheres. If the attacks
are very distant from each other, there is occasionally great danger of
a catastrophe. We have just lost an epileptic patient from apoplexy,
who for six months had appeared to be in the way of recovery.
M. Follet indulges in a little theory, upon which, however, he does
not dwell, that the grey matter is but the superficial expansion of the
white substance, tinged by the constant contact of the nervous fluid,
which is, as it were, insulated under the membranes.
The practical suggestions resolve themselves into one or two very
important points. Idiocy and dementia are incurable; but there is
reason to hope that the acute aberrations, whether continued or inter-
mittent, may in time be as amenable to successful treatment as any
other diseases, provided always, and above all other considerations, i
that appropriate treatment be adopted at a sufficiently early 'period.
M. Eollet speaks most highly of influencing the blood through the
ingesta, and so acting indirectly upon the innervation. Temperature
also has a mighty influence in calming excitement amongst the direct
modes of acting upon the innervation. M. Follet speaks most favour-
ably of the pyrophosphate of iron and soda, which, he says, appears to
act most powerfully upon the blood and the nervous element.
Case of Sporadic Cretinism.

M. Baillarger introduced during the year 1857 to the Socie'te
Medico-Psyclwlogique a cretinous girl, with remarks, from which the
following are abstracted:?

"You know, Messieurs, the differences which I have held to be established
between cretinism and idiocy. Cretinism is, according to my views, an arrest
of development of the entire organism. Endemic idiocy is characterized, on
the contrary, by an arrest of development of the intelligence, which establishes
a well-marked difference between these affections. I have just met with a very
remarkable case of sporadic cretinism:?It is a girl, born at Melun, of healthy
and well-formed parents. She presented no peculiarity at birth; she began to
walk at fifteen months, and at this epoch she had not a more voluminous head
than children at that age generally, nor any other distinctive marks. The first
dentition was completed at three years of age, and it was then that the general
development was arrested.

" The girl is now about twenty-seven, and she has the intelligence and tastes
of a child of four or five; she plays with a doll, and has no sentiments of modesty.
It is in vain to attempt any education, she could never learn to read, and can
scarcely count twenty. Speech is easy and pronunciation clear, but the voice
is nasal. Her height is about three feet, the head is elongated and flattened
at the sides, the palatine arch is high and prolonged, the tongue is thick. The
features recal in all points those which we assign to cretinism; the nose is flat,
the mouth large, and the lips thick. The body is fat, the limbs thick and short,
and sufficiently regular. The second dentition only commenced at eighteen
years of age, and has not yet terminated. The pubis is smooth, the mammary
glands rudimentary; menstruation has not been established, and there has never
been any sexual sensation.

"It seems to me that, in an anthropologic point of view, there is much interest
in studying those types which prove that in the human race there are beings
that cannot attain complete development. But I wish to submit to the Society
an idea which has occurred to me in connexion with this individual case. This
girl presents an extraordinary polysarcia. I have before seen in Paris, with
M. Rayer, a little girl who had the same formation; I have also remarked in
the Pyrenees, the extreme obesity of certain cretins. I have considered whether
there is not a relation between the general condition of these arrested organisms
and that of those submitted early to castration. The description which M. Yirey
gives of eunuchs, is this:?'Softness, paleness, and flaccidity of the flesh; re-
laxation of the cellular tissue, great development of the lymphatic and glan-
dular system, absence of hairy appendages, soft and relaxed abdomen, large
thighs; the legs swelled, moisture predominating in all the tissues, appearing
old and decrepid early, little heat of skin?hcnce the name of frigidi given to
eunuchs.'

" In reference to this last fact I have one more relation to notice: the mother
of this girl has informed me that she has a great tendency to coldness, and that
in winter she has to leave her almost entirely in bed, on account of her being
so cold. The picture which M. Virey draws of eunuchs, and what we see of
cretinism, authorizes then some relation; and I believe that we may entertain
the idea that the polysarcia is due to the absence of menstruation, and the
inactivity generally of the generative organs."

M. Baillarger afterwards explained that this only related to the poly-
sarcia, and not to the general condition of arrest of development?the
polysarcia he believed to be a subsequent effect. Further, idiots and
imbeciles have generally the sexual organs well-developed, and these
have the reputation of being salacious. Idiocy and imbecility are cha-
racterized b}r arrest of the intelligence; but in cretins the generative
organs are little developed, or are large, soft, flaccid, infiltrated, and
without any kind of power?in a word, they are undeveloped or im-
perfect. As to the general state, it is due to a special cause, to which
also must be referred the arrest of development of the genital organs,
in the same manner as arrest of development of the stature, and of
dentition, &c.

M. Ferrus, commenting on this case, did not in all points agree with
M. Baillarger, not considering the portrait drawn by liim represented
truly the cretin type. He continued?

" M. Baillarger has expressed formally the opinion that the arrest of develop-
ment in its essence attacks especially the generative apparatus, the organs of
which are soft, flabby, infiltrated, and powerless. I consider that this apparatus
possesses more power than is here attributed to it. I have seen cretins have
powerful erections; and indeed it could not be otherwise, inasmuch as the
great scourge of those countries where cretinism is rife, is that cretins beget
cretins. Eodere has fully shown that cretinism perpetuates itself in a great
number of families. As to the simultaneous existence of idiots and cretins in
the same locality, we cannot deny that where cretinism is endemic, there are
idiots and imbeciles arrested in development, but here cretins are the rule and
idiots the exception." 4

M. Morel agreed so far with M. Baillarger as to grant tlie accord-
ance between eunuchs and cretins as stated by him, but guarded
against the supposition that all those who are affected by sterility or --s
infecundity, are related to either of these unfortunate classes. Many of
them are incapable of propagating the species in the normal state, in
accordance with the laws developed in the treatise on the " Degenera-
tions of the Human Race." These degenerate beings are distinguished
by short stature, bad formation of the head, and often of the thorax;
incomplete or tardy development of puberty, and sometimes by com-
plete inability to procreate. In spite of this latter fact, they are far
from presenting the peculiar type of cretins or eunuchs. M. Morel
believed that the characters of these degenerations are so marked, that
the time will come when, by mere inspection of the subject, we shall
be enabled to refer each form of degeneration to its specific cause.
Somnambulism and Extraordinary Neuroses generally.

By M. Gtarniek and M. Fekrus.
On" the 25th of May, 1857, a discussion took place before the Societe
Medico-Psychologique, in reference to a case recited by M. Cerise, and to
" extraordinary neuroses" generally, which involved questions concern-
ing somnambulism, natural and artificial, and magnetism. We purpose
giving a full abstract of the proceedings of this meeting, to indicate the
state of feeling of our continental brethren on these vexed questions.
M. Gamier spoke first:?

" M. Cerise had related the experience of M. Puel on a patient affected with
catalepsy. During the period of the accession, the patient at first suffered
much from the application of the hand, but afterwards became accustomed to r
it; and then to friction, which, at first painful, became ultimately salutary.
Frictions too difficult to repeat or prolong, were replaced by applications of
cold water, which began by exasperating the patient, and ended by calming
her. It seemed to result from these facts?that the remedy was effective as
soon as the patient was accustomed to it, or had confidence in it. The expe-
rience of M. Cerise showed that the pointing of his cane towards an organ
seemed to determine pain in the part. We might also recal the experience of .
M. Delasiauve upon a maniac who freed himself from his hallucinations, believ-
ing that he was thereby thwarting the machinations of his enemies. A general
law seemed to result from these observations, common to all mental and
nervous affections, that the conviction of the patient, what we call vaguely * 1
imagination, and what M. Delasiauve calls by the more precise name of belief,
exercises a great influence on the condition of the patient, and determines,
according to the opinion of the patient, the relief or the aggravation of the
suffering."

From these observations, we are naturally conducted to somnam-
bulism, in which it appears also that belief plays a great and important
part.

The phenomena observed in artificial somnambulism are, partial or
total insensibility, rigidity of the limbs, excitement of certain faculties,
and, lastly, the transposition of the senses and vision through obstacles.
Leaving aside for the moment this last phenomenon, the only one
wonderful, we find the others presenting themselves to a certain
extent in ordinary states, such as dreams, reveries, or natural som-
nambulism. Between these, then, and artificial somnambulism there
is but a difference of degree. Thus, in profound reverie, a state so
natural and common, the body is sometimes immovable, sometimes
we walk slowly without perceiving surrounding objects; we are in-
sensible to touch, or to voices that address us. On the other hand,
the imagination is on fire: we represent vividly to ourselves the
objects and persons on which our thoughts are engaged; we address
words and gestures to them; we perceive about us only those things
or persons that may have some relation with our internal workings.
In reverie, then, we observe immobility, partial insensibility, and
excitement of the faculties as regards certain objects or certain
persons.

Dreaming presents the same symptoms. Sleep renders us in great
measure immovable, and insensible to objects of perception. Not-
withstanding which, the interior conception is active; it represents
objects with such vivacity that they appear present; and the illusion
is so strong, that we not unfrequently begin to talk, to move about, 01*
even to get up and walk. If at such a time any one questions us in
accordance with the subject of our dream, we perceive the words, and
add our reflections and responses ; being sensible thus to things relative
to our dream, but insensible to all the rest. It is a partial waking
state.

We come now to natural somnambulism, in which all the phenomena
of dreaming and nightmare are more distinctly marked. The som-
nambulist is insensible to a great number of objects of perception, but
very sensible to others. He walks upon the ridges of roofs, and does
not perceive the abyss over which he steps; he answers to a feeble
voice, which speaks to him on the subjects on which he is occupied,
and hears nothing of the clashing of chairs and tables that are moved
about to awaken him. liecal the case of Castelli, related in the
?0 " Encyclopediche wrote by the light of a candle which alone he
could see. If this were extinguished, and others lighted about him,
he stopped writing, and went softly to relight his own. He had only
perception for a certain number of things, and was profoundly in-
sensible to all others. It was a state of partial waking. The opinion,
and, so to speak, the intention of the somnambulist, determines the
amount and direction of the perspicacity or lucidity : one intends to
taste liquids, and perceives if they are changed; another is fixed upon
drinking only one, and finds its flavour in pure water, substituted. It
is true that the conviction or belief of the patient influences his per-
ceptions, as in the examples of nervous and mental maladies before
cited. One somnambulist has, as it were, taken his resolution not to
awake, and he is insensible to pricking, burning, or pinching; another
has his mind directed to awaking, and awakes by the touch of a
feather.

This partial insensibility?this special perspicacity?conducts us to
the phenomena of artificial somnambulism. The chief difference which
separates this from natural somnambulism is, that the one is preceded
by sleep, whilst the other is immediate. It takes place according to
the conviction or belief of the patient. We do not think that there is
any transmission of fluid from the operator to the subject, but only a
belief on the part of the latter that he is about to fall into this state,
which is sufficient to determine its occurrence.

The influence of belief on the production of this state was shown
by the commission appointed by the Academy of Sciences about the
close of the last century, of which Franklin, Bailly, and Lavoisier
formed part. The phenomena of mesmerism were induced upon
patients by telling tliem that they were subjected to the mesmeric
manipulations ; whilst none were produced by such performances, done
without the knowledge of the subject. Since then, it has been asserted
that it was not magnetism, but a fluid passing from the operator, that
produced these phenomena; and that the results could be produced
even in another room. When tried, it was said that the person
operated on speedily began to manifest signs of some action upon
her, to complain of heat, and remove her handkerchief, &c. But
these signs are vague, and may be attributed to many other causes.
In a crowded saloon, it is by no means unfrequent to find persons
incommoded by the heat: perhaps many others had shown such
indications, and bad not been remarked. If the person in question
had complained of cold, or any other sensation, it would no doubt
have been attributed, in like manner, to the influence of the operator.
When to one and the same cause we attribute such contradictory phe-
nomena as heat and cold, we are very like to be deceived as to the
true cause.

It is to this lack of precision in the relation of causes and effects,
that we must attribute the one truly marvellous phenomenon of
artificial somnambulism?that is to say, the pretended transposition of
the senses, and vision across opaque obstacles.

Some have attempted to explain this latter on physical principles ;
as all bodies are porous, there might (it is said) pass through the
most opaque medium a small quantity of light, imperceptible to eyes
in the ordinary condition, but perceptible to the ecstatic regard of
somnambulism. Thus all bodies would become transparent. But
on this view, the bodies supposed to be seen ought to become also
transparent, and therefore ought no more to be seen than the obstacles
themselves.

It appears to us that the account given by somnambulists of the
objects which they profess to see, is always sufficiently general and
vague to apply to a great number of particular objects. A man, worthy
of credence, told us that the first time he went to Marseilles he was
taken to a somnambulist, who said to him, " You came from the
North; your father lives in a small town,?I see him now; he is going
into the cellar." On writing to his father, it was ascertained that at
that time he was going into the cellar. We asked him particularly if
the indication had been just so precise; if it had not been rather,
"You are a stranger; your father is in a small space, and is going
down" (il descend),?vague propositions which might coincide with a
thousand circumstances. He could not deny that it might have been
so, and would not affirm that the information was as precise as it
appeared after the father's answer. It is thus that the Due de St.
Simon relating, after the death of Louis XIV., a pretended vision, anti-
cipatory of the event, which a young girl, looking into a glass of water,
had had, may have inserted into the prediction circumstances which
he only knew by the event. An honourable member of this society
has related that a somnambulist had told him that he had a button
of gold and a twenty-five cent piece. But is he quite certain that he
was told precisely the article, or only that he had something in his
mouth, to which he unconsciously added the designation ?

We cannot too rigorously guard against our taste for the marvellous ;
we love the supernatural, and through this love we often deceive our-
selves. I have been present at a seance, where this disposition was
shown in a striking manner, when the public refused to be undeceived
by one who offered to undergo the same tests as the mesmerized
person.

A final reason arrests me and prevents me believing in any vision
through opaque obstacles. Somnambulists have never seen anything
but objects without any interest either for themselves or others; they
are always blind to objects which might be to them of very great im-
portance. At the time of lotteries, the drawing of the winning
numbers was made at Lyons, Bordeaux, Lille, and Strasbourg, about
10 a.m., and numbers might be purchased in Paris up to 11.30 a.m. It
might have been very profitable to the somnambulists to see these
numbers, but it has never been done. In our own days, after the
landing of our troops in the Crimea, it would have been equal to a
fortune to have followed our army, and seen the victory of the Alma
at the moment. But those who made fortunes were by no means
somnambulists. Those who say that the somnambulists are inspired
by spirits, which also turn and make vocal tables, also say that these
spirits have not any mission to make our fortunes. The spirits prefer
stating how many chairs there are in the next apartment, and how
many coins there are in our neighbour's purse. But those who do not
believe in spirits, but only in, transparent vision, should show us how
it is that they only see frivolous things, and are blind to everything of
importance.

In regard to those phenomena that are credible, there is but a dif-
ference of degree between them and those of reverie, dreaming, &c.
As to the transposition of the senses and the translucent vision, these
are explicable by considering the vagueness of the indications, some
coincidences which have been noted, the neglect of failures, and, above
all, our love for the marvellous.

M. Ferrus thought that, in order to unmask the dangers and the
abuses of magnetism, it ought to be made a subject of special discus-
sion before the society. Magnetism indeed has brought forth a host
of juggleries, with which it would be well to deal scientifically. At
a former epoch we have seen convulsionaires and mesmerists; in our
own times we have table-turnings and familiar spirits. The highest
saloons are open to skilful magnetizers ; recently a lady was so vividly
impressed by one of these exhibitions, that miscarriage was produced.
We ought then to expose the phantasmagorias which impose upon so
many of the weak and unreflecting, and also upon a few highly
honourable persons. It is important, also, to trace the analogies of
these phenomena in the pathological conditions occasionally met with.
There is nothing completely mysterious and that may not be pene-
trated, at the root of these mystical phenomena. I beg to introduce
two cases, which have reference to these questions.
Amid the infinite shades of variety which prevent any exact defini-
tions, spontaneous somnambulism assumes two distinct forms; in the
one, almost analogous or closely united to dreams, it appears a simple
accident of ordinary sleep; in the other it approaches hysteria, cata-
lepsy, and ecstacy. In the first it is very difficult, if not impossible,
to enter into communication with the subject; and it would, perhaps,
be dangerous to attempt it when in a perilous situation. In the
second, on the contrary, where the attacks come on during the waking
state, the subjects easily establish relations with their friends, or even
with strangers. To these two conditions is allied a third?artificial
magnetism, or induced magnetic sleep, in respect of which have arisen
long, angry, obscure, and obstinate debates, which yet await a solu-
tion. We shall confine ourselves at present to a division of somnam-
bulism into nocturnal, which takes place in natural sleep; and diurnal,
which comes on in the waking state, amid the most diverse circum-
stances, and presents the most defined neuropathic characters.
The form assumed by m}r two observations is the latter; they both
occurred in my own practice. The two subjects of them were young,
recently married, happy women of society, and so far from having
anything to gain by fraud, they had both the most powerful motives
for concealing the affection, if it had been possible.

"Case I. Madame N. had been from her infancy subject to slight nervous
affections, which were aggravated at the period ot puberty. After this time
they diminished, and only appeared at long intervals until just before her mar-
riage. Of an hysterical character, these affections were then almost instan-
taneously developed under the influence of a strong moral emotion. She
had witnessed an assassination. Marriage did not diminish, but rather increased
their intensity; at a later period, their form was modified; from being hyste-
rical, they were progressively transformed into a cataleptieo-magnetic sleep, to
which sometimes convulsive movements were added. Prom this condition she
could not by any means be aroused, yet she answered exactly to the questions
of her husband, who brought himself into relation with her by simple contact;
and she predicted the return of the crisis, without preserving on her awaking
the least remembrance of what had passed. Pathological conditions worthy of
notice had preceded or coexisted with the somnambulistic condition; Ma-
dame N. had been almost completely deaf for two months, without obvious
cause. This was now reproduced, apparently as a sequel to a jolt in a car-
riage, and lasted a year.

" There were frequent febrile attacks, with shivering and burning, during a
space of fourteen months; and in this time her stature increased an inch,
although she had passed the age of ordinary growth.

" The crises, which, as to duration, varied from one to two hours, were ordi-
narily preceded by uneasiness, agitation, numbness, and pandiculation; and
immediately before the accession, an acute pain in the nape of the neck. MM.
Lallemand and Planidoux, who were consulted, after some hesitation pro-
nounced it a case of natural somnambulism.

"Madame N. was submitted at Nimes, where she then lived, with the con-
sent of those two physicians, to the operations of a magnetiser, a relative.
*r During the induced sleep, she gave marks of great lucidity.
" On another occasion, at Montpellier, when no one was present but her
husband and M. Lallemand, who has often related the circumstances to me,
Madame N., during the natural attack, declared that she saw a person of her
acquaintance going to a chemist's shop, distant from the house, in a large
flowing dressing-gown. This was her father; and M. Lallemand going out to
inquire, found that the circumstance had occurred as she had related it.
" Being called in to give my opinion on the state of Madame N., I also ob-
served many remarkable peculiarities. Although presenting a very healthy
appearance, she had frequent malaise. The principal functions of the economy
were performed with sufficient regularity?nutrition, for example, was perfect;
but the appetite was fantastic to the extreme. A lively exaltation of the cuta-
neous sensibility was manifest in the cervical region, about the spinous process
of the second vertebra. Even in the normal state, she complained much of the
lightest touch there. All impressions which she received seemed to 'echo'
there. Having once touched this part as gently as possible, Madame N. felt
extreme pain there the whole day. The touch of a Napoleon caused less suf-
fering ; the temperature of the gold rose rapidly on the contact. This essay
led me to try the application of a piece of magnetized steel. During one of the
crises I touched the painful spot with this, and she manifested 110 uneasiness ;
on awaking, the ordinary suffering was less than usual; and these results have
been repeated.

"After many attempts, I succeeded in establishing a communication by voice
between us. Informed hastily by her husband that she was in a state of som-
nambulism, I went to see her. She was immovable in bed, and did not seem
conscious of my arrival. My hand was placed in hers by her husband. Her
limbs were in a complete state of relaxation, not presenting the rigid pheno-
mena of catalepsy.

"At first Madame N. only repeated my last words, but at length seemed to
recognise me, and said?' Ah ! it is he who wishes to cure me; he has under-
taken a difficult task; he wishes to give me sulphate of quinine; it is well, I
have no objection; let him do what he will; besides, I know nothing; somnam-
bulists generally say foolish things.' She then went on to describe the me-
v thods that had been before adopted for her cure, and mimicked with spirit the
brusquerie of M Lallemand, and the gentle soothing manner of M. Planidoux.
t " Before the application of the magnetized steel, 1 had once observed Madame
N. during the sleep. She had announced during the previous crisis the day
and hour when the next would occur; at this I proposed to be present. I was
there before the time ; the patient knew nothing of her own prediction ; but a
little before the time announced, she told me she felt inclined to sleep, and she
lost gradually her accustomed vivacity. She became uneasy ; the respiration
became quicker, and slightly stertoreous; she then slept without the least
agitation.

" At this latter examination, Madame N. had exacted from me a promise that
I would not touch her?a promise which I should have kept, but during her
husband's absence her arm was thrown out of bed, and struck violently a marble
slab. I tried to replace it, but the attempt caused great suffering; and after
she awoke, which took place without any consciousness of what had passed,
she complained of great pain the whole length of the arm.

"Madame N. was occupied during her sleep with the same subjects that
had formed the topics of her waking conversation. Thus, having been relating
to me the death of a man whom she very much disliked, in her sleep she
assured me 'que le diable lui-meme ne voudrait pas de son ame.'"

" Case II. Madame B., a native of Havannah, ?ct. nineteen, married eighteen
months before, had always before her marriage enjoyed good health, with the
exception of some nervous pains with tendency to faintness. Nevertheless, she
was occasionally affected with low spirits and involuntary tears. Sexual inter-
course gave her some pain, and at the approach of the menstrual period she
had considerable lumbar pains. All at once, at the beginning of Feb., 1811,
without appreciable cause, she fell anew into repeated syncopal attacks, with
hysteriform convulsions, delirium, and hallucinations. These symptoms, after
some hours, were calmed by the use of assafoetida. On the following days,
particularly after meals, there occurred slight crises, marked at first by impa-
tience and irritability, then by insensibility of the organs of the senses, by un-
certainty of action and torpor of the intellectual functions. Towards the
middle of the month, the occurrence of the menstrual flow checked the recur-
rence of these phenomena; but a week had scarcely elapsed when the syncope,
convulsions, lumbar pains, the delirium and hallucinations reappeared with
increased frequency and violence. The first half of March was quiet;?on the
16th there were headache, vertigo, and pains in the groin. The patient said,
also, that ' something ran along the eye, and the eyelids fell in spite of herself.'
These phenomena again disappeared with the return of the menses. On the
26th, at midday, the convulsive movements returned; the ears tingled, the eyes
closed; at last Madame B. neither saw nor heard, yet she spoke volubly, and
expressed herself clearly. In this state she got up to go out, made two or
three steps in the street, then suddenly complaining of feeling something go
down from her head to her feet, she regained the use of her senses, and con-
tinued her walk. Similar attacks, generally preceded by renal pains, occurred
frequently in the beginning of April. Prom the 12th to the 15th there occurred
delirium and hallucinations, which left much weight of head behind. On the
23rd, Madame B. was frightened by a storm, and had syncope, convulsions,
and delirium, which were repeated during three days. On the 26th, the acces-
sion assumed an entirely different form. To the preceding symptoms was
added an excessive sensibility of the whole surface; the different parts of the
body became successively motionless, and as if paralysed. She could not breathe
without great labour, tlie tongue did not obey the will, deglutition was impos-
sible, vision became extinct, and consciousness was lost. She was made to
breathe assafoetida, and the symptoms subsided after twelve hours. In subse-
quent attacks there were other strange symptoms. There were, at first, con-
vulsive movements; the globe of the eye rolled upwards so as only to show the
sclerotica; there were hallucinations. She spoke incoherently; then her mind
seemed to be enlightened, the ideas became connected, and her thoughts and
language assumed an unwonted elevation. Although surrounded by friends,
she thought herself alone. On awaking, she asked for food, and then slept
peaceably until the next morning. Her features then were heavy; she reco-
gnised those about her, but knew nothing of what had passed the day before.
There were repeated attacks of the same nature, during which she would recal
events which had transpired in the previous crises. Sometimes when appa-
rently well, and in all other respects collected, she would miscal her husband
and all her friends. One of the attacks was complicated by an extremely
violent lumbar pain. She said it felt as though each bone of the spine was
divided from the other, and in each a boiling liquid.
-
"In September, being called upon again to take charge of Madame B., I
had ample opportunities of verifying the singular phenomena of this affection,
to which, also, many of our medical brethren can testify. The treatment which
I prescribed was followed for some months by a notable amendment; but the
weather having become very cold and wet, the crises occurred again at very
short intervals. Their nature is shown in the following letter to me from her
husband, an eminent litterateur and advocate. The clear and simple style of
the document, and the honourable character of M. 13., do not permit any "doubt
of the veracity of the narrative:?

"' The more 1 observe the strange malady of my poor wife, the more I am
.Jv astonished at the phenomena of double existence which it produces in her.
When she recovers her senses, she knows nothing of what has passed in the
attack; when she is again ill, she recals the former attack with surprising
fidelity. At these times the senses seem changed; she has even special ones;
she hears certain words, and not others; she recognises the portraits of per-
sons, and not the persons themselves. In what she does and says, all is con-
nected and rational; she takes up the thread of ideas from one accession to
another; orders the details of the menage, and calculates her accounts without
committing the least error. As the attacks succeed each other with great
rapidity, she awakes doing things which she cannot explain?so little relation
have the two lives to each other. Any pain, however slight, wherever origi-
nating, brings on these attacks; and their strength is proportionate to the
pain. In its slightest degree, some attention is required to discover the symp-
toms of the nervous state; if this degree augments a little, she becomes ani-
mated, gesticulates and speaks with force, and her features are convulsed; if it
be more advanced still, the condition of isolation is developed, she neither hears
nor sees any one, speaks to herself, recites, runs, sings, laughs, and weeps;
lastly, her discourse becomes incoherent, she confounds objects, loses certain
senses, and supplies their place by others, which experience every day reveals
to me. There are other effects not less bizarre: she is at such times deprived
of the faculty of pronouncing diphthongs and certain consonants, seeming like
a child learning to speak. Suddenly one of the senses fails, or an organ is
paralysed: a finger, the eyelid, the tongue, the knee, the lips, &c. In other
cases the exhaustion is so complete that all movement is impossible, yet she
hears all that I say; for in coming out of this state, she repeats word for word
what was said. Lastly, if on awaking she forgets all that has passed during
sleep, it is not so with the sleep, in which she knows all in which she has been
engaged before the accession of the affection.'

" During the numerous visits which I paid, I observed myself the greater
part of the circumstances mentioned by M. B. Generally she did not reco-
gnise me, although she named me immediately on having shown to her a pho-
tographic portrait of me. She did not distinguish my voice, and to convince
her of my presence I had to place under her eyes my signature, which she then
compared with one which was underneath the above-mentioned portrait. I re-
proached her one day for ingratitude iu not having answered some compliments
which I had paid her; but as she did not seem to understand, I wrote it down.
She then took a pen and excused herself, on the plea that she had not reco-
gnised me, but was very grateful for all my cares. Thus another anomaly was
manifest, as she read this with eyes upturned under the lids, not having been
able either to see or hear me. However this may be, the accidents became by
degrees less frequent, and finally ceased. Since then Madame B. has become
a mother, and she does not now retain any traces of her old sufferings."
General Observations.?It was the same with Madame !N" . In
both cases the affection was circumscribed within a period of four or
gix years.

In the last instance, so curious from the mobility and infinite variety
of the symptoms, the characters of somnambulism were even more
clearly marked than in the first instance. Not only could Madame
B answer questions, and perceive objects otherwise than by sight,
but she rose up, walked, rode, eat, looked after the house, wrote, made
up her accounts?did, in a word, all that a somnambulist could do.
The attack being passed, she forgot every act connected with it, but
on the next occasion took up the broken thread. Nevertheless, if in
all these particulars these two cases seem allied to natural som-
nambulism, in others, not less important, they differ widely from it,
and require to be placed in a separate category. Whilst natural som-
nambulism occurs without shock, in the night, in course of sleep, these
affections come on indifferently at any hour of the day, when the
patient is awake, and under the form of a nervous crisis. Lucid sleep
is not then a simple modification of ordinary sleep; it results from the
violence of the cerebral spasm (du spasme cerebral), and very often
the attacks are ushered in by divers precursory phenomena?general
disquiet and uneasiness in the limbs, headache, vertigo, sadness, weep-
ing, desire to laugh involuntarily, yawning, numbness, syncope, agita-
tions or convulsions. In one of our cases there was pain in the nape
of the neck; in the other, lumbar pain and general exalted cutaneous
sensibility. (M. Ferrus proceeds to indicate the further differences
between this condition and that of natural somnambulism, which may
be seen by comparing the phenomena of the cases recited.)
Considering these numerous differences, we are naturally led to
admit two sorts of somnambulism; one equally known to physicians
and the public, and another which is related to certain periodic neu-
roses, if even it may not be considered a variety of these, upon which
the phenomena of somnambulism are engrafted; these occurring
always at a comparatively advanced period of the affection, the earlier
stages of which resemble a melange of syncope, catalepsy, hysteria,
and delirium.

The astonishment and the lively interest and curiosity which attach
to the singular symptoms of this kind of somnambulism, have caused
authors to neglect the medical and practical view of the question ; and
so we know but little of the etiology, the progress, and prognosis of
this affection. "VYe may conjecture that the general causes are those
common to nervous maladies. As to the immediate causes, we are
still in the dark. In these two cases, menstruation exercised an oppo-
site influence. In one, the crises corresponded with the approach of
the period ; in the other, they were temporarily relieved by it. In
the course of the malady, the general health and intelligence were but
little affected, and the sequelje were unimportant. Yet we may suppose
that from these, as from other neuroses, might result mental alteration,
profound and durable. In neither case have we traced any direct
hereditary influence. Both were born and brought up in hot climates;
both were cured after four or five years of suffering; both became
pregnant after some years of marriage, and after the entire cessation
of the affection. Their children are living. Both have become
widows, without any recurrence of the attacks from the profound
grief which they experienced. The question arises as to the relation
of such phenomena to those of mesmerism: we only propose, but do
not at present attempt to answer it. One word in conclusion: we
must admit nothing without examination?without proofs and prudent
investigation. This obligation is imperious to every serious inquirer:
it is equally the duty of every friend of science to repudiate nothing
which experience may render manifest. In a word, we must neither
be in haste to recognise the existence of extraordinary facts, and to
deduce theories from them, nor irrevocably to reject phenomena,
because they pass the ordinary limits of our knowledge.

On Disordered Sentiments and Affections. By M. Auzony.
In the "Annales Medico-Psychologiques" for January, 1858, M.
Auzony gives an analysis of 415 cases of insanity observed during
three months at the Asylum at Fains, with a view to ascertaining the
frequency and conditions of the complications of intellectual disorders
with those of the affections and emotions. For this limitation of time,
certain reasons are given which lead the author to prefer a short
observation to a long one.

The emotions may be directed singly or simultaneously to four
objects?God, the individual himself, his family, and his species,?
and are manifested as
1. Adoration, honour, worship, love, fear, &c.
2. Instinct of self-preservation.
3. Instinct of reproduction, including the sexual emotion, conjugal
and parental affection, and the general feeling of the ties of consan-
guinity, &c.
4. The instinct of social relations, including politeness, benevolence,
pity, esteem, gratitude, justice, generosity, admiration, courage, en-
thusiasm, patriotism, &c.

All these are susceptible of exaggeration, of diminution, of perver-
sion, and of abolition. Thus, in the first class, exaggeration produces
mysticism, superstition, and demonomania ; diminution produces scepti-
cism, incredulity, Volt air eianism ; perversion produces blasphemy, and
apostacy; and abolition produces indifference, materialism, and atheism.
The corresponding results in the second class are, from exaggeration,
egotism, covetousness, fear, pride, ambition; from diminution, pro-
digality, rashness, carelessness ; from perversion, avarice, intemperance,
mortifications, voluntary mutilations, and suicides; from abolition,
apathy and inertia. In the other classes, similar perversions result in
hatred, treason, jealousy, erotism, contempt, mockery, harshness,
pride, ingratitude, revenge, cowardice, homicide, &c.

The kind of malady in its successive phases influences greatly the
mode of alteration of these emotional faculties. Thus, in paralytic
insanity, there is most frequently observed at the commencement an
exaggeration of the sentiments, then perversion, followed by enfeeble-
ment and obliteration; and similar variations are observed in the
other forms. From the tables given it appears that " delirium of the
affections" almost constantly complicates that of the intellect. Out
of the four hundred and fifteen cases, there were only thirty in which
the integrity of the emotional faculties was preserved; and it cannot
he doubted that a longer observation of these cases would have greatly
reduced the proportion. Of these thirty, eight were imbecile; seven
were cases of intermittent mania; six were melancholia; four were
monomania; two were mania ; two were epileptics ; and one was para- ,a
lytic insanity. In the three remaining sections of the classification
adopted?stupidity, dementia, and idiocy?all the cases were com-
plicated with some emotional or affective disorder.

The classification here alluded to is in itself not without interest. The
415 cases comprised all that were treated during the three months at
Fains, and are divided into two groups in some degree corresponding*
to acute and chronic cases. The first includes mania (36); intermit-
tent, or remittent mania (53); monomania (43); lypemania or melan-
cholia (73); in all 205 cases. The second includes stupidity (4);
dementia (71); paralytic insanity (14); epileptic insanity (27); imbe-
cility (71); and idiocy (23); in all 210 cases.

These two groups, nearly equal in number, vary much in their rela-
tions to emotional complications. In the former group, the emotions
were perverted or exaggerated in 30 and 34 per cent, of the cases;
whilst in the latter group the proportions were but 10 per cent, of
perversions, and 4 per cent, of exaggerations. On the other hand, in the
former group, there was only a proportion of 20 per cent, of enfeeble- v,
ment, and six per cent, of abolition of these faculties, whilst in the
latter, 35 per cent, were enfeebled, and 45 per cent, abolished. \
Of the whole number (415), in 85 cases (or 20 per cent.), the sen-
timents were perverted; in 77 cases they were exaggerated; in 116
(or 28 per cent.) they were enfeebled; and in 109 (or 26 per cent.)
they were abolished.

The perversions of affective sentiment were by far the most frequent
in lypemania, occurring in 27 cases out of 73. The exaggerations
were proportionally the most frequent in mania, occurring in 19 out of
53 cases of the remittent character, and in 15 out of 36 of the con-
tinued kind. Diminution of the affections was observed by much the
most frequently in imbecility, viz.?in 34 out of 71 cases. Abolition
was, as might be expected, most frequent in dementia?in 44 out
of 71 cases. The following table will facilitate reference:??
State of Emotional *]
Faculties. 1st Group. 2nd Group. Total. V
Integrity in ... 19 ... 11 ... 30
Perversion ? ... 63 ... 22 ... 85
Exaggeration ? . . . 69 8 ... 77
Diminution ? . . . 42 . . . 74 . . 116
Abolition ? . . . 12 . . . 95 . . . 107
Whole numberv . . 205 . . .210 . . . 415
M. Auzony remarks, in conclusion, that although as a general rule
the disorder of the affections is consequent upon, and due to, that of
* Not M. Auzony's analogy, we ought to add.

the intellect, the order may be reversed, and the " effect become the
cause." Thus, a young advocate of perfectly sound mind, and with
no hereditary tendency to insanity, having obtained the promise of the
hand of a young lady to whom he was devotedly attached, could not
support the happiness, and became a prey to incurable melancholy,
with hallucinations and constant chimerical terrors. He adds that
this "delirium of the affections" requires the same kind of treatment
as that of the intellect; but that the moral treatment ought to " pre-
dominate, and, in fact, be almost exclusive. It requires, also, on the
part of the medical attendants, an increase of vigilance, of tact, and of
discernment."

Case of Mania with Homicidal Tendency. By M. Morel.
(Abridged.)

On May 3rd, 1852, Joseph Chanel, a road-labourer in the depart-
ment of the Yosges, met an acquaintance named Olivier, whom he
passed apparently sulkily, without taking any notice of his salutation.
Immediately afterwards Olivier heard piercing cries, and on turning
saw Chanel pursuing a child, whom he seized by the collar, and killed
by repeated blows with a hatchet. Olivier wished to advance to pre-
vent the murder, but dare not, as Chanel, brandishing his weapon,
threatened to kill him also if he came near. He passed several men
whom he also threatened to kill, " as he had done that other one," if
they molested him. Returning home quietly, after purchasing his pro-
visions, he was arrested by force of numbers, and said, " What do you
want ? I have killed a child, I don't repent of it; it is time to have
done with them." Examined, he acknowledged the crime without
any expression of regret; he wished to kill some one on that day, and
had taken his hatchet out on purpose. Taken to the prison of Epinal,
he was violent, and said that "all his food was poisoned." The phy-
sician, however, did not think him insane. On the 23rd of May, he
was removed to the Asylum of Mareville, to be under the observation
of MM. Morel and Blondlot.

The report of these alienists is divided into three parts :?
1. His present mental condition.
2. His antecedents.
3. The conclusions drawn from these.
1. On his admission to Mareville, Chanel was violent, and abused
and attempted to strike the officials. His expression was sombre, his
eye threatening; he required the strait waistcoat. He answerfed con-
temptuously or abusively all questions and observations : " What are
you preaching about? 1 don't like sermons." He whistled and sung,
but ultimately answered more calmly. " What I have done, is done?
it was time to end it; if you had suffered as I have you would soon
see " All that could be understood of his sufferings was that
all his food was constantly poisoned by some unknown agencies, which
he called " Magogie" and "Question." Moreover, he affirmed that
he was not insane, but expressed the utmost indifference to his
fate.

There was no sign of physical disturbance ; pulse about fifty; tongue
clean and natural; appetite normal; sleep apparently untroubled.
Sometimes he was mute, but after the douche he became more tract-
able.

On the 27th there appeared a change ; he was no longer violent,
but depressed and looked on the ground constantly. On being ques-
tioned, he would only answer "You know all about it."
Interrogated on the 3rd of June, he answered as usual; but M.
Blondlot attempted to reason with him : " Granting that your food
was poisoned, is that a reason for killing a child?" "That may
be, but it was time to end it?as well him as another." On the 15th
he again became violent, and refused food. There was a furred tongue,
which he attributed to poisoned food as usual. An emetic, which
acted violently and copiously on the stomach and bowels, and a bath,
restored the former condition. When again tranquil, Dr Morel urged
him to write to his mother, " as he was likely to be condemned to
death." He did so, but with indifference as to his fate. On the 5th
of July, renewed violence with public indecency, attended as before
by digestive disorder. M. Morel remarks that there was a striking
periodicity in these functional perturbations; and that they were
always attended by greater mental agitation. Up to the 26th of
September nothing more could be elicited by question or observation,
than that his food was poisoned, not by a poison that kills, but that
causes great discomfort. His vengeance must fall upon some one, no
matter whom ; and he had killed the child to make an end of the
business (pour que cela Jinisse). He was ready to do the like again
if tormented any more. He was not insane, and would rather die on
the block than be thought so. For the rest, total and brutish in-
difference.

2. At the age of nineteen he enlisted voluntarily, and after seven years'
service he was discharged with a certificate of good conduct, in April,
1838. In 1848 he was local commandant of the National Guard, and in
the same year was engaged to be married ; but he committed certain ex-
travagances, for which he was removed to the Asylum of Mareville, as
likely to compromise the public safety. He was there quiet and orderly,
and in a few months was restored to his family and his public func-
tions. Before this it appears he had taken to drinking, had complained
of headache, and had cranial and facial erysipelas, with epistaxis and
bleeding from the ears. After this, his gait was occasionally hesitating,
and his face frequently injected ; his arms were affected with convulsive
actions also. It was soon after this that he entered Mareville. Leav-
ing the asylum in February, 1849, he was observed in a few months to
be affected with great religious exaltation of sentiment. He attended
all religious services, fasted rigorously, and confessed such sins that he
said the priest was lache for giving him absolution.

After the midnight mass, in 1851, he again changed completely?
believed in nothing, blasphemed much, committed great excesses, and
wrote threatening letters to the priests and civil authorities. Then
appeared for the first time his dominant idea of the poisoned food, on
which subject he quarrelled with all his family, and, becoming
gradually more and more violent, at last committed the crime
related.

3. In the judgment passed on this case, M. Morel reviews the pre-
ceding circumstances, weighing their value and significance, and con-
cludes that Chanel is a " depraved (abruti) being, in whom the senti-
ments are completely disorganized, and whose intellect has never
been well developed. We have carefully guarded (he continues) against
a simulated insanity; we have observed him at all hours of the day
and night ; we have tried to ascertain if these periodical returns are
the expression of a pathological condition: we have continued our
observations for four months, and we are convinced that all the
acts of this man were the result of a general perturbation of the in-
tellectual faculties. Chanel is a hypochondriacal maniac, with syste-
matic ideas of persecution and evil influence exercised upon his person.
This affection presents periods of exacerbation, and whatever may be
the decision of the law, we are of opinion that any return to
society should be interdicted to this individual, perverted both in his
intelligence and his emotions."

In commenting on this case, M. Morel takes occasion to contest the
theory of monomania as set forth by Ruel, Esquirol, Marc, and Georget.
He rejects incendiary, homicidal, and other monomanias, as forming
distinct affections of themselves, and considers them as " tenden-
cies and symptoms" of the principal fundamental malady, general
mental derangement. In support of this he analyses certain cases
brought forward as illustrative of these monomanias, and shows that
in the history of such cases there was ample reason to perceive that,
independent of the crowning acts which gave character to the disease,
there was general derangement of the mental functions, more or less
explicitly marked.

On the Pathogenic Influence of Loss of Sleep.
By M. E. IIenaudin.
M. Renaudin's observations on this subject are so interesting and
important, not only as showing the powerful influence of insomnia in
the production of disease, but also as indicating the loose analysis of
phenomena which is too often made in the science of etiology, that
we shall endeavour in as brief a space as practicable to give the whole
of his views.

" In tracing back effects to causes, we are often content with having found
a cause which may have produced the effect, without carefully examining the
whole of the phenomena; we often arrive at etiological data accepted without
control, transmitted without examination, and by and by transformed into
axioms which no one thinks of contesting Where is the young girl who lias
not indulged in one or two dreams of love ? If insanity follows some such
dream, the statistics of moral causes are increased by a unit. If it follows a
deception or a loss of property, again this is accepted without inquiry as the
' moral cause' of the affection. Lately the list of causes has been increased
by another?viz., the residence amongst the insane. But between the fact
which we consider the cause, and the malady which we regard as the effect,
there are intermediate events which we pass over in silence; which nevertheless
often contain the pathogenic knot which it is of so much importance to un-
loose. I confine myself on this occasion to speak of one only, which plays an
important part in the production of disease?loss of sleep.

" Ordinary maladies exhibit notable modifications, according as they are com-
plicated or not with insomnia, Very powerful is the influence of sleep over
nervous and inflammatory diseases, where opiates produce remarkable results,
as well as over affcctions of the digestive organs. We may observe daily how
Erejudicial is interrupted sleep to the performance of the digestive functions,
?erangement is produced when the normal duration of sleep is abridged by
mental excitement or occupation. This effect varies from age to age, and the
younger the subject the more necessary is sleep. If too often interrupted,
there results a state of cerebral excitement, which prevents the possibility of
the return of natural sleep without the employment of therapeutic agency. The
confusion of ideas which is constantly experienced in the transition from the
sleeping to the waking condition, becomes constant in the cases alluded to, and
is aggravated into a form of insanity, the special type of which depends upon
other causes which have preceded or induced this sleeplessness. The citation
of certain facts will illustrate the position.

"Wlieu, in 1842, I undertook the direction of the Asylum of Tains, the
cellular system was in great repute, and the thirty apartments which were in
each section contained in a very small space individuals who could give them-
selves up to all the vagaries of their riotous delirium. The walls were thin,
and yell arousing yell, there resulted an insomnia concert, which aggravated
and perpetuated the delirium. The system being changed, this agitation dis-
appeared ; and amongst the patients many owe their recovery to the peace and
quiet they were thus enabled to enjoy. But before this took place I had been
taught a very important lesson. The nurses attached to this quarter began
very soon after their admission to lose those qualifications which had induced
us to select them. Their character became awkward, their irritability increased
day by day, their intelligence declined gradually, and in some impending stu-
pidity rendered their dismissal necessary, as well as a brutality utterly different
from their primitive character. The privation and interruption of sleep had
caused these changes, which disappeared quickly when they were removed
and could have rest and quiet. The same results accrue to the nurses who
sleep in quiet wards, and yet are unable to rest without interruption from
fear.

"On my entrance at Mareville, I found the same results attending the
cellular system. Whilst this was in operation the nurses had to be almost
constantly changed, from causes similar to those just mentioned; and very few
were found who could resist the consequences of such deprivation of sleep?
consequences in many cases very serious.

" A young nurse was admitted a short time ago into the asylum, when, for
some nights, the turbulence of the patients in her division interrupted con-
stantly her sleep. Not daring to acknowledge her fatigue and claim some
hours of repose, she laboured on without complaining of any inconvenience.
Four days passed thus, but on the fifth she presented all the characters of an
access of mania, hallucinations, excitement, restlessness, incoherence, &c. Had
this continued long, the mania would have become fixed, but the cause being
recognised, she soon recovered by opiates and repose. Two other cases more
obstinate occurred within a short time. These facts are certainly exceptions,
but the statement of such extreme cases will throw light upon other slighter
phenomena,

"A man of good constitution, of jovial temper, and most irreproachable
character, was suddenly informed that a grave accusation had been calum-
niously brought against him, and the letter in which it was contained was
shown him. The blow was too severe, and he exhibited an excitement almost
maniacal. The first emotion passed away, he resumed his occupations, and his
family hoped that all was well. They reckoned, however, without taking into
consideration the insomnia, which remained as the final consequence of the moral
tortures he had undergone. The least event startled him, the circulation was
accelerated, the beatings of the heart became tumultuous, and after an incuba-
tion of some days, a violent attack of mania broke out. This was attributed
directly to the moral cause, without investigating the process of evolution, and
for some time nothing was done but to combat congestion, &c. At last opium
and digitalis were given with notable good results; but for some reason or other
this medication was abandoned, and the mania manifested itself anew with great
violence, and will now doubtless be incurable. This case indicates the neces-
sity of seizing opportunity as wrell as the proper remedies, or the time comes when
treating properly the original cause will no longer remove the effect; the habit
has become chronic. Sleep, re-established too late, fails to bring back calmness
or the reaction of reason.

" I have been able in another case to trace the pathogenic influence of want
of sleep in the production of delirium. A young girl, arrived at the age when
the besoin d'aimer is strong, had some hysterical symptoms, which ended in a
maniacal attack, which was most violent when she saw any youth with a
resemblance to an ideal formed in her own mind, during a state of hallucination
consequent upon loss of sleep. Her friends at first saw only the agitation,
without seeking deeply into the cause, and instead of trying to obtain sleep
they made her take prolonged baths at Plombieres; the consequence of which
was that the insomnia became chronic. The use of opiates produced a notable
amelioration; when she could sleep the hallucinations almost disappeared, but
as soon as the insomnia returned, the delicious conceptions returned also, and
became in some measure fixed.

" I add the relation of another case which strongly indicates the necessity of
examining minutely into the initial phenomena of this formidable malady:?It
is that of a lady in whose family it was impossible to trace the least hereditary
taint, herself being a person of extraordinary force of character. Her husband
lost a large amount of money, and shortly afterwards she fell into a state of
lypemania, against which the resources of medical skill have been hitherto
powerless. Grief was regarded by all as the cause of this, but a more minute
inquiry revealed a very different kind of sequence. These are the facts: one
day she entered the house of a relative who had committed suicide,* and saw
the body without having been forewarned. Wishing to relieve her husband of
some care, she examined the papers of the deceased, and found details of the
most delirious conceptions. She destroyed every trace of this, and had scarcely
finished when her husband entered, and informed her of his losses. She
appeared at first soothed by the consolations of her friends, but continued
sleepless ; no one inquired about this fact, and she did not think of mentioning
it. A few hours of slumber might have saved her, but prolonged insomnia
was followed by profound stupor, which will most probably terminate in
dementia."

Loss of sleep seems also to be the primordial element of that marasmus
which terminates the life of certain maniacs, who seem to have no
other lesion than a gradual loss of power, a true inanition from default
of assimilation. We also remark the comparative harmlessness of
even great excitement, when sleep is not interfered with; and the
dangers of the period of prostration are increased in proportion as the

* The ensuing relation seems scarcely consistent with the previous statement as
to the absence of hereditary tendency.
period of exitement lias been marked by more or less insomnia. It is
ordinarily by insomnia that tlie periodic returns of mania commence,
followed by gastric disorder; and if we carefully observe these symp-
toms in those subject to periodical attacks, we may not infrequently
cause the attack to abort, or at least make it a very mild one. Again
we observe in continued mania, that insomnia marks the periods of
aggravation and recrudescence of the delirious conceptions. In many
cases, so long as regular sleep can be obtained, the malady is reduced
to a quiescent state, a sort of " abstract virtualitybut a few days
of insomnia suffice to light it up actively again. One of our mono-
maniacs is in this ease; he is the creator of heaven and earth; but
beyond this conception he is one of the most polite and mild of men ;
but deprived of sleep from any cause, he becomes irritable, and a prey
to extreme excitement; and thus his theoretic delirium becomes open
and practical.

Chronic insomnia is frequent amongst those who pass lonely lives,
especially females; this arises from nocturnal terrors, and is often the
cause of insanity. There is, at this time, in Mareville, a woman aged
40, who, under the influence of these nocturnal terrors, has become
gradually subject to hallucinations of the eye and ear, which at first
ceased when she was no longer alone. After some time the expressions
of her terror ceased, and an amendment was anticipated; but instead
of this, it was found that the supposed phantom had acquired more
force and power, even sufficient to repress all manifestation of affri gbt,
by the order of an audible voice. This person would not have arrived
at this point without the insomnia and the solitary dwelling.
" In general, when a moral cause has been the point of departure of
mental alienation, it is rare that insomnia has not had an important
share in the development of the affection, which, prepared by the
psychical element, is only definitively organized when the somatic
element has done its work by loss of repose."
