On Suicide
============

Aet. II. ?
If it were possible to be satisfied with the popular notion of
suicide?"that self-murder is sometimes committed without any
sign of mental disease, and sometimes with symptoms indicating
such malady"?there would not be any necessity to investigate the
subject. But we contend that the occasional verdicts of coroners'
juries furnish the best proof that there still exists much more
ignorance in the mind of the community, on the mors voluntaria,
than, for the sake of humanity, ought to prevail.
Cicero, looking with a philosophic eye on the subject, seems to
have regarded the fact, that no one could be sane who was guilty
of self-murder.* A careful examination of his ideas will clearly
show that he had formed a sound opinion as to the improbability
of suicides being in a normal condition of mind ; for he truly says,
" The first tiling we should understand is, that every animal loves
itself, which, although it be a proposition not to be called into
doubt," &c. " How," he continues, " can it ever be understood or
imagined for a moment that there can be any animal that hates
itself? for contraries would thereby arise, when that desire of
the soul arises advisedly to take something to itself which is
hurtful to itself; when it does so for its own sake, it must both
hate and love itself at the same time, ivhich is impossible."
And yet such a contradictory view of the subject must be
obvious, when the different verdicts of coroners' juries are
recorded. By their decision, we must understand that there
exist cases of self-destruction in which the perpetrators have,
with a species of prepense against themselves, without any suffi-
cient real or imaginary cause, committed suicide, and for this
reason they record the verdict of self-murder (felo-cle-se); and
these supposed deliberately guilty personages were, in conse-
quence, buried in unconsecrated ground, or without any burial
service. On the other hand, when there has been unmistakeable
evidence of mental aberration, and some presumptive evidence
that there existed actual disease of the brain, then there is pro- ??
nounced a verdict of " temporary insanity."
We shall, however, submit evidence to prove that in all suicidal
* " Primum est intelligamus omne animal seipsum diligere qui potest
intelligi, aut cogitari esse aliquod animal, quod se oderit ? necesse est qui-
dem, si quis sibi ipsi inimicus est, eum quae bona sunt mala putare, bona contra
qua) mala: et quae appetenda fugere; et quse fugienda appetere .... sed alii
dolore moventur, alii cupiditate, iracundia etiam multi efferuntur: et cum in
mala scientes ruunt, tamen Se optimfe Sibi consulere arbitrantur."?Cicero de
Finibus Boni et Mali, lib. v. par. 17, p. 147, c., &c. ; Edition de la Reviere, 1606,
small folio. /
ON SUICIDE. 397
cases tliere is an abnormal condition of the mental faculties, and
that when there is not any manifestation of actual disease, there
may he certain indications of functional derangement of the brain,
or great visceral disturbance, producing sympathetic disturbance of
the intellectual and moral attributes. Suicide can never be com-
mitted when the mind is perfectly healthy, as in such condition
the strong instinctive love of life tends to render men careful of
injuring themselves by the infliction of pain; and, therefore, when
the attempt is made to destroy life itself, by whatever methods it
may be effected, this can never take place in those who are actually
sane. There is not anything startling or novel in this proposition;
and we shall endeavour to confirm the soundness of it, by showing
that the predisposing causes of suicide are similar to those which
induce the various forms of insanity?namely, ungovernable pas-
sions, as disappointed ambition, excessive pride, the love of fame,
and the irritation experienced when it is not realized; from sudden
reverses of fortune; from grief, or anxiety, or strong apprehension of
danger; from fear, despair, and melancholy ; from unmerited dis-
dain or contempt; and from jealousy, envy, and hatred. It may
also be induced by imperfect or confused religious perceptions. If
these and other exalted conditions of the mental faculties are mani-
festations of their abnormal states in acknowledged forms of
insanity, and if they also are proved to co-exist in suicidal cases,
how can we contend that, in the first instance, the disturbed
mental functions are indicative of disease; and, in the second,
that they sometimes originate in mere waywardness, without any
abnormal state of mind ? The very fact that self-destruction is
diametrically opposed to a strong instinctive law of our nature?
the law of self-preservation?warrants the inference that tliere are
not any suicidal cases which occur when there exists perfect
sanity. To comprehend the phenomena, we must test them
by the admitted laws of physiology and by the accurate induc-
tions of psychology, even should we seem to run counter to
popular prejudices, but which, on the contrary, will prevent
much of the confusion which still exists on the subject.
Every one who had observed and thought, would admit the
proposed means of testing the data as being the most suitable to
render the investigation of practical importance ; for instance, in
cases of sudden suicide there is evidence of some disturbing in-
fluence, which had more or less affected the bodily or mental
health, whilst in others, which had been long premeditated, these
conditions have been still more obvious. It is therefore essential
for accuracy that we trace the various morbific agencies, physical
or moral, which have induced some change in the mental consti-
tution. This must be done by a rigid inquiry into the personal
history of each self-murderer; and by these means we may learn
t ? NO. XI.?NEW SERIES. D D
398 ON SUICIDE.
to distinguish the difference of a series of remote causes from
those which had seemingly been the immediate and exciting cause
for the commission of the act.* We therefore think that, for the
purpose of classification, the views of M. Esquirol are worthy of
consideration. He regards the two forms of suicide as acute "and
involuntary, or as chronic and prepense. This view distinguishes
between those cases of suicide which have been long meditated
on, and those which have been prompted by some sudden im-
pulse. In the first kind, the act may be induced from some strong
passion either indulged or suppressed, which had insidiously
affected the organization of the brain; or the desire may be long
fostered, from some undefined impression that the death of the
party will be of some advantage to the family, or to their faith,
and so forth ; whilst the latter may act from a temporary depres-
sion, either from some real or imaginary suffering, and decide
suddenly and promptly to destroy himself, as a lesser evil than
the one he seems to experience. It is, therefore, of some im-
portance to endeavour to understand how, under any circum-
stance, a man can so "hate" himself, and pervert a strong law
of his organism, unless that the change of his nature, which
had so perverted his judgment, is admitted to be the result of
some morbific process. Had he been in a perfectly healthy state
of mind, he would have had clearer perceptions of his duty, and
better judgment under any especial exigency, instead of the dis-
torted consciousness which made him assume a right to take away
his own life.
In suicides, therefore, we may remark, that it is with them as it
is with those who .are pronounced insane,?that their opinions
would deserve attention, if their premises were realities. But as
much of what they state is merely assumed, or, if based on dis-
torted notions of things, is highly exaggerated, so their in-
ferences are as a consequence illogical, rendering it manifest
that there exists some functional disturbance of the feelings or
moral sentiments; and thus the suicide, like the insane, may also
have some organic lesion of the brain, which tends to induce in
both cases some form of mental derangement.
Sometimes the two conditions co-exist in one and the same
individual, when, for instance, after suffering for years from " a
mind diseased," the patient will suddenly destroy himself, from
his painful monotonous existence; or when labouring under
* We knew a gentleman fond of horse-racing, who stimulated to great excess
without appearing to suffer much permanent consequences, and, as he was a pros-
perous man, he seemed to he an exception; yet on one occasion, having lost many
thousands at a St. Leger, at Doncaster, he left afterwards, and that same night
destroyed himself. The long course of inebriation had affected the brain, and
under the first strong shock the balance of power was lost, and he acted as a mad-
I
)
\
ON SUICIDE. 399
religious mania, liaunted by the notion that he has a call from
this world by the agency of some supernatural influence.
Other instances of the proximity, if not identity, of suicide
and insanity might be grtfen, when life is "voluntarily sacrificed
from a conviction that the mind is in an incurable state of
disease; and in those cases, when the lunatic has been cured, and
is haunted by the dread of a pi'obable relapse, and under this
painful impression puts an end to his existence, and also in
long-standing cases of melancholy, there is often manifested a
strong determination to destroy themselves.
Whatever may interfere with the actual healthy condition of
the mental faculties, whether the cause is idiopathic or sym-
pathetic, may induce either insanity or suicide. Under such
conditions of mind, the mental vision becomes indistinct and
gloomy, and, like children in the dark, they conjure lip frightful
images, and are startled at their own creations, when sometimes
the shock to the nervous system may end in insanity; or, to get
rid of such morbid impressions, they commit self-murder, their
mode of effecting this act of desperation being influenced by some
means which, in ordinary parlance, are accidentally presented to
them when they have decided on the act!
We will cite a few instances in illustration of the previous
statement.
A. B., a Wesleyan, had been in a state of mental depression for
some time, arising, it was said, from some religious misgiving as
to his spiritual state; but still he attended to his business. On
the morning on which he destroyed himself, he had been to
chapel, when something in the sermon he applied to himself, and
was more than usually taciturn as he returned home with his wife
and family, but still not sufficiently so to excite either alarm or
suspicion. He said that he wanted to go into the shop to get a
tract he had left there, when it is supposed that, seeing a large
knife which he had used in his business, this suggested his
determination. He went up into his bed-room, carrying the fatal
weapon with him. There he carefully placed his Sunday coat
and waistcoat on a chair, and then nearly severed his head from
his body.
A parish clerk of C , who had in a comparatively short
time lost his wife and family from typhus fever. He became
melancholy from this sad visitation, and attributed it to his own
sinful habits of inebriation. But instead of becoming a more
sober man, he continued to drink to excess; and although his
sister (who acted as his housekeeper) was warned not to leave
any weapon in his way, and which she prudently attended to by
taking away his razors, and every article of dress which might
have been used for strangulation, yet one morning, as he had not
dd2
400 ON SUICIDE.
raade liis appearance at the usual hour, his bed-room was entered,
and he was found drowned, having suffocated himself in a
chamber utensil.
A pensioner at B  became melancholy from the presumed
incontinence of his wife. One day, after he had been cleaning a
horse-pistol, he loaded it. His wife came into the room soon
afterwards, when he charged her with his morbid suspicion. She
upbraided him, and told him if he were not drunk he would not
have dared to say anything so insulting to her; and she said, on
leaving him, that lie was a most contemptible coward. Whether
there was a fe-eling of remorse for making such a charge?of which
he had no proof?or the word coward grated on his ear, or whether
he regarded it as a taunt for bearing his supposed infamy so
tamely, it is impossible to say; but the pistol, already primed,
was near him. This he seized on, placed it in his mouth, and
fired, shattering his skull, and dashing his brains up to the very
ceiling!
There are many other conditions of mind, besides those already
noticed, which induce self-destruction ; and none more fatal than
that restless state designated " teclium vita," when the mind
seems incapable of being healthily occupied. There is then
experienced a desire to leap the gulpli which separates the living
from the dead. When such a condition of wasted energies exist,
the irritable and strong nervous irritation must be regarded as a
diseased condition of the mental faculties; for, as it is an im-
perative law to preserve the normal functions of the bodily organs,
so that they should be exercised, it is equally so in reference to
the mind?lassitude and diseases are superinduced when these
sanatory conditions are neglected.
We have many well-marked instances of persons with a plethora
of wealth, who had been pampered from their infancy, and
allowed to take their own course as to their mental culture;
when soon the injudiciousness of this treatment has been obvious,
in the waywardness and fickleness of the individuals, and from a
feverish desire for change, which have brought neither pleasure
nor satisfaction; and having had neither object nor purpose in
their existence, they have, under a temporary loathing, destroyed
themselves, in the same wanton and purposeless manner that a
spoiled child will suddenly break a toy he has been importunate
to possess.
Persons of this class, which belong to the acute or involuntary
form of suicide, according to M. Esquirol, present many phases.
There may also be included in this division those who, under
sudden remorse, often, when in a maudlin state of inebriety,
commit self-murder; and those who, under a sickly condition of
the moral sense, after suffering from a debauched career, have
0
\
I
ON SUICIDE. 401
recourse to the same quietus. Others will destroy themselves
when offended by some insulting phrase by a superior, or when
treated with contumely by an equal. Yet this very sensitiveness
is the sign of positive functional disease. Women who have been
seduced, and afterwards treated with scorn and insult by the
heartless wretches who have accomplished their ruin, will, under
the twofold effect of pained affection and remorse, destroy them-
selves. So also will timid and excellent men who dread any
threat of criminal proceedings, even when they are guiltless. All
these different victims of a state of mind which resembles, if it is
not actual insanity, may suddenly, in a moment of terror,
remorse, or any other outraged feeling, precipitate themselves
into a river, or cut their throats, quaff poison, hang themselves,
and so forth, merely to rid themselves of the irksomeness and
irritation under which they suffer. As a general rule, their
intellectual faculties possess neither power nor intensity; but
there are, on the other hand, too many exceptions of philanthro-
pists and able jurisconsults who have put an end to their exis-
tence, although, if such men had had healthy minds, they would
have endured their allotted trials.
There is another phase in the acute form worthy of a passing
notice. We allude to those who have exercised their minds with
great activity for many years, and when they have obtained the
otium, will seek for the dignitate in some arcadia, where, amidst
plenty, they expect to realize their long-wislied-for rural happi-
ness, and a calm and quiet existence?this state had formed the
staple thought of their waking dreams, whenever there was a lull
in their previous laborious occupations. But, alas ! torpor is the
symbol of death, as activity is that of life ; and so they find their
long-clierished hopes a mere phantom, an " ignis fatuns," and
they soon tire of their meretricious splendour. The very quietude
renders their listless lives so much more monotonous, until it
becomes too irksome for endurance, and then, under a sudden
impulse, they either destroy themselves, or become melancholy
and hypochondriacal. Numbers, therefore, have finished a life
of constant industry in the asylum, or by their own hands. And
by their death they have bequeathed an admonitory lesson to
avoid either excessive mental labour, or so little that inanition
results, and destroys, in either case, the harmony of the mind.
In all chronic cases of suicide there is evidence of a gradual
perversion of judgment, and with so much disturbance of some
of the feelings or sentiments as to render it a matter of legal
induction, that if not insanity, it so resembles it that it must be
regarded as a phase of mental disease. In many instances it may
be difficult to trace the actual predisposing cause, when the fatal
act has occurred; yet, if the manners and conversation of such
402 ON SUICIDE.
persons were carefully noted, they would liave manifested some
change from their ordinary mode of acting, or some perverted
perceptions indicative of moral inconsistency. If the friends,
under such conditions, had consulted a physician, he would have
detected some defectiveness of their consciousness, and have
suggested precautionary measures. But in the social circle such
changes of temper or disposition are considered mere wantonness
or caprice,?instead of assuming the actual truth, that such dis-
crepant manifestations from the ordinary habits of thinking and
acting were, in point of fact, premonitory warnings of some dis-
eased condition of brain; just as coughing is indicative of some
incipient disease of the lungs, or the mucous surfaces, or the air-
passages. Remedial means would relieve both by timely appli-
cation, when the symptoms may have resulted from functional
disturbance; but if allowed to proceed until some lesion occurred,
and the organic condition of the brain became implicated, the
mad-liouse or self-murder must be the inevitable consequence.
We will now allude to those inveterate cases of suicide which
assume the chronic form, when all the precautions to prevent the
act may be abortive, and the long-premeditated end is persisted in
until it is consummated. Often when saved after a first or second
attempt, the infatuated being will persist until the act is finally
accomplished. As an instance which made a deep impression
on us, we relate the following:?
Mrs. B was the widow of an officer, who had married her
for her beautiful person. She had been a servant, living with a
family whom Captain B  visited; and though there was a
great difference in their respective ages, and in their education, he
proposed to marry her, and was accepted. But in order to fit
her for the rank to which he had removed her, he had her taught
things of utility, as well as some accomplishments, and they
seemed to live very happily. After a time it was currently re-
ported that she had formed an illicit amour with the man-servant,
and that, in consequence, her husband had manifested a strong
dislike to her (one of the results of intense jealousy or of violated
confidence) ; but whether the scandal in either case had any foun-
dation, it is impossible to decide. Nevertheless, one part of the
report seemed correct,?they did not live so harmoniously as they
had previously done. The captain had a short and sudden ill-
ness, and was gathered to his fathers, attended with military
honours. His widow covered herself, not with sackcloth and
ashes, but deep crape, and seemed greatly affected at the loss of such
a good and true man. He left her independent, but not rich, and
she continued to live in a respectable position. Soon after this
event the man-servant married, and Mrs. B?;? began to droop,
and became melancholy; and the gossips affirmed that she was
ON. SUICIDE. 403
piqued that lier paramour liad forsaken her, and that her mental
disease arose from the chagrin of offended vanity, and some re-
morse that she had sinned against the man who had treated her
so generously, and with so much consideration. Instead of rally-
ing, her mental sickness assumed a more chronic form ; and one
day our quiet and respectable neighbourhood was startled by the
report that " Mrs. B  had cut her own throat!" Knowing
her medical man, some of our family inquired as to the correct-
ness of this statement, and he confirmed its literal truth. The
wound was not mortal, but she was weak from loss of blood, yet
.it was thought she would recover; but a nurse was placed to
watch, lest she should attempt to tear open the wound. After a
few weeks we saw her, pale yet beautiful, and with such a melan-
choly expression as would have rendered her a charming model
for a Magdalen. Months passed away, and she seemed, if not
happy, yet reconciled to life. She renewed her pastimes, and
occasionally saw company. Yet when it was supposed that she
liad recovered her mental health, we heard that she had lmng
herself! The servant, who found her suspended, cut her down
and sent for a medical man. She was again restored to life, when
she expressed her deep regret that she had been guilty of such
an act.
Her remorse must have been the result of some real or imagi-
nary cause; for about six weeks after the latter circumstance, she
went out one morning very early, dressed in a riding-habit, but
not returning to breakfast, a hue-and-cry was raised, and after a
search of some hours, she was discovered drowned in a mill-
pond. Though dead, she looked beautiful. Her long brown
eyelashes, though closed, and her rich profusion of the same
coloured hair, contrasted well with her dark-green habit, and
gave her the appearance of one in a calm sleep ; but in her hands
there was grass, which she must have seized from the bank, as if
there had been some sudden return of healthy consciousness, and
a desire to prevent the death she had so perseveringly sought.
The latter may have resulted from the sudden plunge into the
cold water, and the tonic effect it temporarily produced on her
brain ; but she was too much entangled by her dress to save her
self, and the current was so strong that she had drifted a long-
way from the place where her hat lay. The verdict of the jury
was " Temporary insanity."
In this case, however imperfectly sketched, there is sufficient
data to trace the predisposing causes of her morbid condition.
Any woman who had yielded to her prepossession in favour of
one in an inferior grade, would have both her affection and vanity
pained^ if he proved worthless and untrustworthy. In Mrs.
13 's case, she had been neglected by the very man to whom
404 ON SUICIDE.
slie had sacrificed honour and conjugal duties; and there was,
besides, " the still small voice" that taunted that she had sinned too
deeply even for repentance, as she could not now compensate for
the injury she had done to her excellent husband ; and young and
beautiful though she continued, her remorse was so great that she
loathed her existence ! Yet no one would affirm, if this history
of the causes which induced her mental condition is correct, that
she was sane when she persisted in the fixed idea of destroying
herself. The evidence submitted is important, as showing how
the balance may be disturbed in a sensitive mind, when the
moral sense becomes morbidly affected; and we have some clu&
to explain the whole change in her mental constitution, and the
derangement which subsequently supervened?a derangement
which tended to subvert the instinctive love of life, and to induce
a constant desire for its annihilation. We might say, that even
when a verdict of " Not proven" is substituted, so far as the actual
guilt of such a being,?yet the whole history of the case, and the
catastrophe, renders it a matter of presumptive proof that there
was some painful state of the moral sentiments, which had quite
metamorphosed one fitted for healthy enjoyment to seek for death
in the midst of more means of happiness than she could ever have
anticipated.
We will now give a case, when a similar result ensued, not
from any moral delinquency, but from a threat to prefer a charge
which would fix a stigma on one whose character was un-
blemished. We quote the facts from the narrative portion of a
lecture delivered by E. P. Hurlbut, Esq., before the Mechanics'
Institution of New York, " On the Legal Protection of the Sen-
timents and Feelings." After many apposite and sound views
having reference to his especial subject, the lecturer said:?
" Many of you, doubtless, remember a case of suicide by a young
gentleman in this city, some two years ago, who rushed to the top of
his house, which was three stories high, and precipitated himself thence
upon the pavement below, thus occasioning his awful and instantaneous
death. A few weeks before this melancholy event he was in perfect
health, mingling with fellow-citizens, having their highest respect, and
the attachment of many warm and devoted friends. His domestic
character was a model of the most affectionate kindness and perfect
devotion to the happiness of his mother (his only surviving parent)
and his brothers and sisters. His charities were liberal; no worthy
applicant for aid went away empty from his door. He was generous
to a fault. His integrity was of the highest order, and he preserved the
most unsullied honour ; it was his soul?his life. In fine, he was one
of the noblest young men I had ever known, and one whose memory
I shall always cherish to the latest hour of my life. I would it were
divested of the story of his unhappy fate !
" A few days before his melancholy death he called upon me, under
ON SUICIDE. 405
great excitement of mind, and stated to me, more as a friend than as his
professional adviser, the details of a conspiracy formed by several aban-
doned people in this city to extort money from him, one of whom had
sought his acquaintance to ask charity, and who had received pecuniary
relief at his hands. The conspirators had a scurrilous paper in their
interest, and a threat of a libellous publication had been made in its
columns. This was his concern at the time of his visit to me. I inquired
into the whole matter with great interest and anxiety. I know the
truth of his case, and I know to a moral certainty that there was not
a shadow of a just foundation for the least censure on his fair fame. I
advised his treating the conspirators with utter contempt, and to pay
them not the least attention. He soon after received from some lawyer,
who read the laws but to violate their spirit, and whose moral nature
was attuned to the work of mischief, further intimation that the con-
spiracy was to be further consummated by a suit at law. He brooded
over the matter till sleep and rest forsook him. The scurrilous print
came out with its brutal libel, and its victim fell beneath the stroke.
" When he next called upon me, which was the day after publica-
tion, I think his whole appearance was that of a maniac; and his wild
exclamations, his intense mental suffering, amounting to the most dread-
ful agony, baffled description. Alas! 1 could not soothe his wounded
spirit; he was taken to his home, and when inquired after the next
opportunity, I learned his death. This man was murdered, and the
murderers live unmolested by the law."
The lines marked in italics are ours; and we have not any
hesitation to say, that had this excellent young man, whose
moral susceptibilities were so fearfully deranged by a foul libel,
consulted a physician instead of his legal adviser (though an
estimable and intelligent man), some means would have been
suggested, and the horrid catastrophe might have been prevented.
Cases of the acute form of suicide, as M. Esquirol would have
designated the one given by Mr. Hurlbut, are rare in comparison
with those which assume a more chronic form ; and yet such acute
and sudden development of the suicidal tendency furnishes the
clearest psychological evidence of functional disturbance of the
mental constitution, indicated by defective ratiocination' and a
derangement of all the moral perceptions. Like in monomaniacs,
they have the one idea which haunts their imagination, and death
to them is the only means of exorcising it. In our experience
we have remarked that such persons are of a highly sensitive
organization, the intensity of which is greatly increased by their
nervous or bilious temperament. Examples have been already
given that the predisposing causes may he sudden pecuniary
embarrassment, real or fancied jealousy, or the dread of infamy,
and so forth, and which, by arousing into fearful activity some of
the affective faculties, destroy the mental harmony, and then in a
fit of desperation life is sacrificed. In Mr. Hurlbut's case, a man
406 ON SUICIDE.
of pure mind and life was so disturbed by threats whicli he sup-
posed would, though innocent, still stamp him with ignominy, that
liis existence became to him intolerable. Even in such acute
forms, when the suicidal act is perpetrated, there is unmistakable
evidence of positive insanity. Such disturbing influences might
occur to individuals of merely a lymphatic temperament, although
the process would be more tardy, but ultimately similar con-
sequences might result. An individual of this kind would brood
over the source of his irritation, and gradually affect the healthy
action of the brain, and then his life's drama might suddenly
terminate in an act of apparent deliberate self-destruction.
In both the acute and chronic forms of suicide, the mind is
clearly in an unsound state?an opinion which has already been
advocated in this and other journals. The cases of suicide whicli
have been regarded as exceptional, are those wherein the act has
been committed with apparent deliberation, and with a coolness
worthy of right and praiseworthy objects : such as when life has
been voluntarily sacrificed under the impression of an incurable
disease, and a deliberate determination to avoid a continuation
of the suffering experienced. But persons who have committed
suicide under such circumstances, have reasoned contrary to all
sound data, and in violation of the strong instinctive feeling of
self-preservation. It is true that they may have had their per-
ceptions sympathetically perverted by the fixed sensation of fear
with which they are impressed, and would not be regarded as
actually sane by the competent physician who had studied the
effects of suffering on the vital organs, and the disturbing in-
fluence of continued pain on the organs of thought and feeling.
So, also, although there are cases on record when persons under
pecuniary difficulties have destroyed themselves, apparently with
great coolness and deliberation, yet this should not be regarded
as any proof of their sanity, inasmuch as all who are in embar-
rassed circumstances do not destroy themselves. Hence the
inference must be, that when they do so they act insanely, being
predisposed, from some defect of their organization or education,
to distinguish what are the legitimate acts of a man's volition,
and what are interdicted in the very constitution of the mind in
its relation to the Divine Author.
The following case, which induced a jury to pronounce a ver-
dict of felo-de-se?as, in their judgment, the voluntary death was
the act of a sane man?is cited to show that even the evidence on
which that opinion was founded, furnished indubitable testimony
to the contrary. We are forced to quote from memory, having
mislaid the newspaper (published at Chelmsford) containing the
report:?
11 Some years since, a gentleman of the name of D? arrived at Saffron
ON SUICIDE. 407-
Waldon, in Essex, in a post-cliaise, from Dunmow, and drove up to
the principal inn. He was by profession a surgeon-dentist.
" The morning after his arrival he called on some of the medical
men, who, finding him a man of cultivated mind, and with a respect-
able knowledge of his pursuit, promised him theii ^support. He inti-
mated his intention to deliver a lecture at the Town-hall, ' On the
Natural History of the Teeth.' He therefore issued a circular inti-
mating the evening on which it would be given, and, at the same time,
announcing that he might be consulted daily.
" Some of the medical men who attended his lecture were still more
satisfied with his qualifications, and pleased with his polite and urbane
manners. He is represented as a man with an intelligent expression,
dark eyes and hair, a blond colour, with an aquiline nose and good
mouth, and that he made a favourable impression on his auditory.
" He gave little trouble at the inn, and was rather abstemious in his
habits. On the Saturday, just a week after his arrival, he was ob-
served to be very moody; but still this did not produce any unfavourable
impression, much less any suspicion as to the actual condition of his
mind. On the contrary, it was attributed to his ill-success, as he had
had but one professional visit.
" The next morning, as he did not make his appearance for his
breakfast, some misgiving was felt, and the waiter went to see if he were
indisposed. As he received no answer when he knocked, he tried the
door, and found it locked. A forcible entrance was made, and the poor
fellow was found dead on the floor, lying in a pool of blood, as he had
effectually severed the carotids with a razor!
" It was then remembered that he had been heard pacing about his
room for some time after he retired, during which he had taken the
precaution to destroy every scrap of paper, and to cut out the marks
on his linen, as if to prevent all clue to his personal identity. And he
had also addressed a letter to the jury, prior to the performance of his
last fatal act. This document commenced by stating that he had long
battled with misfortune, and his whole life had been a series of impo-
tent struggles; that his ill-success arose from no fault of his own, so
that he had no other alternative but death. He then went on to say,
that some would deem his act as extreme cowardice; and others, that
it was one of daring presumption to his God; that this latter was a
mere personal matter between himself and his Maker, and that he
believed that the Great Author judged of motives, and that he did not
doubt of being pardoned. Then he continued thus: ' This act of mine
is clearly an act of self-murder, and the verdict must be felo-de-se
Finally, he spoke of his obligations,?that he had paid up his account
to the previous day; and lie requested that his instruments might be
sold to liquidate the remaining debt, and the surplus to be given to
the servants, to whom he had not given any gratuity, &c.
" The jury brought in the verdict he had pronounced on himself.
He was buried on the cross-roads near the town, and a stake driven
through his body."
In this brief view there is furnished evidence of unsound-
408 ON SUICIDE.
ness of mind ; for with his previous experience of the tardiness
of professional application, and with the evidence of his positive
integrity, it might have been supposed that he woukl have
avoided the expense of travelling post, and sojourning at an inn;
and that if he had been actually sane, that he would have econo-
mized his means by taking some reasonable apartments, and thus
been enabled to await with some little patience the chance of
replenishing his almost exhausted exchequer. So much for the
facts which ultimately induced him to commit suicide. But
there are other moral aspects which may be worth noting. He
seemed to lack moral courage, or any firm reliance on Providence,
otherwise he would have struggled on even had his prospects
been still more gloomy.
The jury considered that his letter furnished strong evidence
of self-felony, induced by a deliberate criminal intention against
his own person ; and that his justification, though erroneous, was
a proof of his sanity. For our part, we should decide the con-
trary by the presumptuous and contumacious manner in which
he justified his act. Had he been sane, he could not have spoken
with such flippancy of the Majesty of Heaven. It may be
said that if this constitutes a proof, then all inveterately sceptical
persons should be regarded as lunatics. If they are not so in
the eye of the law, they certainly indicate proofs of a want of
harmony of the mental faculties ; and we must decide in the case
of D , that he indicated some defective conditions of the
religious perceptions, either from some defectiveness in his mental
constitution, or by some warping from defective culture. The
inference we have drawn as to his actual abnormal state of mind
is capable of some further presumptive proof, if we investigate
what strong motive might have influenced him in urging a ver-
dict of /elo-cle-se.
We may mention, incidentally, that a gentleman at Saffron
Waldon told us "that D had a fine Oriental physiognomy,
and that he felt assured that he had been born an Israelite."
This fact would explain the difficulty, that amidst the distraction
and want of confidence resulting from his scepticism on spiritual
subjects, there seemed to lurk the prejudice of his people, that
if he could not be buried " in the cave of Machpelah," where his
ancestors lay, that he would prefer unconsecrated ground rather
than lay in the consecrated ground of any other form of religious
belief. Now, whether the suicidal act had been the result of
long deliberation, or from a sudden impulse, the insanity is obvious
from the incoherence of the reason for the act, and that his very
conclusions had simply resulted from his incapacity of perceiving
the erroneous data of his premises?so that the inferences which
had induced the deed itself were absolutely unsound, and posi-
ON SUICIDE. 409
tively absurd. If this victim had been actually sane, his crime
would be greatly aggravated; for in committing the sin he had
seemed reckless of consequences, and had added to his ill-deed
the great offence of using insulting language to Him whose law
he had determined to violate. We, however, cannot hesitate to
decide that his conduct marked one of decidedly unsound mind.
This induction is founded on positive data, particularly if we
reflect on the predisposing causes of suicide, which are found to
be precisely similar to those which induce some of the forms of
insanity, so that it would seem in all cases that it is difficult to
draw the line of demarcation. In both there is evidence of some
disease of the mental faculties.
If we were to indicate any particular form of the affection by
which to specify the perfect analogy between suicidal cases and
insanity, we would instance certain states of the domestic feelings
induced by some sudden and strong emotion which tends to make
persons so powerfully deranged, that for a time they will " play
such fantastic tricks before high heaven" as to give evidence of
some morbid aberration of mind, which might be of temporary
duration if medical aid had been procured, but which assumes a
permanent form of disease if neglected, and then it might end
in fits of despair, revenge, murder, or suicide. Nay, there are
instances of both crimes being perpetrated at one and the same
time.
The following case will illustrate the latter statement:?One
night, during our visit at H , we heard a report that Mr.
had murdered his wife, set fire to his house, and then killed him-
self. We went with some gentlemen to visit the tragic scene.
The premises had been fired at different places, in an apparently
deliberate manner. In the bed-room, in which lay the murderer
and suicide, we found the bed-curtains burnt to tinder, presenting
a crape-like mourning where the innocent victim lay, through
whose head a pistol-ball had penetrated the brain. She was
lying in a pool of blood, whilst the corpse of her husband was
stretched on the carpet, cold and stiff, with a pistol close to his
temple!
The circumstance itself excited great commiseration for the
murdered lady, as her death seemed to have been the result of
previous deliberation. This was confirmed by the evidence at
the coroner s inquest. It was proved that on the previous
Saturday the suicide had sent two poisoned loaves to his sons,
who were at a boarding-school; but, in consequence of the
tragedy taking place so soon, information was forwarded to
prevent their being eaten. It was also stated by one of the
servants, that, on hearing the pistol fired in her mistress's bed-
room, she took a light to ascertain what was the matter; that
410 ON SUICIDE.
she spoke to her mistress, hut did not receive any answer; and
that then she beheld the curtains in a blaze. In the midst of her
terror, and at the hazard of burning herself, she took means
to ascertain if her mistress was there; and just as she obtained
proof of the fact, and began to make an alarm, her master rushed
in like a fury. She fled, and he fired at her, but missed; and she
had scarcely regained her own room, when she heard another
report, and a heavy fall. All the servants screamed, and rushed
to the street; their screams, and the appearance of fire, brought
immediate assistance, when the latter was put out, and the horrid
affair was then revealed. The whole town was in a state of
excitement, and every one marvelled what could have been the
cause for such a series of unnatural and savage acts.
Mr. was reputed to be a rich merchant; was a professor
of religion; and lived, to all appearance, on terms of affection with
his wife and family?so much so, that it was observed that, when
he went for a morning walk, or to church, some of his children
usually accompanied him. Besides, he was a man of gentlemanly
bearing, seemingly kind in his manners, and generally punctual
in his engagements. But, on investigation, it was discovered
that his affairs were embarrassed; he had two establishments
to keep, and two families to clothe and feed; for it appeared he
had had a paramour with whom he cohabited, either before or
soon after his marriage. To understand, therefore, the probable
condition of his mind prior to the final catastrophe, we must
reflect that he was not like a common, vulgar, uneducated man;
he was well versed in his relative duties to his family, to society,
and to his God; and he could not blink the sinfulness of his
career, and the despicable acts he had to commit in order to con-
ceal his immoral conduct;?then, again, his affairs had become so
involved, that he could not continue to ward off the infamy of
his conduct. These things, conjointly, must have fretted him
greatly, and affected his moral sense, whose "still small voice"
must have continually tortured him, and denounced his follies
and his crimes,?and thus he was ultimately driven mad. For one
of the strongest collateral evidences of his insanity is manifested
by the fact that, whilst he endeavoured to destroy his legitimate
children and his wife (a most charming woman), he did not try
to injure those who, in the eye of the law and in the judgment of
society, had not similar claims on him.
Who could pronounce Mr. to be sane ? He had placed
tallow candles in different cupboards, which he set fire to just
about the time he had intended to shoot his wife and himself,
under the unsound assumption that his whole residence would be
burned to the ground, and that then no evidence would exist to
implicate him, or to explain the origin of the horrid affair. If
i
-4
ON SUICIDE. 411
his mind had been in a healthy state when he concocted his
diabolical scheme, he would have been certain of exposure and in-
famy ; he would have thought, that if the servants smelt fire, or the
flames were visible,?and if to these be added the report of pistols,
he would have calculated that alarm would be given, and that, as
a natural consequence, the double murder would be discovered,
and that an exposure would be made of his immoral duplicity,
and the desperate condition of his pecuniary affairs.
We have deemed it right to mention these facts, as, by their
means, we can trace all the incidents which predisposed the state
of his'mental faculties, and induced the fearful tragedy we have
narrated. His duplicity caused too much strain and tension on
the brain, and could only tend to mental derangement. He used
to go to the counting-house, and return to dine with his family;
but much of the time which should have been spent in business
was devoted to his immoral purposes. Can it then be wondered
at, that he was in a constant state of irritation ? And he must
have had an incessant struggle how to rid himself of his moral
annoyance, and to relieve himself of his pecuniary liabilities, until
at length his own preservation became the all-absorbing subject
of his mind. This constant painful excitement made him dwell
on the means of avoiding certain infamy; this one thought
engrossed his whole attention; and it at length manifested so
much intensity, that his judgment lost its influence, and his
moral sense became so depraved, that it could no longer exert
any restraining influence over his conduct. And when the
balance of power was thus lost, the selfish idea then suggested
no other alternative?infamy or annihilation! In the arrange-
ments he made, he showed an absence of all common sense?a
mere muddled state of brain, which defeated bis own tortuous
policy, and thwarted the intention of the result of his desperate
plan. If he had not been a slave or a coward,?made so by his
strong desire to prevent the public disgrace that awaited him,
should any exposition of his conduct take place,?he would not
have attempted to kill his own offspring with poison, murdered
his wife, attempted the life of a servant, set fire to his house, and,
as a finale, destroyed himself.
There is one practical lesson derived from this melancholy and
fatal history?namely, that when any of the feelings obtain such
despotic influence, there cannot be any sane perception, and self-
control is then more or less defective; and then the intensity of
the selfish propensities increases inversely, in proportion as the
moral sentiments become torpid,?the latter lose all influence
over the actions, whilst reason is too feeble to whisper a protest
so as to restrain or save the victim of passion, even when the
most criminal actions are contemplated. In the case of Mr. ,
c
4] 2 ON SUICIDE.
there was a feverish condition of mind; he either had not time, or
else he could not deliberate on the consequences; and then he
was the victim of disease, hurried onwards to the frightful gulf
without one thought of the actual danger until he had perpe-
trated the first deed of violence, and was then driven irresistibly
on, and in a reckless and desperate mood consummated the last
act of madness.
We think it not improbable that many domestic tragedies are the
result of some moral compromise in the first instance, and not
always from any strong natural criminal tendency. Whatever,
therefore, tends to affect the mind's harmony, is fatal to its health.
It matters not what the disturbing influence may be,?if it disturbs
the whole thinking process, then it is certain to induce some
form of mental alienation. Whatever, then, may become a fixed
idea, assumes a palpability, having all the vividness of an actual
picture, which so impresses the mental vision, that every other
thought is rendered confused and indistinct, until a sensation is
experienced that the only way of getting rid of the phantasma is by
self-murder. We think, in Mr. 's case, the verdict of the jury
was " Temporary insanityand they were right in saying so, par-
ticularly as it was remembered that for some weeks before the sad
occurrence there was observed some alteration in his manner.
He was more irritable, and less attentive to his toilet; he drank
more wine, was more abstracted and taciturn, and betrayed more
impatience than was his wont. If these symptoms had been re-
garded as indicating some abnormal condition of the mental
faculties, the miserable result might have been prevented.
In cases where there has not existed any criminal predisposi-
tion to account for these forms of mental derangement, yet some-
what similar results may be induced by an over-sensitiveness of
the nervous system, often from extreme anxiety arising from
great pecuniary difficulties. We could cite some interesting
illustrations, where a chronic form of disease has disturbed the
mind's sanity. The various agencies may act insidiously, until
there is some positive injury to the organization of the brain.
Other important vital organs may be implicated, which, react-
ing on the seat of thought and feeling, aggravate the symp-
toms in the ratio of their disturbing influence. Dr. Mantell says
that?
" During the last twenty-five years many cases of suicide have come
under my notice, in which the mental hallucination which led to self-
destruction had depended on lesions of the brain, occasioned by slight
or neglected injuries of the head, to which neither the patient nor his
friends attached any importance. In several instances of self-destruc-
tion without any assignable moral cause, and in which no previous
signs of fatuity or insanity were manifested, I have found, on a post-
if
I
I
ON SUICIDE. 413
mortem examination, either circumscribed induration, or softening of
the brain, or thickness and adhesions of some portions. The convic-
tion was therefore forced on my mind, that very many of the so-called
nervous or hypochondriacal affections, which are generally considered
imaginary, and dependent on mental emotions, are ascribable to phy-
sical causes, and frequently originate from slight lesions of the brain."
The effect of cold and hunger may induce insanity and suicide,
and which fact is vividly described by Baron Larry as occurring
on the retreat of the French army after the burning of Moscow.
We also know that great misfortunes or deep humiliation to the
proud and sensitive when they become the recipients of alms,
that this degradation will so affect them, that the whole chylo-
poietic viscera become disturbed in their functions, and in their
turn aggravate the morbid condition of the mental faculties.
Thus some painful emotions may so affect the liver, and a state
may be induced of morbid depression, and which may for a time
exist with symptoms of self-destruction, and yet if cured before
the brain is organically affected, the symptoms also cease, and a
healthy instinctive self-preservation supersedes the previously
painful condition. On the contrary, if the hypochondriac is
neglected, under the erroneous impression that the complaint was-
bad temper, then the mental depression which was in the first
instance an effect, becomes a cause, and the suicidal disposition,,
which had only been a symptom, assumes the more chronic form,,
and may be persevered in until the act of self-destruction is
accomplished.
The latter cases are well distinguished from those sudden,
manifestations under a temporary irritation of temper, or the low-
ness of spirits after a debauch, or a quarrel with a lover, and so
forth, when often such persons talk of destroying themselves. In
the majority of such cases the threat is never seriously entertained.
But should these persons, under the impulse of irritation, carry
the threat into effect, if the patients are promptly saved, a re-
action takes place, and they never repeat the folly or the crime of the
attempt; and generally the cure is so effective that not any further
endeavour is made to abridge life. These, however, can never be
oonfounded with patients where there exists a strong tendency to
self-destruction, and which, from the intensity of the desire, must
be regarded as a state of actual disease; sucli a case as that of
Mrs. B , who hung herself, then cut her throat, and finally
drowned herself. For such beings the suggestions of Dr. W. A.
F. Brown, for an asylum for patients recovered after an attempt
at.suicide, would be highly, important, and cures might be made
of even sucli chronic cases, unless there existed extensive lesions
either of the brain or its membranes. The following extract from
the article is worthy of attention :?
NO. XI.?NEW SEKIES. E E
414 ON SUICIDE. (J
" No one can read the public papers from barren curiosity, or catch
the moral characteristics of the time, and shut out a conviction of
the frightful increase of suicide meditated and effected." And he
regrets " that the frequency of such events, and the publicity given to
them, often impart to the suicidal disposition an epidemic or imita-
tive character. We may daily observe it stated in the public papers,
that persons who have been prevented from the commission of suicide,
are immediately, on their recovery from the effects of the attempt,
set at liberty, and allowed to return to their friends and home. This
is very questionable humanity. It is, in effect, to deliver unfortunate
beings, a prey to their shame, or sorrow, or madness, to the very
motives of the act they meditated, and will still meditate, and to these
aggravated by exposure and obloquy. Individuals, under such cir-
cumstances, cannot be regarded as responsible, or expected to under-
stand so clearly in which they have been, and are, as to resume at
once those modes of thinking and feeling on which dependence can
be placed, and in which the safety of the miserable beings consists.
Assuredly they are neither trustworthy nor rational, and yet it is
doubtful whether they can be treated as insane. The law forbids that
they should be confined and protected from themselves in an asylum,
however appropriate such a retreat may appear for their condition, and
however closely connected that condition, when analysed, may be
found to be with mental derangement."*
That it should have ever been doubted that there are many
symptoms in common between mental derangement and suicide
is indeed a matter of surprise. Place all the phenomena of both
these forms in juxtaposition, and it is impossible to distinguish
the difference of a person with one fixed idea?that of liis own
self-murder, and the different hallucinations which are actual
existences to the mental perceptions of the insane; and that it
should be deemed right in the latter cases to protect the indivi-
duals from injuring themselves, and to abandon suicides to caprice
or accident; circumstances so similar, yet treated so differently,
demonstrate the defectiveness of the state of the laws, arising
from the fact that the distinctions between insanity and suicide
are made rather from the popular views of these different affec-
tions, than from the more certain data of the physiological and
psychological sciences. No one cognisant with medical physics
could possibly say that when there exists a fixed determination
for self-destruction, that it is not a sign of mental disease, because
the very premeditation is opposed to the instinct of the normal
mind. But we have the testimony of many practical and learned
physicians who have given special attention to the subject, and
we find that their experience confirms the a priori reasoning?
that in suicides long meditated there is found, on a post-mortem
examination, some organic lesions of the brain, or some altera- A
* "Lancet."
ON SUICIDE. 415
tion of its structure; and that when no such signs are indicated,
that then the membranes of the brain, or the skull, show some
proof of diseased conditions. By the evidence, therefore, of these
most qualified witnesses, there is confirmed, what might other-
wise appear merely speculative inferences on the predisposing
causes of both these kinds of mental affections. When, however,
in the positively insane and the determined suicide the brain, &c.,
does not appear to be implicated, that is, so far as our experience
can detect, then in both instances it will be found that some of the
organs of vegetative or animal life are in a diseased condition,
and by reflex nervous action affect the organ of thought, and
induce symptoms of such mental derangement, just as if the
mental organs themselves were idiopatliically affected.
We have alluded, incidentally, in the extract from Dr. Brown's
paper, to the epidemical form of the suicidal malady, but which
is a subject in itself so very important, as to demand not a mere
passing notice, but an elaborate investigation from more careful
statistical tables than now exist. These tables should be col-
lated from well-marked cases of this kind in counties, districts,
and countries, in which certain special difference should be noted,
not only when they are epidemical, but also when they are
endemical.
If it is admitted that there is such intimate connexion
between particular conditions of the body and the states of the
mental faculties, it is not surprising that, in a low marshy district,
for example, where the malaria induces low forms of fevers, that
in its incipient stage, if one so circumstanced commits suicide,
that others suffering from precisely similar depressing sensations,
should adopt a similar mode of making their quietus. Having
thus alluded to an epidemical fever as liable to induce epidemical
suicide, and that this sort of imitation arises from a similar con-
dition of the bodily and mental faculties; we would now also
call attention to the fact, that a special moral state of a people
may exist, which may render them disposed to listen to any sug-
gestion, even as to the best method of how to kill themselves.
About the year 1818 there was published a brochure in Paris,
recommending ignited charcoal as an easy and agreeable mode
of dying. A programme was given of all the details to be at-
tended to, and a lively description of the modus operandi, when
death was described as advancing in a noiseless way, without
either startling the conscience or the consciousness, and that a
gentle drowsiness covered the senses, and continued to increase,
until the world, and its joys and its sorrows, were oblivious!
The following year, we learn that out of two or three hundred
suicides in Paris, one-fifth of these cases had died from ignited
charcoal. The imitation in this instance arose from a mental
E E 2
416 ON SUICIDE.
idiosyncrasy, a qtiasi-philosopliical indifference of life, a state often
induced by a conception that all the vital phenomena are the result
of mere bodily organization, and that mind is merely the result
of cerebration, or in other words, a secretion of the cerebrum.
With such opinions men may seem to commit suicide in what,
in ordinary parlance, might be called health ; but as the con-
dition we have named is in violation of all the teachings of
theology, and at variance with the experience of mankind in
general; it would seem that the intellectual and moral defect,
inferred from the incapacity to appreciate the most ennobling
truth, " man's immortality," would be presumptive evidence, if not
of positive insanity, according to any acknowledged legal defini-
tion, yet of that kind of defectiveness of some of the mental
faculties by which scepticism is induced as one of its consequent
hallucinations.
We have noticed, in this country, that when some special mode
of self-destruction has occurred,?as, for example, taking prussic
acid,?that this has become, for a time, the prevailing method of
suicide. And lately, we have observed so many cases of throat-
cutting, that it seems almost epidemical; and yet there has not,
probably, been any acquaintance between any of these infatuated
beings. Among the unfortunate, dissolute, and criminal-minded
among the gentler sex, the mode of seeking a quietus from the ills
of life is by drowning themselves.
Although statistical tables have some relative value in an
investigation of the subject under consideration, yet they are
defective in furnishing data as to the causes which induce the
chronic or acute forms of suicide. The latter knowledge can
only be acquired by an examination into all the antecedents of
each case; and then the medical psychologist would obtain
positive information both how to prevent or cure these forms of
disease, so as to enlighten the public on the subject.
Statistics of suicide are, however, important to indicate what
are the particular effects of occupation, of climate, habits of life,
age, sex, and so forth. They are also important as correcting
much misunderstanding as to the periods of the year that suicide
is most prevalent, and the countries in which it is most common.
Thus, for example, the names of the following countries are
placed in the order of their respective number of suicides
to the population ? namely, " the United States, England,
Prussia, France, Austria, Russia, Italy, and Spain."
The following statistical facts concerning suicide are extracted
from page 74 of the Third Report of the Registrar General:?
" This crime, it appears, is most prevalent in London, the propor-
tion being 10"9 to 100,000 inhabitants ; next to this discreditable pre-
eminence stand the south-eastern counties bordering on the metro-
ON SUICIDE. 417
polis, where it is 8*4 to 100,000 ; the range of other parts of England
is G"8 to 74, which is the proportion of the western counties, whilst
in Wales it is but 22. The proportion throughout England and
Wales is 6'3, and the total number in the year was 2001."
The greatest number of suicides occurred in the spring and
summer, when crimes attended with violence, and also attacks of
insanity, arc most common. Thus, in April, May, and June,
there were 5G3 ; in July, August, and September, 539 ; in
January, February, and March, 484 ; and in October, November,
and December, 405.
Unfavourable climate cannot,per se, specially favour the develop-
ment of the suicidal tendency. For the climate of Holland is
similar to England, and probably even more foggy, and yet its
proportion of suicides is less than any of the countries above-men-
tioned. There must, therefore, be some circumstances capable of
modifying the effects of this supposed powerfully predisposing
cause ; and it is some proof that such is the case, by the fact that
the number of suicides in different countries vary considerably at
differeut periods. The common opinion that there are more
suicides in the dull months of the year, is refuted by more
accurate information. For, on the contrary, it is now proved
that a dry hot season fosters a disposition to suicide, and this,
for the reason that a dry atmosphere has a tendency to produce
a feverish habit; and, as a consequence, tends greatly to increase
the irritability and susceptibility of the nervous system. This
latter view is founded on accurate observation. We cite the
following additional evidence :?
" Of 1131 suicides committed at Berlin, Hamburgh, Westminster,
and Paris, there were, in January, February, and March, 237; in
April, May, and June, 299; in July, August and September, 335 ; in
October, November, and December, 260.
" A similar influence of the spring and summer weather as favouring
the disposition to suicide is proved by the statistics of M. Esquirol,
at the Salpetriere, and by those of M. Prevost, who found that of 113
suicides committed at Geneva in 10 years, the numbers in each month
were as follows:?April, 19; June, 17 ; August, 17 ; July, 15; Octo-
ber, 14 ; May, 13; March, 10 ; November, 9; September, 6; January,
5 ; February, 5 ; and December, 5."
The tendency to suicide seems to be least among persons who
have out-door employments, and greatest among those of sedentary
occupations, whose constitutions are necessarily less robust. The
statistical facts which confirm these views are as follows:?
" That there is 1 in 9582 masons, carpenters, and butchers, who
?committed suicide in one year; and 1 in 1669 tailors, shoemakers, and
bakers. The tendency to suicide in those of active out-door occupa-
tions being 1 to 5'6 ot those of more debilitating and depressing em-
ployments."
418 ON SUICIDE.
It may also be noted, "that the tendency to suicide is more
than twice as great among artisans than it is among labourers?
being as 0 in 10,000 of the former, to 2'9 in the same number of
the latter."
In the class designated by Mr. Eickman as miscellaneous,
" capitalists, bankers, professional and educated persons, the pro-
portion is 4*9 to 10,000."
Mr. Farr does not attribute any great value to the opinion of
M. Boue, and other theoretical writers, "that suicide is most
common where education is most diffused/' Yet he admits that
in England suicide is most frequent in the metropolis, the south-
eastern, and south-western counties, where the greatest number
can write, and is less frequent in Wales, where the proportion of
persons who signed the marriage register with a mark is the
greatest. He adds, however,?-
" There is a general but no constant relation between the state of
education thus tested and the commission of suicide. It may be ad-
mitted that there is some relation between the development of the
intellect and self-destruction ; but the connexion must be indirect and
accidental. In opposition to the argument derived from agricultural
districts and labourers in towns, there is the fact that suicide is more
frequent among several classes of artisans than among the better
educated people."
This latter view of the subject may be explained, partly as
being the result of the excessive habit, among the working-classes
alluded to, of taking various kinds of intoxicating beverages. The
Registrar adds:?
"If the progress of civilization is to be charged with increase of
suicide, we must, therefore, understand by it, the increase of tailors,
shoemakers, the small trades, and to the incidental evil to which they
are exposed, rather than the advancement of truth, science, literature,
and the fine arts."
Subsequently, to show the difference between the influence of
education, and the cases where a certain amount of education is
occasionally associated, Mr. Farr mentions,
"That about 2'0 in 10,000 persons assured at the Equitable
Society, and 7'8 in 10,000 dragoons and dragoon-guards, have been
ascertained to commit suicide every year."
In the latter cases, we apprehend, the number is not to be
attributed so much to defective education, as it is to their drunken
and dissolute habits, to the non-exercise of the moral sentiments,
and to the low and degraded condition, generally, of the mental
faculties. We cannot attribute suicide to education; if we did so,
we might as well say that persons would be likely to have the
worst health who rigidly obeyed the laws of mastication, deglu-
c-r
ON SUICIDE. 419
tition, and digestion ; and who, besides, would be sure to aggravate
the symptoms by their attending to the laws of exercise and ablutions.
Every reflecting man will, therefore, form a different inference
as to the reason why there is a greater proneness in artisans to
commit suicide than those who have out-door occupations, by
attributing this difference rather to their breathing so many hours
in a vitiated atmosphere, with a liability of vital disturbance from
an obstruction of the perspirable exhalations, and other debilitating
influences 011 the nervous system.
Mr. Farr seems to think that in trades least exposed to acci-
dents " the mind is left unexcited by natural dangers, imagines
and creates causes of death." But we repeat, that the morbid
state which induces suicide in such cases is developed by the
want of free air, genial temperatures suitable to the seasons, defi-
cient muscular exercise, gloomy workshops, and uncomfortable
homes, and the attempt to counteract these unhealthy and depress-
ing conditions by the excessive use of alcoholic stimuli, until posi-
tive injury is induced to the brain and the nervous system. Then
restless and irritable, they are rendered incapable of arousing
themselves, or of entertaining cheerful trains of thought, and
being haunted by the spectra of their abnormal minds, they seek
relief from the irksomeness and irritation they endure in self-
destruction.
In a very excellent article on " Suicide,"* the writer says :?
" It is not proved that education has, as many have asserted, a ten-
dency to increase the number of suicides; its influence in this respect
is not discernible. Neither does the state of poverty or wealth seem
to have any material influence. But it is proved that among the
inhabitants of large cities suicides are more frequent than in rural
districts.
" M. Guerrey has shown, ' Statisque Morale de la France,' that the
frequency of suicides in France regularly decreased as the distance
of Paris increases. Similar observations were made by Prevost, from
statistics at Geneva, and they are completely confirmed by observa-
tions made in this country.
" The tendency to suicide is much more frequent in men than in
women. By the Westminster returns, in 25 years there were 478
males and 187 females who destroyed themselves : the proportion
being as 73 to 27."
We have to notice similar proportions were observed at Geneva,
by M. Prevost; and M. Esquirol, comparing the result of several
tables, says, " the proportion may be stated as 3 males to 1
female."
Further details would be of little practical use, but the follow-
ing proportion of the annual number of suicides in difierent
* " Penny Cyclopaedia."
420 ON SUICIDE.
countries will furnish data for grave reflection, and confirm our
previous statements, tliat the results will be found an exact
ratio to the degree of departure from the laws of mind and body.
M. Quetelet tells us, "that in Russia there is 1 suicide to every
49,182 inhabitants; that in Austria there is 1 in every 20,900;
in France, 1 in 18,000; State of Pennsylvania, 1 in 15,875;
Prussia, 1 in 14,404; City of Baltimore, 1 to 12,500 ; and New
York, 1 to 7997 inhabitants."
These results would seem to affect the question of mental
culture, for in Russia the people are generally ignorant and
superstitious, which reduces them to a low intellectual condition;
and that at New York, where they are not so, yet there are seven
^fco one suicides in the latter. This would indeed be a gratuitous
inference. For the high rate of suicide in the metropolis of the
Northern States of America results in consequence of reckless
trading, and to the sudden vicissitudes in the prospects and
fortunes of such commercial gamblers. Suicide in all ages and
countries has been perpetrated either by those whose moral aspi-
rations were obtund, or else by those who reasoned (certainly
on false premises) that when life ceased to be pleasurable, that
we might get rid of it as we should avoid any other annoyance.
And yet in the remotest times in which any opinions on suicide
have been recorded, we find some sound views on the subject.
We have already quoted the opinions of Cicero, and are tempted
to give some few additional statements from the same author.
jCicero, " Epis. ad Marium" (Epis. vii.), says, " When he had been
defeated (when he laid down his arms under Pompey), there only
remained for him to fall into the snare of the enemy, to choose
exile, or suicide (mors voluntaria)." But he added, " Cause why
I should commit suicide there was none, why I should wish it,
much." Cato destroyed himself at Utica in consequence of the
victory of Csesar in Africa.
Cicero " Tusculan Questiones"xxxiv., 1 and 3, says, " A malis
igitur mors abducit non a bonis. This argument was so ably
advocated by Hegesias (a philosopher of Cyrene), that Ptolemy
forbade him discoursing publicly on the subject, because many
people after hearing him committed suicide. Callimichus has an
epigram to Cleonbrotius, in consequence of Ambracia, a youth,
who having read Plato " On the Immortality of the Soul," threw
himself into the sea.*
The discrepant opinions of the ancients on the enormity of
self-murder may be judged of by the laws which were enacted
for its suppression. A rescript of Hadrian's expressly directed
" That those soldiers who, either from impatience of pain or disgust of
life, from disease, from madness, from dread of infamy or disgrace,
* Vide " Lact. in Aristippi." Va.
ON SUICIDE. 421
had wounded themselves, or otherwise attempted to put a period to
their existence, should be punished with ?ignominia.'#
" But the attempt of a soldier on other grounds was a capital
offence ; or those who, being under prosecution for heinous offences,
or being taken in the commission of a great crime, put an end to their
existence from fear of punishment, forfeited all their property to the
fiscus."f
Suicide was not uncommon among the Romans in the latter
days of the Republic, and it became very common under the
Emperors, which is evident from the examples given by Tacitus,
and by the younger Pliny, who mentions the case of Cornelius
Rufus (Epist. xii.), Silius Italicus (cxi., 7), Arria (cxi. 16), and
the woman (vi. 24) who succeeded in persuading her husband,
who was labouring under an incurable disease, to throw himself,
tied to her, into a lake. Except in the cases mentioned in the
two tables of the "Digest" above cited, suicide was not for-
bidden by the Roman law, nor was it discountenanced by public
opinion.
Voluntary suicide, by the laws of England, is a crime; and
every crime is presumed to be voluntary until the contrary is
made apparent. But "the crime of self-murder," or felonia cle se,
are terms calculated to convey a correct notion of the legal
character of the offence, or the mode in which it is punished.
When such a verdict was pronounced, the personal property was
forfeited to the crown. The common law, in the case of suicides,
followed the canon law; and if declared guilty of self-murder,
were considered to have died in mortal sin, and were interred,
and a stake driven through the body. But the law was altered,
dispensing with the stake. The self-murdered must now be
buried at night, between the hours of nine and twelve, in any
church or chapel yard, without the performance of the rites of
Christian burial.
The " Code Penal" of France contains no legislation on the
subject of suicide.
Of the modem codes of Germany, some adopt the silence of
the French code, and others vary in their particular provisions.
In the Bavarian and Saxon codes suicide is not mentioned.
The Prussian code forbids all mutilations of the dead body of
a self-murderer, under ordinary circumstances, but declares that
it shall be buried without any marks of respect otherwise suitable
to the rank of the individual; and it directs that, if any sentence
lias been pronounced, it shall, as far as feasible, be executed, due
regard being had to decency and propriety, on the dead body.
Besides which, the body of a criminal who commits self-murder
to escape the sentence pronounced against liim, is to be buried
* Dig. 49, tit. 16, s. 6, De Ee Militari. + Ibid. 48, tit. 21, s. 31*
422 ON SUICIDE.
at night by the common executioner, at the usual place of
executed criminals.
The Austrian code simply provides that the body of the self-
murderer shall be buried by an officer of justice, but not in a
churchyard, or other place of interments.
From all the evidence submitted, it will be obvious that there
has been, and still continues to be, many very discrepant opinions
on the subject of suicide, which is regarded rather as a positive
criminal tendency, than as a result of some form of morbid
affection. It would seem that legislators, philosophers, and
jurists, appear to have forgotten that man, in a normal state of
mental and bodily health, is strongly influenced by an instinctive
love of life, and that when he ceases to experience a sense of
self-preservation, it is presumptive proof of some derangement of
his mental faculties. It matters little, so far as the argument is
concerned, how this state has been induced, whether by animal
excesses or moral causes, if, ultimately, there is induced a fixed
and determinate notion of self-murder, that the very existence of
this unnatural condition is absolute proof of mental indisposi-
tion ; and although this condition is to be lamented, yet it is
contrary to a cultivated humanity to treat the dead body with
marks of contumely, just as it would be a want of true benevo-
lence because a drunken man had broken his leg, or otherwise
seriously injured himself, to neglect giving him the necessary
aid under his suffering, and find an excuse for so doing, that he
had himself to blame for it! It is, therefore, not in the province
of any community claiming to be civilized and humane, to visit
on the suicide impotent penalties, such as the stake, or burying
him by the common executioner, &c. These useless punishments
to the corpse of the suicide do not prevent others, when their
minds are in a similar diseased condition; for if they can inflict
on their own living bodies deliberate destruction, how little will
they think on what may be inflicted on them when they have
neither sensation, perception, nor consciousness !
We therefore affirm that, to prevent suicide, we must endeavour
to alter the habits of the people; and, as a discussion on this
portion of the subject would necessarily lead to many important
details in connexion with education, we shall prefer treating the
subject in a separate article. This will be obvious, if we copy a
brief extract from Kant's " Elementology of Ethics," as this
great metaphysician seems undecided whether to assign actual
demerit to the suicide. He says, Aptome i., Chap. 1, " On the
Duty owed by Man to himself in respect to his Animal Part?
" The first, if not the chiefest duty incumbent on man, in respect of
his brute nature, is the ^ self-conservation of his animal estate. The
anti-part of this obligation is the deliberate and forethought destruc-
L
I
ON SUICIDE. 423
tion of his animality ; and this may he considered as either total or
partial. The total we call murder, and so forth."
Again, on Self-murder, this author says?
" The voluntary divestiture of man's animal part can he called self-
murder only when it is shown that such an act is criminal. A crime
which may be perpetrated, either singly on our own person, or also at
the same time on the person of another?e.g., as when one in preg-
nancy kills herself. Self-destruction is a crime?murder. Suicide
may no doubt be considered as the transgression of a duty owed by
any one to his fellow-men?as a violation of the conjugal obligations
incumbent upon spouses?as the disregard of the duty owed by a
subject to his government (the state) ; and, lastly, as a dereliction of
one's duty to God in this world. But none of these amount to the
crime of murder; and the question at present to he considered is,
whether or not deliberate self-destruction is in violation of man's duty
towards himself, even when abstraction is made from all those other
considerations ; that is, whether a man ought to acknowledge himself
beholden to the self-conservation of his animal part, and beholden so
to act, and, too, by force singly of his personality. That a man can
injure himself appears absurd {volenti non Jit injuria); and this was
the reason why the Stoics considered it to be the prerogative of a sage
to walk with undisturbed soul out of life as out of a smoky room, not
urged by any present or apprehended evils, but simply because he
could no longer sustain with effect his part in life; and yet this very
courage, this strength of soul to advance undauntedly to death, arguing
his opinion of somewhat prized by him far higher than life, ought
to have taught him not to despoil a being of existence possessing so
mighty a mastery and control over the strongest force in his physical
system."
He adds something more to the purpose, thus,?
" Mankind, so long as duty is at stake, cannot renounce his perso-
nality ; that is, by consequence, never, duty being always his incum-
bent debt; and it is a contradiction to hold that any one were enti-
tled to withdraw himself from his obligations, and to act free, in
such sense as need no ground of warrant for his conduct."
We could multiply quotations, hut to little practical advantage.
The opinions of legislators may be inferred by the laws which
apply to suicides, and the theories of philosophers are based upon
no certain data; so that, however they may discuss the moral
aspect, they appear to he defective in their information as to the
causes which may induce the suicidal tendency. Cicero anti-
cipated the true mode of testing the subject, as he affirmed "that
a man could not love and hate himself at the same timeyet
this simply states a fact, without giving us its true solution.
This could only he obtained by sound physiological and psycho-
logical information on the organization of man, the laws which
affect it, and which derange the mental faculties; and lastly, to
424 TENDENCY OF MISDIRECTED EDUCATION
explain wliat is his normal state, and what constitutes disease,
and hy distinguishing between what is a temporary disturbance
of function and what a permanent affection, in order to assign the
degree and the kind of the malady. By these important sciences
the student can learn to distinguish between crime and disease,
and to indicate the best way of preventing or remedying such
affections ; thus proving, in the most empliatical manner, the
truth of the Baconian aphorism, that "knowledge is power !"*
L.
* In this paper we have not mentioned the fact, that the disposition to suicide,
like to insanity, are often both hereditary. And in many instances, in our notes
of such cases, we have evidence which goes far to prove that there exists a similarity
in their history .?that they may remain latent for years, until some predisposing
circumstance developes their active manifestation. And in both forms of disease,
if attention is paid to the hygienic laws, they may be prevented from manifesting,
any morbid consequences.
