Phantasmata
============

136
Aet. VIII.-

It is one of the elementary laws of matter, that, when in
motion, it has the power of communicating to other matter a
similar motion to its own. This is not only true of masses
dynamically considered, but also of molecular and chemical
conditions, in which changes in progress have the power of in-
ducing similar changes in substances similarly constituted ; as
in the case of fermentation. The dynamics of mind have been
less investigated than those of matter ; yet every step taken in
this course shows more and more clearly that mind individual
and mind collective, both act in accordance with certain definite
laws, not dissimilar in nature and general results to those of
matter. One of the most interesting results obtained from
such inquiries, is the more clear comprehension of certain class
states of mind?states produced in small or large communities
as if by a veritable fermentation?a propagation of impulse
molecularly amongst the masses, producing true epidemics of
thought, emotion, or volition, as defined in their symptoms, as
obscure in their source, as erratic and uncertain in their pro-
gress, often as deplorable in their results, as epidemics of cholera,
plague, or small-pox.

Scientific psychology is a study of late invention ; still im-
perfect in many of its details ; not at all reduced to the con-
dition of an exact science;?very imperfect still is our know-
ledge especially of epidemic crime and insanity ; of epidemic
emotion and volition. Yet the subject has of late years attracted
much attention, and many most valuable contributions to its
literature have been received. The most recent and most com-
pendious treatise which we have seen, is that which forms the
especial object of this notice. Mr. Madden has been well known,
both to the profession and to the literary world generally, for
about a quarter of a century, as an able and popular writer.
His work on the " Infirmities of Genius," of which we have made
some use in another part of this Journal, has for many years
been a standard favourite. The present one is of a more weighty
and learned cast, as becomes the more serious and important
subject. It is full of matter, well-arranged, well-digested, and
admirably calculated to illustrate the deeply-interesting subject
under treatment. As to the precise object of the work, we will
let Mr. Madden speak for himself, by which we shall see the
very comprehensive views taken of the bearings which these
studies have upon social and political science :?
* " Phantasmata; or, Illusions and Fanaticisms of Protean Forms productive of
Great Evils." 2 Vols. 8vo. 1857. By R. R. Madden, F.R.C.S., Eng., M.R.I.A., &c

The subject of this work has largely to do with the failings, and in-
firmities, and passions of mankind, and their accompanying disorders
of the imagination; for to these sources must we attribute the
epidemic fanaticisms which we meet with in history and elsewhere?
simulating at one time an ardent zeal for religion, at another a
glowing love of liberty ; now a laudable ambition to rise in the world,
to attain to power, to obtain wealth, to add field to field, possession
to possession, dominion to dominion ; anon a strong wish and settled
purpose to dominate over others, to master their wills, to invade their
rights, to trample down their inferior intelligence, weaker powers, or
feebler energies of mind or body.

" We are accustomed to regard passing events of an extraordinary
character which disturb society as indications of rather too much
political excitement, or polemical heat, sectarian strife, competition in
trade, monopoly in patronage and preferments, an insufficient police
force, an inadequate representation, too little rationalism in religion,
or reverence for law, or devotion to material interests, or knowledge of
the true principles of political economy. We find it saves the trouble
of thinking to fall into this way of viewing remarkable outbreaks of
popular frenzy, like those of the Reign of Terror of the French
Revolution, in 1792 and 1793; outbreaks of intolerance and
immanity in Spain and Portugal in the times of the Inquisition;
outbreaks of barbarity in England and Scotland and the New
England States of America, in the proceedings against witches;
outbreaks of superstition in various countries in regard to new
revelations of pseudo-saints, pseudo-'spiritualists,' pseudo-seers of
mesmerism claiming prophetic gifts; outbreaks of a raging
avidity for sudden gain?for means, no matter how they may be
acquired, to live luxuriously, or to seem to others to be rich
" The madness of the various forms of fanaticism is not confined to
individuals?it extends to communities, at times and intervals more or
less widely separated, and seizes on the minds of nations at periods of
greater intervening distances, that have been terminated by great
wars, or other grievous public calamities Such fanaticisms
have all the distinguishing characteristics of epidemic mental dis-
orders."?Preface, p. 6-8.

Mr. Madden attributes these fanaticisms to an epidemic dis-
order of the moral sense, which is not to be removed "or remedied
by materialism professing Christianity, or sanctimony and sec-
tarianism proffering for genuine religious instruction the teachings
of strife and bitterness." He notices also, as a remarkable fact,
that the most extensive fanaticisms that the world has seen have
no^ .?P?^nated with the poor and uneducated, but with persons of
abilities and education ; with, in fact, the " educated men." One
remark on this subject is impressive and important:?
It is said^ that 'man, ignorant and uncivilized, is a ferocious, sensual,
and superstitious savage.' But there may be a great deal of savagery
in the heart's core of civilization, when the intellectual faculties alone
have been educated, and the moral feelings and affections left untaught.
To use common but significant terms, you must educate the heart as
well as the head."
The first illustrations of epidemic insanity which are given, are
derived from the various disorders and commotions which affected
various parts of Europe in the fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth,
and seventeenth centuries, and " signally in the convents of se-
veral of the religious orders in France, Spain, and Germany."
These disorders appear to be both contagious and epidemic.
With many of the facts we are sufficiently familiar, through the
medium of Hecker's valuable treatise on the " Epidemics of the
Middle Ages." Mr. Madden makes some valuable observations,
from which we shall quote :?

" The mind and body reciprocally and mysteriously affect each other.
To determine where disorders of the body cease to be mere physical
derangements, and where mental maladies supervene on bodily ailments,
and to distinguish between states of health in which bodily functions
or organs are affected, and mental faculties or moral feelings are per-
verted, requires a large amount of knowledge of medical philosophy, as
well as of practical acquaintance with medical pursuits."
He enlarges upon the necessity for calling in history to aid us
in our researches, and " it might be added, we must have that
historic light before we can understand how many degrees there
are of enthusiasm, and of excitability of the nervous system,
which amount not to the temperature of the mind at which
reason ceases to be recognised as a controlling power."

Mr. Madden holds that the epidemic forms of mental excite-
ment are not merely matters of history, but are liable to recur
at any times and seasons when the proper conditions are present;
perhaps in modified forms, in accordance with the changed aspects
of society, of science, and of belief; but still, that imagination will
always, to the end of time, and in all forms of civilization, have
a tendency to exert a powerful influence over " the production of
disease, and morbid sentiments that border on insanity."
That we are not free from these tendencies is a position capable
of ample illustration; and Mr. Madden, after alluding to Mr.
Thorns of Canterbury, and Johanna Southcote, thus proceeds:?
" Has the enlightenment of the nineteenth century so entirely dis-
sipated the dark, thick mists of demented superstition that no traces
of it are to be found in modern English and American records ? In
what language is the future word-painter of Welsh history to depict
the strange antics and the frantic orgies of the Jumpers and Kevivalisfc
fanatics ?

"Will Macaulay 'come down' to the period of the field-meeting of
the saints, and the love-feasts of the brethren and sisterhood of the
elect in Wales? Or will Alison ' finish Europe' with a chapter on
modern miracles, furnishing a resume of the phenomena, and an eluci-
dation of the mysteries of clairvoyance ?

" Shall we read in that chapter, of revelations from the other world
by persons in the ' superior condition,' solemnly announced in the pre-
sence of Christian ministers, of dignitaries of the Church, impugning
doctrines of Christianity which are deemed fundamental truths in all
its churches ?

" Must we go hack to the middle ages for sorcery and dealings with
' Satan's invisible kingdom ?' Or may we not only have to cross the
Atlantic on a voyage of discovery for devils, and those who commune
with ' fallen angels ' and ' inferior spirits ?' Have we not in America,
at the seances of the spirit-rappers, scenes which may remind us of the
' sahbaths' of assembled witches ; media stationed in circles, intent on
conjurations ; discoursing in a jargon scarcely intelligible to the unin-
itiated; invoking spirits?some 'disobedient,' 'mischievous,' 'perverse,'
'mocking,' and 'mendacious;'?others 'benign,' 'angelic,' and 'di-
vinely gifted intelligences

^ After noticing the Mormons, and various other deluded asso-
ciations, we find the following shrewd observations :?

_ " We have abundant confessions of compacts with devils, prepara-
tion of philtres, all kinds of extravagant practices of a sortilegious
kind, in the records of judicial proceedings of the middle ages, and
of those occurrences which took place under the sanction and auspices
of spiritual superstitions, carried into effect by the strong hand of the
secular arm at the gibbet and the stake.

"And in the nineteenth century we have no dearth of avowals of
sorcery, of interviews with Satan, of power derived from his angels, of
the perpetration of fearful crimes committed by Satanic suggestion;
hut not in the same places and under the same circumstances as in the
middle ages. JVe have them now in lunatic asylums, on the part of
persons who are restrained on account of their insanity, and not
burned in the market-places, on the plea of vindicating God's honour."
?(P. 11.)

After noticing the " fanaticism of infidelity, and its effect in
producing the horrors of the French Revolution, Mr. Madden
observes

" An infidel periodical literature in England is accomplishing a similar
mission there?slowly, perhaps, but surely?among the great masses of
the people; and where its propagandism of infidelity, and the vulgar
cynicism of socialism, does not extend, corresponding results may be
expected from the prevalent indifference in matters of religion which
characterizes the literature, science, and philosophy of our time, which
pervades our journalism, and lurks under the folds of the drapery of
fashion, as well as in the precincts of St. Stephen's Chapel."
After these illustrations of our author's style of thought, we
propose to notice very briefly a few of the interesting topics on
which he touches. A short notice of the life of Swedenborg is
given, from which it would appear that he was the subject of
almost constant hallucinations both of the eye and ear, as we
feel bound to reject entirely the theory of imposture. He was
accustomed to hold frequent and long conversations both with
angels and men deceased. He talked with St. Paul during an
entire year ; with St. John, Moses, and Luther. He says, " Lest
any one should call this an illusion, or imaginary perception, it
is to be understood that I am accustomed to see them when
perfectly wide awake, and in full exercise of my powers of ob-
servation." The reason why the speech of an angel is not heard
by the bystanders is, that it " finds entrance into a man's
thoughts, and reaches his organs of hearing from within." This,
or some analogous form of expression, is very common amongst
those who suffer from auditory illusions. Thus the prioress of
the convent of Soudum, tormented by the demon Behemoth,
heard him speak "par une locution qu'il un faisait dans ma
tete."

On the subject of the well-known visions and revelations of
St. Teresa, Mr. Madden says :?

" It is impossible for a medical man to read this account (an account
of her bodily sufferings before given)?of the occasional falling into
a lethargic state, fits of fainting and swooning, violent spasms and
pain at the heart, temporary loss of reason, shrinking of the sinews,
oppression, with a profound sense of sadness, biting of the tongue in
many places when out of her senses, inability to swallow any liquid,
distortion of the whole frame as if all her bones were disjointed, sub-
sequent inability to stir hand or foot for some time, and a generally -
diffused soreness, so as to be unable to bear being touched?without
coming to the conclusion that the sufferer laboured under physical
disease of a low nervous or gastric kind, with continuous fever, pro-
bably complicated with epileptic tendencies."

Elaborate and interesting notices are given of various forms of
epidemic manias ; amongst others, of Witchcraft, of Lycanthropy,
Epidemic Hysteria, Convulsive Chorea, Manie de la Danse
amongst the French, the Tarantula dancing-mania of Apulia, the
Flagellation mania, and the Migratory Epidemic. The last is
thus noticed :?

" At various times in the middle ages, the minds of a multitude of
people seem simultaneously to have been affected with this universal
feeling of malaise, accompanied by an irresistible and unaccountable
impulse to go forth and walk out of one's own land and place in society,
to move with masses of people with some apparent instinct of a high
purpose; at one period they appear, as it were, on a pilgrimage, but
without any definite object, or fixed shrine?like the liianchi in the
thirteenth century, wandering en masse from one end of Italy to the
other, making no proclamation of plan or object, but moving onward
with a dim, confused idea, that God's honour was in some way or other
to be promoted by these peregrinations."

These migrations are to be distinguished from the Crusades,
which were epidemics of another class.

About half of Mr. Maddens second volume is occupied with a
carefully-prepared history of the life and character of the Maid
of Orleans, Jeanne d'Arc, founded on the work of M. Quicherat,
whose researches were undertaken for the Socidt^ de THistoire
de France. The result arrived at appears to be, that Joan of
Arc was affected to some extent with thermania?that she was
subject from her earliest infancy to illusions and hallucinations
of sight and hearing?that the intensity of her enthusiasm pro-
jected outwards the promptings of her own mind, so as to give
them substantive existence, and that they were acted upon as
inspirations. It appears fully proved, however, that her life and
morals were perfectly pure and irreproachable, and that her
execution was nothing more nor less than judicial murder. Mr.
Madden does not reject the idea that she had in some sort a
divine mission to perform, as would appear from the concluding
sentence of his chapter on her inspiration :?

" Agents of this sort have been used by Divine Providence for great
purposes in all times, and in many regions of our globe With
the several Scripture records of inspirations given to women for the
accomplishment of great and good designs, the history and mystery of
the visions of Jeanne d'Arc may possibly be found to be in nowise
inconsistent."?(Vol. ii., p. 226.)

On the subject of epidemic mania in convents, much useful
information is afforded in these volumes, showing how, under
mental influence, the most extraordinary phenomena were mani-
fested in frail, weak bodies, and how singularly these phenomena
coincided in the various places in which they appeared ; also, how
yery similar they are to the results claimed to be produced by
modern mesmerism, such as magnetic sleep, insensibility to pain,
clairvoyance, influence over volition, &c. &c. But we must
close our notice and extracts, strongly recommending these
volumes to the attention of all who feel an interest in the very
obscure yet important subjects on which they treat.
