Intemperance Considered as a Form of Mental Disorder
=====================================================

There cannot be a more fertile subject for the student of psycho-
logy than to elucidate the direct and indirect consequences of
intemperance, not only for its ravages on the vital organs
generally, but for its special injurious effects on the mental
faculties, and as a predisposing cause of many forms of insanity.
FOffll OF MENTAL DISOKDEK. 103
We shall examine some of the facts to prove that excessive
intemperance tends, not on]y to injure those who indulge in this
habit, but that it also affects their offspring, occasioning an
excessive craving in them for the gratification of similar tastes,
which is often so irresistible as to constitute a special form of
disease.
It is, therefore, essential to trace the modus operandi of
alcoholic poison on the system, which induces, besides the above
consequences, many forms of moral depravity.
This latter view is obvious by an inspection of our jails and
workhouses, which present ample proof of its devastating effects
on the higher attributes of man ; and our infirmaries and hospitals
will furnish indubitable evidence that it predisposes to many
forms of corporeal disease; whilst our county lunatic asylums
present many lamentable cases of mental affections induced
by excessive intemperance.
Lastly, it is now a well-established fact, that all those abnormal
conditions are transmitted as heirlooms by inebriates to their
unfortunate children.
In one short paper we can give little more than a mere outline
of the subject, but yet sufficient to show that the evils which
will be enumerated are not exaggerated for any special purpose.
They are patent to every observer, and demand not only the
sympathy of philanthropic men, but some effort to prevent their
continuation. Finally, we shall submit a few reflections, in order
to show how this result may be accomplished by means similar
to those made use of to cure various mental affections.
So that for our purpose there is not needed any novel treat-
ment or startling new views. The inferences will be deduced
from the premises, and may therefore be regarded as simply
consistent; for, prior to submitting our deductions, we shall
endeavour to prove that drunkenness in some of its forms should
he treated as a type of insanity, and that in all inveterate cases the
victims should be regarded as patients to be placed under restraint,
and forcibly prevented from continuing their debased habits !
. It will be acknowledged that intemperance is a leveller! All
its votaries, whether illiterate or learned, rich or poor, are brought
down to the same low moral condition. And just for this reason,
it acts on the mind through the organization in general, and the
rain in particular. And if we select an example of one highly
cu lvated, we have the advantage of his experience of its mind-
es ioymg tendency. Its continued excess and the fatal conse-
quences are thus graphically described
? . . . " 'till the brain became
n 1ts own eddy boiling, and o'erwrouglit,
whirling guljih of phantasy and fame."
104 INTEMPERANCE CONSIDERED AS A
The effects on a worshipper of this modern Moloch is
unmistakable havoc. He is rendered abject and reckless, and
qualified for deeds of violence ; daily he is rendered more savage
and infuriated, and becomes desperate and dangerous even to his
habitual associates. His criminal outrages are perpetrated
under a certain amount of excitement, but he abstains from
great excess until he has performed^ his immoral ravages, and
then " he drinks deep," and " steeps his senses in forgetful-
ness." He is, under such circumstances, impotent to act; his
expression is then most idiotic, his appearance desolate, and
if he attempts to move, he is in danger of clasping his
kindred clod, and presents a being of such disfigured form,
as if he had lost every trait of humanity. And in verity
it is difficult to believe one so uneducated and so brutalized
had ever felt the pure and refined emotions arising from moral
perceptions; or that he had ever experienced the love of the
beautiful and the true, by contemplating the works of creation.
We shudder at beholding the mental degradation of an immortal
agent, and we come to the conclusion that Government, in its
paternal character, is bound to use means to prevent the great
mass of the working population becoming similar to the sketch
we have made of one slave to intemperance, with its necessary
concomitant, crime ! Intemperance is indeed a giant vice, and
requires commensurate means to prevent its spreading,?means
only possessed by the rulers of the country; and if they neglect
their duty, let them not imagine that even the most innocent,
pure, and holy will not suffer from the malignant consequences
thus unrestrained; and rendered liable, whatever their station,
to be injured in the midst of such a vortex of ruin.
It so corrupts, that servants sacrifice their integrity to it, and
violate the misplaced confidence of their employers; and it
pollutes the minds of women, that nurse-maids may corrupt the
innocent beings under their charge.
So that even as individuals we dare not remain unconcerned
spectators; we must combine to stop the torrent of evils which
are more devastating than pestilence and plague. We pity the
obtuseness of those who consider that, although it may be the
source of some crimes, the revenue could not dispense with the
sale of that which induces intemperance. Yerily they have eyes
and see not, ears, and hear not; for the injuries to life and
property are more than commensurate to the monetary advan-
tages, and that, if it were possible to prevent altogether the sale
of alcoholic compounds, there would be a vast amount of pro-
perty saved, besides the absolute millions sacrificed for their
purchase. And in these advantages we have not added that
there would be prevented a number of bad husbands, fathers,
FORM OF MENTAL DISORDER. 105
mothers, wives, sons, and daughters, which are made by intem-
perance, and if a list of them could be annually exposed to
public gaze it might startle and probably deter some few of the
noviciates of this fearful habit. Adding to these brief facts the
searing effects of intemperance, and that its tendency is " to drain
every drop of the milk of human kindness" from the hearts of
its votaries, and then leave them steeped and saturated with
extreme and inveterate selfishness, which is confirmed at every
session for the trial of criminals.
These are simple truisms, for inebriating stimulants damage the
organization, render the moral sentiments callous, and prostrates
the God-lilce attribute of reason, often driving its worshippers to
madness or murder!
There requires little reasoning to explain why such must be
the ultimate results, as the primary effect of alcohol is to increase
the circulation of the blood; in the first stage brightening the
eyes, and exciting symptoms of greater vivacity, as the mental
faculties become stimulated. If the doses are continued, there
is soon manifested a vast change in the expression?the eyes
become slightly injected, the face flushed, the mouth hot
and dry, the body feverish, and the brain congested. This
latter state is indicated by a sense of heaviness and stupor.
If, despite these warnings, additional draughts are quaffed, the
individual is in that ominous condition approximating to actual
disease.
We shall, after these general statements, submit some few
particulars under the following heads :?
1. The physical and moral ravages of intemperance.
2. The intellectual lesions.
3. That the inordinate craving for alcohol is an hereditary
affection.
4. That drunkenness must be regarded as itself a form of
insanity, irrespective of delirium tremens.
5- Concluding reflections.
It is well known that the stomach of the drunkard suffers
from the effect of his excesses, and that its functions are much
impaired, so that it can ill perform its allotted task.
Ihe proof of all these effects is graphically expressed in the
countenance; for the inebriate either looks very pale and pasty,
or else bloated with an accumulation of diseased fat. In the
atter case, the slightest scratch, which would be unheeded by a
lea thy man, will often induce mortification and death.
ut if the drunkard does not become unwieldly, then he has a
cada\ crous expression, with, at times, feverish and hectic symp-
oms I he intemperate are also liable to affections of the liver,
bladder, kidneys, and so forth ; and he pays the penalty of his
106 INTEMPERANCE CONSIDERED AS A
excesses by all the complications of dyspepsia, and by having to
endure the racking, gnawing pains of gout.
Besides these diseased conditions, the thoracic organs are im-
plicated. The heart or its valves may become ossified, or it
may lose its contractile power in some degree, producing many
distressing consequences ; and if the inebriate has inherited weak
lungs, his career may be cut short by rapidly developed con-
sumption.* It is patent to every practitioner that the tendencies
of these diseased organs may be transmitted to the children of
the intemperate besides the other affections to which we shall
subsequently allude. %
These brief statements will suffice our present purpose, as we
merely wished to indicate that intemperance, among its other
evils, deranges the whole of the chylypoietic viscera, involving
the organic functions. It also disfigures the outward form, but
this latter is of less consequence than the changes induced by
this vice on the inner life of the individual.
Before we treat on this important part of our subject, we must
call attention to the fact, that the fatal habit of intemperance
injures the nervous system generally, and the brain in particular.
A vast many of the patients attending the ophthalmic institu-
tions are either drunkards or their children, and the disorders
they suffer are, inflammation of the eyes, amaurosis, and very
often loss of sight. Many also suffer from deafness and the
absolute loss of the senses of taste and smell.
"Writers on the deaf mutes attribute the affection to intem-
perance as one of the causes. And it also induces paralysis,
epilepsy, and apoplexy.
Whilst the brain gives surety of its functional disturbance in
delirium tremens, which specially is induced by intemperance,
in this affection the victim sees the most frightful objects mock-
ing him, or threatening him with ribald jests or horrid de-
nunciations, and often exciting in him a sense of terror from
their demoniac expressions.
We will only cite one case as an instance that, after the active
attack, the hallucination still, at times, annoyed and irritated the
individual.
Mr. R  was a drinker of brandy to great excess, and although
a man of great talent, he had lost all moral control over him-
self. During one of his attacks of delirium tremens, instead of
threatening creditors stunning him with their demands, he fancied
that a large black raven was pecking at his right shoulder.
* Drunkards who have scrofula transmit this dreadful disease in an aggravated
form ; whilst they are also liable to jaundice and fits of melancholy depression,
which, when inherited, is a predisposing cause of suicide.
FORM OF MENTAL DISORDER. 107
This made him rave and swear most frightfully. He, however, re-
covered from the attack, and resumed his daily potations; and
when he had imbibed a certain dose, the old black raven would
again annoy him. As he was a public man we often saw him,
and frequently noticed that in the midst of an intellectual dis-
course he would turn his head abruptly towards the right
shoulder, and say in a half smothered oath, " Be still; be quiet,
will you?"
So, one day we asked his man, why Mr. R did so ? " Why
sir, don't you know that he still thinks his old enemy, the black
raven, is pecking at his shoulder; but he is never troubled with
this fancy until he is nearly drunk ; and/f he continued, " it
takes a rare quantity of brandy before he is so."
He died in the prime of life, suffering in the most fearful
manner, bodily and mentally.
But before this lamentable malady takes place, the inebriate
is forewarned by some abnormal state of some of the external
senses.
These latter statements we could verify by many instructive
cases ; we select the following :?
Mr. M   was a most inveterate drinker from his youth, but
was mild and gentlemanly when sober, and full of regret at the
madness of his career; and vet he continued this suicidal
habit.
About a year after we had seen him he complained of an
absolute loss of his smell and taste, and was strongly urged to
abstain from all intoxicating beverages. He made a powerful
effort to do so, and partially recovered his lost senses. But real
or fancied annoyance made him relapse, and then he was unable
to distinguish the most fragrant from the most foetid substances.
And yet, so enslaved had he become to his fatal habit, that he
continued to indulge in excess, to use his own apology, " to pre-
vent the irritation he experienced, by stupifying his thoughts."
And this he continued to do until active disease of the brain
took place, and after repeated attacks he died of delirium
tremens.
. ^|le next case we will submit, from its " pointing a moral," if
it will not "adorn a tale," might have terminated similarly, if
poor inebriate had not been cut off in his career rather pre-
maturely by a most unfortunate accident.
i-ir. ?5 . ]ja(j keen jn business as a respectable retail druggist,
f ~ ' and was said to have been intemperate as a young man,
u or some years after his marriage he restrained the strong
propensity; yet from some circumstance we are unacquainted
wi le began his old course, and soon became an inveterate
108 INTEMPERANCE CONSIDERED AS A
drunkard. All his stock and furniture were disposed of to
gratify his inordinate craving, and his wife and children were re-
duced to poverty.
The ravages lie committed on himself were written in red and
blue blotches on bis face and nose, but these were trifling to his
absolute loss of both smell and taste; still he might be seen
reeling about the streets whenever he could procure money for
drink.
When most degraded in mind and body he was urged, in a mo-
ment of sobriety, to take the temperance pledge, and he soon reco-
vered some more natural expression, and a little feeling of renewed
respectability; but Be was still deprived of smell and taste.
A situation Was procured for him at the house of a respectable
firm of wholesale druggists, in what we believe is called the dry
department. Yet, with all his past experience, there still lurked
a craving for a more potent stimulus than coffee or tea, and so he
was easily persuaded to break his pledge.
All kinds of alcoholic beverages were excluded by the firm
from their establishment. Yet this salutary order was evaded,
and spirits or porter were procured in medicine bottles. This
evasion cost the life of an individual. Poor B had clubbed
for some porter, and during the time it was sent for a bottle of
laudanum had been placed on his counter, to be enclosed in a
parcel he had to pack. This bottle he mistook for the forbidden
porter, and took a hearty draught of it, and immediately reco-
gnised by his sensations the fatal mistake. A stomach-pump
was instantly procured, and every effort which science or humanity
could apply to save him was tried, but all proved useless, and, if
our memory is correct, he died within half an hour !
As he had not recovered his smell or taste, and had recom-
menced his former intemperance, there is little doubt but that
he would have ultimately been carried off by some form of cerebral
disease.*
We will now briefly advert to some effects of intemperance
on the moral perceptions.
It is proverbial " that fools and drunkards betray their natural
tendenciesfor they cannot conceal their follies or their vices.
If the inebriate is naturally of an irritable temper, he is sure
to quarrel under the influence of drink. If he is sly and cunning,
he will become suspicious and spiteful, and often very mischievous.
Pot-companions have frequent brawls; and the friendship of
drinking associates is held on a very slight tenure. Look at the
* These two cases will assume an importance in our elucidation of the organs
implicated in the hereditary intemperance, and if our views are rejected it would
be impossible to explain how a craving for intoxicating drinks can exist when the
drinker had neither smell nor taste !
FORM OF MENTAL DISORDER. 109
violated confidence; the adultery; manslaughter; the breaches
of commercial faith, even amongst the comparatively educated ;*
also the wife-beating and other brutalities among the working-
classes ; and thefts, burglaries, murders, rape, and so forth,
among the degraded portion of the community?those who are
without any culture of their mental faculties. And thus we
possess a mass of evidence, amounting to actual proof, that
intemperance merely rouses into frightful activity the lowest of
human propensities.
This is confirmed by the fact, that it is rarely the case that
drunkards are chaste and highly moral in their conversation and
actions.
It is therefore a natural consequence that intemperance should
more or less affect the brain, and induce many forms of insanity.
This is a valid reason to avoid the temptation and the penalty;
yet it is a lamentable fact, that those who become addicted to
this debasing habit cannot be deterred from it by the most
urgent appeals to their better nature, and the most startling
narratives of the diseases it induces. To such infatuated beings,
it is most true that?
"Every charm of gentler eloquences
All perishable?like the electric fire??
But strike the frame, and as it strikes, expire!"
We shall, at the conclusion of this essay, submit some reasons
for the use of other means than either precepts or arguments, to
stem the frightfully increasing evil of intemperance.
We have, therefore, the most voluminous evidence that apo-
plexy and delirium tremens are not the only affections conse-
quent on the baneful vice of inebriation ; that it is not only
destructive to the physical and moral health, but that it also
prevents intellectual development.
The following case corroborates this statement: ?In the town
of B??j in Suffolk, there resided a married pair, who lived on
a small independence. They were near relations, and were re-
ported to be not very remarkable for great intellectuality ; and
from their mode of life it would seem they did not use what little
they had. They rather preferred gratifying their animal pro-
pensities, and miserable were the consequences. " Their usual
occupation/' says our informant, "consisted in muddling their
prams with vinous potations, probably never getting absolutely
intoxicated, but in that state usually designated 'fuddled/ In
this condition they retired every night, and the results of their
depraved habits soon became manifest. They had five children,
i 6 do not re5ar4 any one educated if the moral attributes are left untrained,
an et - 010 not manifesting any influence on the character and conduct.
110 INTEMPERANCE CONSIDERED AS A
all of whom were of the worst class of idiots ; that is, not only
defective in intellectual capacity, but they also inherited from
their progenitors the animal propensities with an intensity of
power."
Similar examples are patent to every physician, for intempe-
rance produces its havoc as a mind-destroyer in all places. Look,
for instance, at the squalid groups lounging at the "gin-palaces"
in this metropolis and in all large towns; and mothers may be
seen (0 profanation to this sacred name!) standing or reeling
with their weak, sickly, and emaciated children, many of them,
from want and neglect, staring in vacant idiocy.
But the most startling problem connected with intemperance
is, that not only does it affect the health, morals, and intelli-
gence of the offspring of its votaries, but they also inherit the
fatal tendency and feel a craving for the very beverages ivhich
have acted as poisons on their system from the commencement
of their being !
The first time this aspect of the subject was forced on our
attention we had become acquainted with persons in respectable
positions of society who would break out for a week or so, and
during the time would continue to drink to great excess, after
which they would remain for some lengthened period rigidly
sober.
We at first attributed the latter phase as the consequence of
the nausea and derangement of the system, but we soon had
a mass of evidence which, in a great measure, rendered this
inference invalid ; for we noticed that the alternate inebriety and
abstinence assumed a regular periodicity.
We also met with cases which confirmed our first impression,
as to the tendency being transmitted " from sire to son." Two
remarkable instances were related in a public assembly. Two
respectable men, members of two different denominations of
religion, had made the discovery in their youth that they experi-
enced an irresistible craving for alcoholic liquors, but that they
could not taste them without continuing to drink until they
became inebriated. They were men of good sense, and very
moral, and they determined to act on their higher motives, and
abstain altogether from the use of these fatal beverages. This
they did many years before the evils of intemperance had induced
men to form societies for its suppression.
These two rational reformers continued water drinkers for
many years; but both were induced, on some special occasion,
to taste " the forbidden beverages," and each is reported to have
had some misgiving as to the danger and hazard of the experi-
ment, but they were overruled, and yielded to the fatal tempta-
FORM OF MENTAL DISORDER. Ill
tion. For it seems the moment they drank all their long-
smothered latent craving was revived with fearful intensity, and
both, on the first occasion, became intoxicated ; and then they
continued their old course, and both ultimately died in mad-
houses, no doubt expedited by the remembrance of their long-
sustained victory over this vicious tendency, and the weakness
and degradation of ultimately being vanquished by it.
From similar well-authenticated facts, we were induced to
believe that drunkenness, like many other morbid affections, is
hereditary; and then we naturally sought for a solution?How
is this tendency transmitted ?
Before submitting some of the evidence in our possession, by
which both questions may be answered, we may premise that all
the animal functions are under the directing influence of the
brain ; that, fur instance, the cerebellum conserves the sexual
functions, and that all the feelings and sentiments, included
under what are termed " the affective faculties," are located in
the cerebrum. We merely insist on this induction to strengthen
the data for the following elucidation.
That in order, for example, to comprehend how the tendency
of intemperance exists, we must avail ourselves of the assumed
fact, that a portion of the brain gives man "a desire for food arid
drink," so that these essentials for his health may not be left to
accident. Spurgheim called this organ " Alimentivenesswhilst
other writers term it " Gustativeness," or " Instinct of hunger
and thirst." And it will be by the physiological evidence of this
function that we are enabled to explain and answer both queries.
Nay, we will affirm that, if we reject the evidence for the
existence of such an instinct, though the facts of this craving for
intoxicating drinks be admitted, it could never be explained.
We might say that it was very curious, or very mysterious, and
endeavour to invent some ingenious speculation to account for
it; yet it would be, under such treatment, a tangled web of mere
gratuitous assumption, or unsupported ambiguities/ The desire
for food and drink are appetites possessed by all animals ; and
there is a periodical demand for both, to keep the body in a
state of working order. Observations, often repeated, enable us
to point out the locality of the organ of alimentiveness, it being
This was just the dilemma in which the late highly-gifted Sir Charles Bell was
1' ac? ln his " Eridgewater Treatise on the Hand." He could not reconcile the
great mechanical tact of man to have been bestowed on him merely by the hand,
an so le had to admit " that there must be some portion of the brain destined to
.give 11m his manual dexterity;" and this portion of the cerebrum he called " The
?l6fC!q Z ?f which ingenuity he would have been spared had lie ad-
f11 ? . San of Constructiveness," which is said to be more or less deve-
loped m the ratio of the manipulative power.
112 INTEMPERANCE CONSIDERED AS A
situated at the base of the brain, and occupies the temporal fossa
on each side of the head. It gives origin to the olfactory nerves.
When the organ is large, there is great width at the lower part
of the skull, just at the temples, and above the zygomatic arches.
This may be verified by the inspection of all voracious animals,
such as the lion, tiger, pig, and so forth.
The same parts of the head are generally very full in gluttons
and drunkards, but they are narrow in persons who have perfect
control over their appetites.
As presumptive evidence of such an instinct, it may be
affirmed that the stomach does not select food or indicate any
preference, and, although it is often a very ill-used organ, and
greatly imposed on, it has but one remedy?it can reject the
superabundant supply.
In a state of nature man and animals would, as a general
rule, select the sort of food most suited for them, by the sense
of smell, but the stomach is, and would be, a mere passive
recipient.
But still it might be said, supposing these statements to be
correct, they furnish no positive evidence that the selection of
nutriment is the province and prerogative of alimentive-
ness.
We might content ourselves with simply answering that the
two cases of the absolute loss of the senses of smell and taste,
and the continued craving for what could not gratify by the
flavour or the odour, must have been excited by the remembered
instinct which had set up some preferences, not from tradition,
but from the primary gratification these drinks imparted in the
commencement of their career.
We, however, submit another kind of evidence, and which
gives a complete answer by fair induction.
1. That alimentiveness indicates a regular periodicity.
2. This is proved by the fact that whatever may occupy the
mind of an individual, he is apprised of his meal-time, by an
urgent desire for food.
?3. That this periodical craving cannot originate in the stomach
itself, for should any casualty prevent food to be eaten, there
is little or no inclination to eat.
4. If, therefore, the periodical instinctive desire for food de-
pended on the stomach, as it remains empty, the desire would be
indefinitely persisted in. But as this is not the case, we are
forced to conclude that alimentiveness is the " Master of the
Ceremonies."
5. It should also be remembered that the desire to eat may
be induced by savoury smells, which, affecting the olfactories,
the excitement is transmitted to the organ of alimentiveness,
FORM OF MENTAL DISORDER. 113
and thus the craving is so great, that a keen appetite is
experienced.
Lastly. "We are, from these premises, warranted to conclude
that the stomach does not induce the desire (as inferred from
the fact mentioned) ; and further, when the next meal-time
arrives, there will be experienced again a great desire for food.
We might add other well-ascertained facts?that, for instance, in-
sane patients who try to starve themselves have moderate alimen-
tiveness ; whilst criminals left for execution will, when this organ
is large, be very eager for their last breakfast, and enjoy it with
as much gusto as if nothing unpleasant was anticipated.
The inordinate exercise of any feeling or instinct induces not
only greater activity, but also greater intensity of power. *
We therefore shall submit evidence that a craving for ine-
briating liquors becomes, from this circumstance, an hereditary
affection; just as in the same manner when individuals exercise
certain of the perceptive powers the tendency is transmitted, and
hence there are families of mechanicians, painters, sculptors, &c.
We have already mentioned?and only repeat it now as afford-
ing collateral proof?that the base of the brain is the seat of the
animal propensities, and that our passions are stimulated by
strong drinks; for they excite the heart's action, and the blood
is propelled with an accelerated force to the brain generally,
and to the base of the brain in particular, where are situated
the largest blood-vessels?so there is not any marvel that the
feelings are roused, whilst the more remotely situated powers
are scarcely affected. And hence the habitually intemperate
do not manifest any high and exalted sentiments ; recklessness
takes the place of prudence, and every pure affection is tram-
pled on and outraged. And although the inebriate is at times
conscious of the destructive and searing influence of his debased
habit, he seems like one spell-bound, and if he has not inherited
this horrid insanity, he is sure to transmit it to his family.
Mr. J was a professor of religion, but the truths he incul-
cated were rendered useless by his own intemperate habits.
His children received them with mockery from their heavy-
tongued and scarcely articulate father. Morality taught by
him acted as a few drops of water on a dry and barren ground,
and excited the ridicule and not the reverence of his hearers.
-But he never was seen reeling drunk?only constantly kept up to
the point of saturation. He was cut off in the prime of life.
We have numerous instructive facts in reference to the instinct of alimentivc-
ness m cases of gluttony, both in persons reputed intelligent, and those who were
x 10 ic or insane, and many curious idiosyncrasies. These we may on some future
occasion be disposed to prepare for this Journal; there are many psychological phe-
nomena connected with the subject.
NO. IX.?NEW SERIES. I
114 INTEMPERANCE CONSIDERED AS A
His wife had a similar tendency ; she had a very bad
" stomach complaint," and she took spirit as a halm ; and she
imbibed it so continually, that scandal affirmed " she liked the
medicine."
"Was it therefore any wonder that all the younger J s
became drunkards ?
We would not use this case as furnishing proof of the heredi-
tary tendency of drunkenness, as it might be referred by some
to the children having been educated to drink. But we knew
some of the family, who were witty, intelligent, and most
excellent companions, being chided for their suicidal conduct,
say, "We can't help it; we inherit a strong love for rum or
gin !" One actually bound himself by some heavy penalty, and
after some months' abstinence, broke out and declared " The
craving was actual torture?he could not help himself."
The mother died a confirmed drunkard, and so did every one
of her children.
Mr. B , of , Yorkshire, had also a large family, but
he and his wife were never exactly sober. Soon after we knew
them, the lady died suddenly, as it was reported, of a fever, but
in fact from an attack of delirium tremens; and a few hours
before the affection came on, an empty brandy bottle was found
under her pillow.
The old man had an iron constitution, and stood for some
years the havoc of this searing vice; but he lived long enough
to witness the sad effects on his family. His eldest son, under
the influence of alcohol, committed suicide, and all the other
children (with one exception) came to an untimely end, all being
inveterate drunkards ; but the final blow to the poor old sinner
was struck by his only daughter, as she was brought home by
the police in a state of inebriety. This shock was too much,
and he did not survive it.
We could narrate a vast many cases, some of literary and
professional men, who, in answer to our query whether they
had a strong craving for intemperance in drink (judging so
from their large alimentiveness), have either confessed them-
selves the slaves of this propensity, or, to avoid the baneful
consequences, have shrunk from the temptation; " for," said
one, " if I drink at all, I cannot help going on to maddening
excess?and my father was so before me!"
In a Journal devoted to investigate the phases of insanity, we
need not insist on the fact that literally " the sins of the fathers
(physical and moral) are visited on the children;" and we also
affirm that the drunkard's propensity is also transmitted to
them through some morbid condition of the alimentive organ.
We possess a large mass of evidence in proof of this statement,
FORM OF MENTAL DISORDER 115
as valid as that the brain, heart, lungs, stomach, bladder, and
kidneys are implicated under long-continued acts of intem-
perance.
When once this vice assumes a mastery, the slavery to it is
most humiliating. There is only one chance of curing this form
of disease in its incipient stage?to warn the victim that he
stands on a precipice which is full of danger, and that, if he has
not destroyed his intellect, he will make an effort to save him-
self from the imminent consequences. That if he does not make
this effort from a high moral motive, he should pause ere he
drags to certain destruction the innocent and helpless beings
whom he has been instrumental to usher into existence, and
which it is his sacred duty to cherish and train, that they may
be fitted to perform their parts on the busy stage of life.
He might be told that, instead of being selfishly reckless, he
should rigidly observe the laws of health, and studiously exhibit
for their example the most correct moral discipline, and should
cultivate his own intellect, that he might be more fitted to train
and educate his precious charges.
And, as a practical lesson, he should have his attention called
to the fact, that in mercy many premonitory warnings were
given him when he violated the laws of temperance; that his
head ached and temples throbbed ; that he had a fevered skin,,
and hot, dry mouth ; that the nausea and acidity he experienced,..
as ordinary indications of physical disturbance, should be heeded,,
and that he should also note his mental disturbances; that he
was irritable at trifles, and quarrelsome without any cause; then,
if he continued his career, and seemed incapable of perceiving
so many body-and-mind-destroying influences, he should be then
treated as a madman, and be forcibly prevented from injuring
himself or those dependent on him.
We are disposed to consider, with Dr Caldwell,* that dvutiken-
ness is, in some of its types, itself a species of insanity I
Its tendency bears a marked analogy to the diagnotic symptoms
?f other forms of this disease. We speak not merely of its
chronic forms ; but under the potent influence of ardent spirits it
may be suddenly developed, and as suddenly cured. We cite
the following instructive cases :?
During our residence in Yorkshire, we paid a visit to ,
a small place in the West Riding, and was told by a very in-
telligent person of a small farmer of the name of P , a
married man; that he seemed to love his wife and child very
I
Thoughts on the Pathology, Prevention, and Treatment of Intemperance, as
a xorm of Mental Derangement." By Charles Caldwell, M.D., Professor of the
Institutes of Medicine and Chemical Practice in Transylvania University.
I 2
116 INTEMPERANCE CONSIDERED AS A
mucli; and yet, under the influence of drink, he had suddenly
made a recent attempt to destroy them both. It appeared that
the farmer had been very temperate ; but he had, on the same
day of which the fearful occurrence took place in the evening,
been drinking many glasses of spirits and water with some one
whom he had not seen for years, and that he returned home
very drunk, and in a state of great irritability of temper. His
very amiable wife did not even rebuke him for his disgraceful
excess, yet he did nothing but quarrel and abuse her; and
when at last her womanly nature protested against his words of
unjust reproof, he rose like a maniac, and struck her so violently
that she fell on the floor, and for a few seconds lost her con-
sciousness. He was furious, and struck himself, vowing ven-
geance against every one, confirming the words of the poet?
'' That to be wrotli with those we love,
Doth work like madness on the brain."
The woman was still prostrate, and contemplating the strange
metamorphosis of him who had hitherto been a most affectionate
partner, when she was astounded by another phase?he, with a
frenzied expression, charged her with a criminal intercourse with
some ideal personage, and then he seized the cradle in which
their son was sleeping, and placed it on the fire. She gave a
most piercing shriek, but still, nerved with strength and presence
of mind, she took the infant from the grate, and holding the
blackened cradle with its contents before her mad husband, she
said, with a wild and husky voice, " What is the matter with
you? You tried not only to kill me, but you have attempted to
murder our poor little innocent Billy! May God forgive you \"
The neighbours had witnessed this painful scene, and they
took, in silent admiration, the cradle from this heroic mother;
but were shocked and surprised at the conduct of her husband.
The violence of her grief, and the suddenness of the whole
horrid affair, had sobered him, and he sat with his hands before
his face, crying and sobbing, "May God forgive me!"
A reconciliation took place, and he expressed the deepest con-
trition ; and in the full and sincere repentance of his heart,
explained that the drink he had taken quite maddened him,
and had nearly led him to the perpetration of a double murder.
In this case we have an instance of sudden insanity from the
potent poison; and, under a new excitement, an equally rapid
recovery.
We select another from a police report, which occurred a very
*few years since in this metropolis :?
"A woman, in an attic in some low locality, attempted to throw her
son, a boy about five years old, out of the window in her room; ar.d
FORM OF MENTAL DISORDER. 117
his screams brought a neighbour, who lived in the adjoining apartment,
just in time to save the child. The unnatural mother, who was in a
state of inebriation, was given into the custody of a policeman, by
whom she was taken to the station-house, and locked in a cell all
night. The next morning the case was heard before the sitting magis-
trate, when the principal witness said (after telling the above incident),
that she had not a doubt that the wretched woman had been induced
to kill her son, that she might pledge his shoes for a little more gin !
And she added, that when she was sober, she was rather an indulgent
parent; but that when she was drunk she was like a mad woman, or
words to this cffect.
" The magistrate then asked the trembling and contrite prisoner if
what had been related was the truth ? and if she had any cpiestions to
put to the witness ? She shook her head, and acknowledged that she
had 110 other thought than to get some more liquor with the shoes,
and that she was always demented when she had drink! If she had
not been so, she was sure she would not hurt a hair of her dear boy's
head!"
The worthy magistrate gave lier a most excellent lesson for
her future conduct, and she was discharged on her own sureties
not to repeat the offence.*
We could give many similar instances where "a mother's love,"
the strongest instinct of woman's nature, has been withered by
intemperate habits; and that such mothers, instead of making
sacrifices for the preservation of their offspring (sacrifices which
such beings will always make in a normal state of mind), will
act in violation of every sentiment of humanity to gratify their
craving for an irritating poison which maddens them.
Can any other form of disease but insanity express this sad
and degraded condition ? And these instances suggest the best
curative process. In the one instance (Farmer P ), he had
been a sober man, and the sudden excess induced the temporary
affection ; but as he afterwards rigidly avoided the exciting cause,
he continued to retain his sanity. In the other instance : though
under the maddening stimulus the mother attempted to murdei her
son, yet a few hour? abstinence had so changed her that she felt
her degradation, and the enormity of her contemplated crime.
We therefore cordially agree with Dr Caldwell, that all inve-
terate and dangerous drunkards should be treated as insane;
then they would be saved from committing crime, and be forced
to^abstain from that which maddens them. And although there
might be some persons who would thus be under the necessity of
remaining in seclusion, yet others might, by a curative process,
be ultimately restored to society, and avoid any relapse by
abstaining from its predisposing cause.*f*
i * report this from memory, not having the paper in our possession.
T Dr Caldwell endeavours to show what kind of affection is drunkenness what
118 INTEMPERANCE CONSIDERED AS A
This would be a wise and judicious proceeding, for an inveterate
criminal intemperance will often so degrade its victims as to
render them useless to any one?if among the higher classes,
embittering the feelings of relatives; and in the more degraded
portion of the community, rendering them a tax on the more
industrious.
The argument is strengthened by the fact, that frequently the
habitual drunkards will, even when the intellect is weakened
and the limbs paralyzed, still persist in their destructive career!
Shall this outrage against humanity be continued ? Would it
not be conservative to such degraded persons to forcibly save
them from indulging in their senseless and suicidal habit?
O O , ? ?
Would it not be an act of mercy to place them in some institu-
tion, where time and medical treatment might restore them to
a more normal state?
The wealthy who are reduced to such a condition may be re-
moved from the public gaze, and may thus avoid the scoffs of an
idle and unfeeling crowd, because their friends have the means
of placing them in some private lunatic asylum ; but the poor
worn-out debauchee, whose ]ot is extreme poverty, whose home
(if such a miserable place can be so called) is destitute of
means?he must linger out his cheerless existence, naked and
shivering, or accept the last refuge for the destitute?the parish
workhouse!
The penalty which is inflicted on the rich and the poor for
their intemperate habits is marked by special differences, if we
examine the different results on their respective families.
The children of the rich inebriate may be weak and nervous,
yet those who have to superintend their education may modify
and improve their bodily and mental condition. They have the
advantage of an ample supply of food, and care is taken to im-
prove their intellectual and moral perceptions by systematic
mental culture.
But the offspring of drunken parents, sunk low into the very
depths of poverty, have the horror of their condition aggravated
effect it has on human health?wherein consists its ungovernable appetite for ardent
spirits, and how the entire evil maybe prevented or removed. " Drunkenness," he
considers, " consists of an affection of the brain?the spinal nerves being also im-
plicated?but chiefly as an affection of the part of the brain belonging to the animal
propensities, and hence its first effect in rousing passions and animal desires."
The appetite for intoxicating liquors is regarded by Dr Caldwell as springing from
a morbid excitement of the organ of alimentiveness ; and he explains the augmented
intensity which attends indulgence, by reference to the ordinary principle of exer-
cise invigorating the power." Dr Caldwell, therefore, recommends " bleeding,
tartar-emetic, cold applications to the head, purging, and spare living. By these
means the paroxysm is shortened, and by their repetition its return is prevented."
?Vide a Review of Dr Caldwell's Essay, in the Edinburgh Phrenological
Journal, vol. viii.
FORM OF MENTAL DISORDER. 119
by painful and unmitigated suffering ; and being surrounded by
many temptations of hunger and comparative nudity, they are
often stimulated to commit offences against the laws, from a
mere sense of self-preservation. And if they avoid such acts,
they are still liable to be the victims of impulses, and sacrifice,
for present gratification, purity and self-respect. Girls are more
to be pitied than boys, as, without knowledge or means, they
soon fall victims to prurient appetites.
Although our subject rendered these contrasts a necessary
result of our investigation of consequences, yet we cannot help
concluding that the offspring of the inveterately intemperate,
whether wealthy or needy, cannot and do not escape from some
moral blight. The sons of poverty may present the coarser
aspects, but the children of the better classes do not escape from
the contaminating influence; they may be restrained from
glaring manifestations, but they cannot escape altogether the
" sins of their fathers."
Let us then use every effort to promulgate sound views on the
effects of intemperance, so as to counteract and neutralize the
moral poison which, like a blight, is gradually destroying the
bodies and minds of thousands; and one of the most effectual
modes would be, to treat drunkenness as a special form of
insanity.
It would be merciful to do so when persons are incapable to
resist temptation, and who, when once inebriated, commit the
greatest outrages against all decorum, and violate all the laws of
morality. The following example was published in a recent
paper :*?
" On Wednesday, Margaret Broughton was brought before Mr.
?Jardine, charged with being a prostitute, and behaving disorderly
in Holborn, and assaulting the police. Constable Madden, of the
E division, found the prisoner, at a late hour last night, quarrelling
with a cabman in Holborn. She was shouting and making a great
noise. He remonstrated with her, and requested her to go
away; but she only made the more noise, and abused him with the
foulest language. At length he was obliged to remove her to the
station-house, when she struggled violently, and struck him. She was
drunk.
The prisoner is the widow of a gentleman who died about seven
years back, leaving her an income of 3007. a-year. She almost imme-
diately abandoned herself to drinking and low company, and has ever
since lived a deplorably profligate life. She draws her money quarterly,
and in an incredibly short time squanders it away amongst her dis-
reputable associates. Then, when all is spent, she goes on the town
to support herself till the next quarter becomes due. She frequent y
* Dispatch, November 22, 1857.
120 INTEMPERANCE CONSIDERED AS A
gets to prison, and at such times makes great promises of reform.
These promises are sometimes kept for a short time after she comes
out of prison, hut as soon as quarter-day comes round she is sure to
fall in with her ' friends,' who, of course, are on the watch for her, and
who take good care not to leave her whilst she has a shilling.
" The prisoner was sentenced to three months' imprisonment. As
she was being removed, she was heard to declare, that as soon as her
term of punishment expired, she would take a cab from the prison
door to her lawyer's office, take the quarter's money, which would fall
due in the meanwhile, and go away out of town, from her old haunts
and temptations."
A glance at the statistics of crimes perpetrated under the
influence of partial intoxication, would warrant some stringent
means. The murders, rapes, suicides, savage assaults, robberies,
and so forth, all stand as fearful evidence that intemperance
only stimulates the animal impulses; and we cannot but think
that the greatest sticklers for the "freedom of the subject" must
be forced to acknowledge, that it is better to prevent the com-
mission of crimes by forcibly restraining men who have lost
all self-control, and ivho, without such extraneous influence,
must steep their souls in deeper guilt!
Which, we ask, is most in accordance with the true function
of an enlightened Government?to suffer the rank growth of
immorality to spread so luxuriantly, and jeopardize life, property,
and the very stability of the community; or to prevent these
consequences, by forcibly restraining offenders from wilfully and
deliberately destroying themselves, and inflicting vast evils on
others not implicated in their conduct ?
There would not be any stretch of power in these conservative
means. Few can plead ignorance as to the certain consequences
of intemperance?consequences which, though modified by the
different organizations of individuals, are never productive of
noble and exalted actions. If, therefore, persons make the
declaration that they cannot avoid an intemperate indulgence in
alcoholic drinks, with all their fostering tendency to crimes, we
repeat, they should be placed under restraint, and treated as
patients, so that means might be applied to effect their recovery
from the morbid influence of a degrading and most pernicious
vice.
This treatment would be justifiable on other grounds, as it
would save the children of drunken parents, who are almost
always driven to the commission of crime, and thus aid in fur-
ther polluting the moral atmosphere. What otherwise could be
expected, when all the example set them is idleness, dissipation,
and the worst form of selfishness ?
If the present do-nothing state of things continue, we must be
FORM OF MENTAL DISORDER. 121
prepared for greater physical deterioration and moral degrada-
tion among the masses. For it follows, that if a vast many-
have inherited the fatal tendency, without some positive remedial
treatment they will become more deadly than the fabled Upas
tree!
The humblest mechanic may learn enough of chemistry and
physiology, in the institutions devoted to his improvement and
relaxation, to render him sufficiently well-informed of the de-
structive consequences of intemperance. He sees written 011 the
brows of the inebriate the branded marks of either criminal
depravity or pauper degradation.
If a comparatively educated man is more amenable than one
left in extreme ignorance, how much greater, then, is the crimi-
nality of those who are early indoctrinated in the sacred truths of
religion and a knowledge of moral responsibility, if they prostrate
themselves before the idol of intemperance, and lose all the
conservative influences of their early culture?if they have
become indifferent to the priceless gifts of a conscience void of
offence ! Yet sucli persons must feel occasional pangs when
beholding the debilitated minds and diseased bodies of their
unfortunate offspring. And when the fatal truth is forced on
their consciousness, that they are the authors of these sad
calamities, can we wonder that, in a moment of moral nausea,
they sever " the silver cord," and thus finisli their vicious career
by the presumptuous act of self-murder ?
Lastly. We may confirm the actual propriety of treating intem-
perance as a form of insanity, by the fact that we have heard a
vast many criminals, confined in different prisons, declare
" that had they never tasted the (fatal poison/ they might
have remained industrious and respectable members of society."
Then what apology can be made for the national conscience,
that there is not made some vigorous attempt to prevent the
evil consequences, by removing the landmarks of temptation to
inebriety, by shutting up "The Palaces," with their glaring
lights, which necessarily attract the thoughtless, like flies, to
their certain destruction ?
# We know that some efforts have been made; but they have
either been too feeble, or else the clamour of " vested rights" have
so bewildered our legislators, that they have not recognised the
many crimes which are concocted in such haunts of vice !
Then, again, shallow political economists have boldly asserted
that the revenue arising from the sale of intoxicating drinks
cannot be dispensed with, even admitting that there are many
evil consequences ! They forget in this calculation the cost of
criminals, and the tax which intemperance inflicts by the pau-
perism it occasions. The expenditure for these joint conse-
122 INTEMPERANCE CONSIDERED AS A
quences is indeed enorm ous. And if, on striking a balance between
the receipts, should it even be proved that the fiscal advantages
of intemperance still leaves a surplus (which we deny)?then,
even then we should pronounce any revenue obtained through
such unhallowed means rather as a source of disgrace to an
enlightened community than as a subject of congratulation !
We venture to add, that if we remain supine, and do not make
any efforts commensurate to prevent the horrid injuries inflicted
by intemperance, we must build more infirmaries, more dis-
pensaries, more workhouses, more prisons, and more madhouses;
and that for the very purpose of filling them with self-immolated
victims, who blindly follow their insatiable appetites, unmindful
of the injury they inflict on themselves, their unfortunate off-
spring, and on the community.
We are told of enthusiastic and besotted idolators worshipping
the idol Juggernaut by throwing themselves under the wheels of
its car, to which is attached scythes, which mow down these
senseless" beings by thousands, and we shudder at their barbaric
ignorance; but is it not still more surprising that we, who boast
of our religion, know that thousands are annually destroyed by
alcohol, and we regard it as a matter of course, without making a
vigorous effort to prevent such wholesale destruction?
The latter insensate devotees cannot plead ignorance, as the
first-mentioned might do, for they know they must be sacrificed;
and yet they go madly on, paying homage to this enemy of
human happiness. They sin with their eyes open, and with a
knowledge of the consequences of their idolatry. If they will
not or cannot turn away from this fatal infatuation, let us
forcibly prevent their continuing in a career which must lead to
sin, disease, and a moral death; let us place them under restraint,
and cure them of their insane affection.
Let us not be lukewarm on the subject, for the picture of in-
temperance we have sketched is neither embellished nor
exaggerated. The scenes of crime, misery, disease, and destitu-
tion, in every locality, are the vouchers of our accurate delineation
of its consequences. Then let us lay our hands on our hearts,
and before God and our consciences declare that wTe will use
every means to stop the onward tide of crime which flows from
the polluted sources of intemperance; if we do not do so, we
must stand charged with moral complicity. It is not any use
merely to lament the evils which flow from it?we must put our
shoulders to the wheel, and then pray for help; and to do this,
we must show our deep abhorrence of its bitter fruits, not only
by precepts, but by our own example; and then, indeed, we may
regard success as certain.
In conclusion, we may remark that our recommendation of
FORM OF MENTAL DISORDER. 123
restraining the drunkard from continuing in his senseless and
destructive career, is not a novel suggestion ; an article on this
subject appeared in one of the early numbers of the "Psycho-
logical Journal." In this article it was intimated that some
place of refuge, or temporary asylum, differing from the usual
lunatic asylums, would prove of real advantage to the com-
munity, and a blessing to those whose habits of intemperance
would render it necessary to seclude them, as by such an arrange-
ment they might be put under a course of judicious remedial
treatment, and might soon recover their perfect normality of
mind.
If, therefore, this suggestion was carried out into practice, the
benefit would be incalculable, whilst religion and morality then
would dispense their hallowed peace-giving tendency, and the
truly humane would then be spared the many painful spectacles
which originate solely through excessive intemperance.
Among the immediate advantages which would result, might
be calculated a great diminution of crime ; and amongst the
working classes they would, with habits of sobriety, manifest
greater prudence and forethought; and thus, with a sense of
self-respect, would be found a great decrease of pauperism and
its consequent degradation. And those amongst the wealthy,
when they are cured of an insatiable habit, they would be more
likely to attend to works of utility, and may thus become bene-
factors of their less fortunate fellow-subjects, instead of pervert-
ing their morals by their previous most debasing example.
Thus we may affirm, that the good which would result from
forcibly counteracting the inordinate craving tendency of chronic
intemperance would be greater than the most sanguine spirits,
in the full activity of their benevolence, could ever have antici-
pated.
And, therefore, as it is our firm conviction that mere precepts,
however good, will not correct the errors and crimes resulting
from drunkenness, then, in the name of religion, morality,
patriotism, and humanity, there is demanded some forcible and
effective means to render certain this essential and all-important
reform in the habits of a vast proportion of the community.
L.
