On The Treatment of Insanity in Julius Hospital, Wurzburg,
============================================================

124
Art. YII.-
-
Under the Management of
Der Herb Hofrath Dr von Marcus, Senior Physician of Julius Hospital,
Hitter des verdienst Orders der Bayrisclien Krone, &c. &c.
(Communicated by Edward Mottley, Esq.)
The following subjects will be treated seriatim :?
1st.?Six Years' Statistics of the Lunatic Wards in Julius Hospital.
By Dr Ernst Schmidt, late Assistant Physician.*
2nd.?Clinical Lectures of Dr yon Marcus, on Insanity, during
the Session 1857-8.
Introduction by the Translator.?Julius Hospital, in Wiirz-
burg, is the magnificent foundation of Julius Echter, Prince-
Bishop, and sixty-sixth Bishop of Wiirzburg, and Duke of
Franconia. This eminent prince and prelate, who must be classed
with the foremost benefactors of his fatherland, who founded an
hospital and a university in "Wiirzburg, and rebuilt or restored
twenty hospitals and more than one hundred and twenty churches
in various parts of his Principality, was born on the 18th of
March, 1545, at Mespelbrun, in the Spessart, about twenty-two
miles from Frankfort-on-the-Maine, and died at Wiirzburg on
the 13th of September, 1617, one year before the breaking out
of the devastating thirty years' war. He was the last descendant
of the time-honoured and illustrious family of Echter von Mes-
pelbrun; and after studying in Belgium and France, finished
his education in Rome, where he obtained the degree of Doctor
of Civil Law. On the I7tli of August, 1570, he was chosen
Dean of Wiirzburg, chiefly through the intercession of Fredrich
von Wiirzburg, the reigning Prince-Bishop, who appears to have
foreseen his future greatness; and on the demise of that prelate
was elected to the vacant throne on the 1st of December, 1573,
being then under thirty years of age. His election was con-
firmed by the Emperor Maximilian the Second and the Pope ;
but the ceremony of his installation was deferred until Whit-
suntide, 1575, when he was at the same time consecrated priest.
His reign extended over the lengthened period of forty-four
years (the average possession of the see by the eighty-three
bishops?ending with Carl von Fechtenback, 1808?being about
twelve years and four months), " of which," to employ the lan-
guage of one of his encomiasts, " nearly every day was distin-
* " Sechsjiihrige Statistic der Ivrenabtlieilung des Julius Hospitas," from the
Zum Scliutze der Irren : by Dr Ernst Schmidt, a physician of rising reputation,
now in America (Chicago).
ON THE TREATMENT OF INSANITY IN JULIUS HOSPITAL. 125
guislied by some important act. His government was charac-
terized by a profuse but judicious liberality in public works.
He found liis diocese greatly reduced by debt, by the peasant
war, and by the defection of great numbers of his subjects, who
had embraced the Protestant faith ;?churches and hospitals
were in ruins, cloisters and monasteries abandoned, and their
possessions wasted and destroyed. A mind less vigorous, and a
less skilful administrator, might have viewed its condition with
despair, and turned from the task of restoring its shattered
iinances. The first act of his reign was to limit and control the
disorder and extravagance of his court, and he lived after his
election in such retirement and seclusion, that serious doubts
were entertained of his capacity for the good government of his
diocese ; but these fears were soon dissipated, when one great
work after another, matured in this retirement, was carried into
execution with extraordinary perseverance and success. Resolved
to dedicate his energy and ability to the see of Wurzburg, he
refused the Palatinate and Archbishopric of Mayence, to which
he had been elected by the Chapter in 1582. The two great
works of Julius, and by which his name has become historical,
are the University and Hospital of Wurzburg. Struck by the
almost total want of institutions for the benefit of the poor,
while the nobility and clergy were amply provided for, he
" resolved," as stated in the charter deed, " to endow a Spittal
for all sorts of poor, sick, and impotent persons requiring medical,
surgical, and other necessary assistance ; for abandoned orphans,
pilgrims, travelling labourers, and other necessitous persons."
The foundation-stone of the original building was laid by
Julius on the 12th of March, 1576, and was opened on the
10th of June, 1580. The extensive circuit of the building
contained a mill, a slaughter-house, a large garden, baths, and
an "inn " for the reception of poor wayfarers, who were there
entertained for a day and a night; and everything necessary and
convenient for the reception of the poor and infirm belonging
to the Principality (for our poor brothers and sisters, as stated in
the charter), for sick persons?with the exception of patients with
disgusting and contagious diseases?orphans, pilgrims, and
labourers, when sick ; such persons to receive and be supplied
with such clothing, meat, and drink, and necessaries, as the
income of the foundation would allow. The last clause of this
document threatens " that whoever deprives the hospital of any-
thing that is to say, the poor and abandoned orphans, and the
shall be accused as perverters of the charity, and dis-
honourers of God's glory, before His judgment-seat on the last
day. In one remarkable instance, this threat operated very
successfully. When Gustavus Adolphus, after plundering the
126 ON THE TREATMENT OF INSANITY IN JULIUS HOSPITAL.
town and university of Wurzburg, visited the hospital with the
intention of emptying its then well-filled coffers, the reverend
principal of the hospital read the concluding paragraph to the
Swedish King, who, being much struck with its import, drew
back, saying, " I will have nothing to do with this priest in the
other world," and left the hospital with its treasury untouched.
At the time of its foundation, the property of the hospital was
estimated at 500,000 florins (42,000?. nearly); but the accumula-
tion of nearly 300 years of good management has increased it to
6,000,000 florins (500,0001.), consisting chiefly of estates in
Bavaria and Baden. The duties and benefits have increased in
an equal degree, and the single physician and chaplain, and the
120 inmates of the founder's time, have augmented to three
senior physicians* and five assistants, an apothecary with two
assistants, a house-surgeon, a chaplain and two vicars, with about
900 inmates of all classes, consisting of pensioners (pfriindners),
sick persons without distinction of country or religion, and an
asylum for the reception of curable insane patients. As a
medical school, it possesses a European reputation.
The original building has yielded to time, and to a destructive
fire which occurred at the close of the eighteenth century ; the
present noble structure bears the date 1791. Such is the flourish-
ing condition of an institution whose founder was, by his con-
temporaries, deservedly called great. If, in his zeal for his reli-
gion, he was at times severe, his faults were those of the times in
which he lived; his virtues were his own. The general condi-
tion of the hospital not being the object of this article, we will
limit our observations to that division dedicated to the relief of
insane patients, under the benevolent superintendence of Dr.
von Marcus, and take for our guide Dr Ernst Schmidt's " Six
Years' Statistics of the Insane Wards of Julius Hospital," who
says :?
" It is evident that for more than 200 years the insane in Julius
Hospital were treated merely as pensioners, and the first weak
attempt to introduce a rational system of psychology (psychiatrik)
took place about the year 1780 ; the locality for the then patients
being the same as that now used for the incurable?viz., a large
secure vaulted hall, on the ground floor of one of the wings con-
necting the principal buildings. It may be truly considered as
one of the first institutions of its kind in Germany; and it was,
indeed, somewhat more friendly and humane than many others
?at least, we are so led to conclude, from the examples of similar
buildings that are existing at the present day?for example, the
famous Narrenthurm, at Vienna. At the commencement of the
* The appointment of the senior physician is honorary ; each receives a.
nominal fee of 300f, (251.) yearly, the salary of Upsilius, the first physician.
ON THE TREATMENT OF INSANITY IN JULIUS HOSPITAL. 127
present century, the number of patients was somewhat above 30,
which soon augmented to 40, which was at that time considered
as the normal number, and only exceeded in cases of pressing
necessity. The proper separation of the insane into curable and
incurable patients appears to have taken place between the
years 1785-90?at least, such is the information derived from the
account of Dr Miiller, the senior physician, whose book on the
treatment of the insane was published in the year 1824. This
account extends from 1796 to 1823, and gives 528 patients as
being received?viz., 258 men, and 270 women. During this
time, only 21 patients, on the average, were annually received ;
but the number was constantly increasing, 15 being received
during his first year of office, and 25 the last. What he relates
of the proportion of his successful cases must be received with
some reserve, as it is contradicted by the more sober computa-
tions of the present day. Dr Miiller gives 292 patients, or 56
per cent., as perfectly restored ; and 62, or 11 per cent., as im-
proved ; while at the present day, 40 per cent, perfectly restored
must be taken as a very favourable result. Under the next
physician, Dr Schonlein (the present chief physician to the King
of Prussia), about 400 curable patients were received between
the years 1823 and 1833. Materials to show the result of his
practice are not to be found. Towards the end of the year 1833,
Dr von Marcus was appointed senior physician of Julius Hospital,
professor of clinical medicine, and director of the internal manage-
ment of Julius Hospital, as regards the insane and the pensioners.
What he accomplished as professor of clinical medicine may
he given in another place; what he effected as senior physi-
cian?his earnest zeal for the adoption of all contemporary
improvements, and his disinterested exertions for the welfare of
the noble institution to which he was appointed principal?will
give his name a lasting endurance in its annals.
" Above all, we have to thank him for the arrangement and im-
provement of the lunatic wards as they now exist, and which need
not shun a comparison with any institution especially dedicated
to the reception of insane patients?notwithstanding many
deficiencies which, in old buildings first appropriated to this
Purpose, were with us not to be obviated, and which are demanded
by the multitudinous requirements of the present day, and not
unfrequently carried to excess by the asylum physician.
During the first nine years of the direction of Dr von Marcus,
the number of applicants so increased, that frequently, by im-
proper crowding, 60 patients were received in one year?-until
the year "1841, when he introduced those extensive alterations
and improvements which will allow the reception of from 90 to
100 patients. Two extensive wings, perfectly adapted for the
128 ON THE TREATMENT OF INSANITY IN JULIUS HOSPITAL.
purpose, are appropriated for curable patients." [For cleanliness,
neatness, and cheerful aspect, these apartments are everything
that can be desired. Every patient has a separate bed, furnished
-with curtains?and the whole range of apartments have the
appearance of a well-ordered English academy.?E. M.]
" All the cells for dangerous patients are floored and wain-
scoted with wood, and the approaches to the stoves and windows
painted of a light-green colour, so that these cells make no
unfavourable impression. Some handsome isolated apartments,
for private patients, are also provided. For extremely noisy and
raving patients, fitting cells, capable of being easily warmed
(heitzvare), are erected in a court where the occasional noise
cannot be heard by the convalescent patient (a precaution not
always sufficiently attended to in asylums). A retired part of
the garden is appropriated to gymnastic exercises, skittles, &c., and
which, with its summer-house, affords on fine evenings an agree-
able spot for recreation and recovery. Opportunity for manual
labour, so far as it is desirable as an auxiliary for recovery, is
provided, under the superintendence of an attendant, in the
wood-house. The numerous and well-chosen attendants render
the use of coercion chairs and strait-jackets only necessary in
extreme cases. The new steam douche and shower-baths (the
latter often of the greatest service to insane patients) leave
little to be wished ; indeed such satisfactory arrangements are
hardly to be met with in many larger establishments.
" Great importance being attached to the quantity and quality
of the food for patients in asylums, we will give the Diet for
the Sick, or No. 2 Diet Table :?
"No. 5.?Dinner?f-, or full portion?meat soup, with white bread ;
Tylb. beef, with vegetables.
" Supper?Soup, with |lb. veal or calf in meat.
" Breakfast?A portion of soup, with white bread.
" Bread?For the whole clay, 14ozs. of rye or llozs. of wheat bread.
" Wine?Each patient receives as much wine of the second-class as
the senior physician thinks necessary.
" Extra food and wine can be given by the permission of the three
senior physicians ; and wine of the first-class."
"The above Table is reduced f, ??, at the discretion of the
medical attendant; fruit, coffee, poultry, are also frequently given.
" Immediately after the completion of the improvements, the
number of applicants increased, and the present more exact
statistics show the capabilities of receiving 100 patients annually.
" In a financial point of view, the admission of curable patients
to the hospital is extremely favourable. All persons admissible
as pensioners are received as patients?that is to say, all the poor
OX THE TREATMENT OF INSANITY IN JULIUS HOSPITAL. 129
of the former Principality of AViirzburg, and now of the whole
of the circle of Lower Franconia, are received free of charge, with
the exception of the necessary clothing, which must be provided
by the parish (tleimath gemeinde) to which the patient belongs.
But even this regulation is not insisted upon when the parish is
notoriously poor.
" Patients with independent property are admitted upon the
payment of 30ks. (10c?) daily; and when they require a sepa-
rate apartment and special attendant, 1 florin (Is. 8d.)
" When we state that, between 1798 and 1854, more than 2500
curable patients have been received?nearly 2000 gratis?and if
wetake into account 250 incurable patients received as pen-
sioners for the whole term of their life, it does not require
another word to prove that the division of Julius Hospital appro-
priated to the reception of insane patients has acquired an
historical right to the gratitude of the circle of Lower Franconia.
" Consulting the more exact statistics of our own time, from
1848 to 1854, we find that the reception of curable patients during
that time (including a surplus from 1847-1848) amounted to
512?viz., 287 men, 225 women ; the re-admissions during that
period being?
Men .1-6 times Women . 16 - twice
35 2 - 4 ?
? 3 - 3 ?
? 25 - twice
" The number of individuals is therefore reduced to 454?or
245 men, and 209 women (54 and 46 per cent.) Singly con-
sidered, in four years the men, and in two years the women
predominated. In order to form a judgment at what season of
the year the greatest number of cases occur, requires a greater
exactness of observation of the previous and earlier symptoms
(anamnese) than unfortunately is generally the case ; as we
know that not only the laity, but unfortunately the faculty, do
not sufficiently distinguish between cause and effect?essentials
and non-essentials?putting aside the intentional deception that
is too frequently practised by the patients friends, and, alas!
often by the medical attendant, with regard to the time the
patient has been affected previous to being brought to the
asylum. We will, however, take 132 cases, on which no doubt
rests as to the date of the attack :?
January - 3.4. April . i2. July . 9. October - 8.
February 11, May - 11. August 10. November 7.
March - - 13. June . l3 Sept. . iL December 10.
NO. IX.?NEW SERIES. K
130 ON THE TREATAIENT OF INSANITY IN JULIUS HOSPITAL.
" This Table contradicts the assumption that has prevailed nearly
undisputed since the statement of Esquirol?viz., that the greatest
number of cases occur in the hot months?as it must be admitted
that a comparison of many thousand examples show a marked
increase of attacks of insanity from January to July, and a cor-
responding decrease to the following January?the latter month
giving 6*5 per cent, to the 10*5 per cent, of July. These pro-
portions appear pretty correct for the south of France, Italy, and
similar climates, whose winters resemble those of our latter
autumn. So with us, to the more wealthy, who cannot be so per-
fectly and continuously protected from the heat of summer as
from the cold of winter, the summer months may be equally dan-
gerous; but for the greater part of our country population, and
the poorer classes, the injurious effects of winter are greater than
the highest summer temperature, which can be readily under-
stood when we consider the more than tropical heat our peasants
and labouring classes maintain in their apartments, which serve
at once for living and sleeping rooms?where they cook for their
families, and prepare food for cattle; this extreme heat, suddenly
alternated with the severe cold of the Bavarian winter, too often
accompanied with want of sufficient clothing, protection for the
feet, and insufficient nourishment?conditions upon which the
results of the accompanying Table may be grounded.
"The period of life which most predisposes to mental alienation
has always been one that has occupied the attention of the
statistical writer. Esquirol maintained that, with men, from
thirty to forty, and with women from fifty to sixty years, were the
most dangerous. I must acknowledge that to me this state-
ment has been one that, with reference to our social and natural
relations, appears to be little founded upon reason. In fact, we
have quite a different result from more than five hundred cases.
[The re-admissions must be included in the number, because pre-
disposition at a peculiar age will also render the re-admissions
more numerous.] The following Table gives the ages:?
03? MEN.
Before 15 15 25 25 35 35 45 45 55 55 65 65 75 After 75
1... 53 ... 77 ... 68 ... 58 ... 22 ... 6 ... 2
Per cent. J... 18 i ... 27 ... 23^... 20 ... 8 ... 2 ... ?
OS" WOMEN.
2... 41 ... 90 ... 58 ... 35 ... 17 ... 2 ... 0
Per cent .4... 10f... 36|... 23f... 14? ... 7 ... f 0
Consequently, with us the greatest number of cases occur,
with both sexes, between the ages of twenty-five and thirty-five,
at which period of life the human being attains the zenith of his
ON THE TREATMENT OF INSANITY IN JULIUS HOSPITAL. 131
or her mental and physical powers; after which time, except
in rare instances and extraordinarily gifted individuals, those
powers become more languid, and a greater passivity predominates
over all the functions. This is also the period when, in most
cases, the individual commences an independent existence, and
loses the support of his family. Now begins, with most persons,
the greatest exertions; the time when the passions and affec-
tions expand, under the influence of the meridian hour; the
time when the mental powers are put to the severest trials, and
become steeled and invigorated, or, alas ! by disappointed hopes,
unfortunate speculations, or by powerful interruptions of the full
tide of human passions, too often shattered and destroyed for ever!
After this period, the per centage of the cases suffer a marked
decline?slower with the men than with the women, whose de-
cline, corresponding with their earlier development and maturity,
is equally premature. The few cases of insanity which occur
after sixty years of age, with perfectly healthy individuals, mostly
belong to dementia senelis and apoplectica, arising in most in-
stances from pathological change. As regards sex, with us, as in
most instances, the male patients predominate; yet we can affirm
with the greatest truth, that an authentic statement of the dif-
ference of numbers between the two sexes requires a much more
extended computation over different countries than we have at
present. Of the men, 103 were unmarried, and 142 married ;
of the women, 1 61 unmarried, and 48 married. Of the men,
the greater number, nearly three-fifths, were married; whilst
with the women, more than three-fourths were, at least in the
world's eye, "withering on the virgin thorn." With the men,
masturbation was unhappily proved with more than one-third
of the patients; with the women, the proofs are more difficult.
In no one instance (at least, with the men) was want of sexual
chastity (Seschlects befriedigung) presumed to be the cause of
mental alienation."
On the all-important subject of hereditary predisposition, or
inheritance (Erblichkeit), Dr Ernst Schmidt says:?
" Hereditary predisposition is proved in more than three-fifths
?f all cases, to which more than two-fifths to the so-called direct,
and one-fifth to indirect, must be attributed. Fortunately, how-
ever, the entire doctrine of inheritance begins to be subjected to
a more searching criticism, and we must remember in how many
cases very different conditions than those of the so-named inheri-
tance are the cause of disease in members of the same family.
lis much is certain, that in cases of well-proved direct inheri-
ance, but very few patients have ever perfectly recovered/7
Dr Ernst Schmidt now gives the annexed tabular view of
K 2
J 32 ON THE TREATMENT OF INSANITY IN JULIUS HOSPITAL.
the 512 cases treated in Julius Hospital between the years 1848
and 1854:?
Form of disease.
No.
Cured.
S ?>
Improved.
Uncured.
Dead.
Pure Hallucination.
Men
Hypochondria.
Men
Women
Hysterico.
Women
Melancholia.
Men
Women
Mania and Delirium.
Men
Women
Eroto& Nymphomania
Men
Women
Dementia.
Men
Women
Stupiditas.
Men
Women
Delirium Tremens.
Men
Women
Epilepsy.
Men
Women
Chorea with Delirium.
Men
17
C wks.
2 mon.
3 mon.
m.
3? m.
4| m.
3 mon.
3 mon
3 mon.
6 mon.
1 mon.
1 mon.
6 wks.
4 mon.
6 mon.
G mon.
9 mon.
1 mon.
8 mon.
7 mon.
10 m.
2 6 mon.
8 mon.
11 m.
8 mon.
18 m.
15 m.
8 mon
12 m.
G mon,
7 mon.
5 mon.
5 mon,
3 mon,
3J m.
i mon.
6 wks.
1 mon.
2 mon.
8 mon.
1 day
Men  287
Women  225
100
93
1512
I
In the remarks appended by Dr E. Schmidt to the Table, he
says :?
" Our most numerous form of disease was melancholia?viz., 40 per
cent, of all the women, 23 per cent, of the men. Mania and delirium
(tobsucht) is represented by 30 per cent, men, and 23 per cent, women.
With dementia, including dementia senelis, 28 per cent, men, and 23
per cent, women. The most favourable result as regards cure, consider-
ing the number of cases of each peculiar form of disease, is delirium
tremens?80 per cent.; then maniacal female patients, of whom 66
per cent, left the asylum cured; maniacal male patients, 59 per cent.
Melancholia gave a more favourable result for women than men; of
the first, 52, and of the latter, 44 per cent, cured. The proportion of
fatal cases was equally unfavourable for the men, of whom 10 per
OX THE TREATMENT OF INSANITY IN JULIUS HOSPITAL. 133
cent, died of the whole number received, and of the women nearly
7 per cent. The form of disease most fatal was hypochondria, which
exhibits with the men, 37 per cent.; with the women, melancholia,
nearly 9 per cent. With male maniacs, above 12 per cent.; but with
women, hardly 6 per cent. died. On the average of all the cases, the
deceased were the shortest time in the asylum; and the patients the
longest under treatment were the maniacal women, who were dismissed
uncured after eighteen months' treatment; the nymphomaniste,
15 months ; one hysterische, 22, &c. The most speedy recovery was
with delirium tremens?4 weeks, average ; the latest, with melanclio-
lische women?4^ months. However we may be satisfied with the
result of the treatment at Julius Hospital, we cannot conclude this
statistical voucher without forbearing to mention the great evil in
treatment of lunatics, and whose sin it is that we cannot show a result
still more favourable?we mean, the neglect in not bringing the patient
to the asylum at an earlier period. We will employ 220 cases, where
the correctness of the time of the duration of the disease previous to
the reception in the asylum admits of no doubt:?
DUiaei0nHnfntS?vfe t0 No. of cases. Of which were healed,
leception m the asylum.
1 to 3 months. ... 39 ... 25 = 64 per cent.
3 to 6 ? ... 46 ... 20 = 43 ?
6 to 12 ? ... 48 ... 16 = 33 ?
1 to 3 years. ... 87 ... 15 = 17 ?
220 76 = 34 per cent.
" These numbers require no commentary, and show at the first look
where the foulest spot of our present management lies (irrenuesens).
Its removal would diminish the inmates of our asylums one-third. . . .
How and in what manner Hofrath Dr von Marcus rendered our
institution available for the purpose of clinical instruction, is too well
known and acknowledged to require more than a passing notice
here. Since the year 1841, Dr von Marcus rendered access to the
patients practicable, in the form of clinical visitations. A practical
course of clinical psychiatria commenced (eine werkliche psychiatrische
klinie), and that has been rewarded by a numerous and zealous
auditorv."
Br. Ernst Schmidt then gives the following cases, as some of
the most interesting that occurred during 1818-54. Of chorea
St. Yiti, accompanied with delirium, we have a case of great
interest
1- A boy, ten years of age, healthy, and without family taint,
one day walking with his mother, stooped to pick up what he thought
a andsome stick lying in the road. The adder (for such it was), when
seized, wound round his arm without hurting him, and escaped. The
03 cried aloud, trembled, and in a few days presented a perfect type ol
c 101 ea fet. Viti. The delirium that supervened wore a religious cha-
racter lreated with nutritious food, cheerful amusements, and the
1 34 ON THE TREATMENT OF INSANITY IN JULIUS HOSPITAL.
employment of Valerian iron. Perfectly cured in less than two
months.
2. "R , colour manufacturer; healthy, with an inclination to
spirits. Ill domestic and financial relations, not fortunate. In 1849,
employed himself zealously with the return of members to Chamber
of Deputies. Attempted electioneering himself, and thought seriously
of becoming a deputy. His imagination soon passed the limits of
reality?he firmly believed that he was chosen deputy, for the purpose
of being named President of the Chamber. He came to Wiirzburg
in consequence, to fetch his patent from the Government. Felt con-
fident of becoming Duke of Franconia, in which case he promised us
his favour and protection. Cured in three months.
"3. S. B , twenty-one years old; slight, without hereditary
predisposition. Often chlorotic; suffered from menorrhagia. Was
one day offended, and her modesty outraged, by a young man suddenly
exposing her person' during the time of her menstruation. She was
suddenly seized with convulsions ; a few hours after, with delirium.
In a few days, mania supervened. She raved uninterruptedly; was
uncleanly and immodest in the highest degree; digestive powers im-
paired. Cured in eight months.
" 4. S. B , twenty years old, well formed, and powerfully built,
without the slightest disposition to hereditary predisposition, had
recovered in her eleventh year from an attack of typhus; men-
struated at eighteen, irregular, but at the time of her attack regular.
In the middle of July, S. B fell asleep in a warm bath, and
slept in water constantly decreasing in temperature, five hours before
she was discovered ; in the evening of the same day mania appeared,
with ideas of the most exalted character; raves, and becomes dangerous
to approach. Four weeks after her attack she was brought to the
asylum, and left it in four months perfectly healed.
" 5. F , twenty-two years old, Protestant schoolmaster, healthy,.
strong constitution; went over to the Catholic Church, and will dedi-
cate himself to the priesthood?felt great anxiety about the validity
of the Protestant baptism ; doubt its Christianity, and could not be per-
suaded to the contrary. The day before the one appointed for his full
reception into the Catholic Church, he heard a voice which commanded
him to make a trial of his being in the grace of God : he obeyed, and
sprang out of his window, two stories high, to the court below, and
received no injury. He employed himself zealously in prayer, on re-
turning to his room, to be able to resist all temptations of the devil;
but the voice continued to follow him, and he obeyed a command to leap
from the wall of the fortress into the fosse below, which was fortu-
nately a mere swamp ; here he was found torn and bruised, and quite
speechless. After four weeks' residence in the asylum, he was so far
restored from his demono-melancliolia that his friends removed him
from the asylum : no relapse.
" 6. S. M , thirty-one years old, servant, single; healthy, with-
out hereditary predisposition ; mother of two healthy children ?
regularly menstruated?suddenly was attacked with religious melan-
choly on the unexpected death of her father?believed that the wicked
ON THE TREATMENT OF INSANITY IN JULIUS HOSPITAL. 135
would prevail over the good, but she would remain true to her Saviour;
and as a propitiatory sacrifice exarticulated the upper joint of her little
finger. She was brought to the asylum; suffered an attack of typhus;
left in less than three months, perfectly restored, mentally and bodily.
"7. F. B , forty-five years old, still menstruated regularly;
mother of four healthy children; healthy. Insanity was proved in
one member of her family?father's brother; was suddenly attacked
with religious melancholy, after hearing twenty sermons consecutively
from the Jesuit Missionaries; was holy and in a state of grace?and will
intercede with God for a fallen world?screamed and raved, and at last
bit off an inch and a half of her tongue, which only hung by a few
ligaments; the lesion was secured as well as possible, but gangrene
supervened ; the end of the tongue fell off, and she died in a few days.
"8. J. H , thirty-nine years old, married, healthy, without
direct or indirect predisposition ; obtained permission to establish a
dyeliouse in W ; made the necessary arrangements, carrying on
the business with good success, till the authorities forbade the dye
refuse to run into the stream that passed by the dyehouse, as the fish
suffered in consequence. H  remonstrated on very reasonable
grounds?in that this condition should have been known before he
Avas allowed to erect his premises, and that the revocation of his licence
would ruin his business. His remonstrances were without effect; angry
words were exchanged; and H was imprisoned forty-eight hours
for slandering an official person (Amssehren beleidigung). From this
time he evinced great irritability, without his friends perceiving any
symptom of insanity. "When he was informed by a legal officer of a
second unfavourable decision against him, he seized an axe, and ran to
the office of the magistrate, who was necessitated to escape into an
adjoining room. J. H attacked the massive door with great
violence, and drove the axe with such force into the wood as for-
tunately rendered him unable to extricate it; he then ran away.
Some days after, he allowed himself to be taken willingly to prison by
the gensdarmerie, prayed aloud, and did not recognise the magistrate.
Two days after, by the advice of the official physician, he was removed
to the asylum of Julius Hospital; mania ensued. Cured in six months,
and remained perfectly sane for two years. Then H began again
to demand compensation for the loss of his business, which produced
no result, when he again attacked the magistrate in a paroxysm of
rage. Captured, he made his escape from his guards, and, after four
days' wandering, came himself to the asylum to beg for admission.
He was less cxcited than in his first attack, but suffered from pro-
nounced confirmed delusions?e.g., the Virgin appearing to him, and
comforting him by promising to punish his tormentors. Intelligence,
thought, and will, quite changed; and his body wasted by sleepless nights,
disturbed digestion, continued restlessness. However, after six months'
quiet, and restoratives, he became convalescent, and had no relapse."
In our next number, the first of Dr von Marcus's Lectures will
appear.
