Psychology of Kant 
===================

494
Abt. VII.?

BY PROFESSOE HOPPUS.
The works of Kant mark the date of the second period of the
German philosophy. He was horn at Konigsberg, in 1724 ; and
here he lived and died, never having travelled more than a few
miles from his native place. Madame de Stael remarks that there
is scarcely an example, except among the Greeks, of a life so
strictly philosophical. A more recent writer observes that he was
a genuine " type of the German Professor: he rose, smoked, had.
his coffee, wrote, lectured, took his daily walk always precisely at
the same hour. The cathedral clock, it was said, was not more
punctual than Herr Kant."f His almost recluse life may excuse
us from entering into its details, and this will better suit our
space. We may, however, refer to Borowski, Schubert, and the
"Biographie Universelle;" also to Jachman's "Letters." Kant died
in 1804. He wrote a great number of works. The most im-
portant are his " Criticism of Pure Reason," " Criticism of
Practical Reason," and " Criticism of Judgment." It is to the
first of these worksj that we shall chiefly confine ourselves.
We must not be led into any detail of the state of philosophy
in Germany when Kant arose: suffice it to say that, until he had
fairly grasped the sceptre which had fallen from the hand of
Wolf, a sort of Eclecticism prevailed, in which heterogeneous
elements were not seldom blended,?rationalism, empiricism, dog-
matism, scepticism ; but the predominant tendency was towards a
kind of experimental psychology, and towards the history of
philosophy, a source of psychological criticism which was some-
what neglected by Kant himself. The Kantian metaphysic ulti-
mately triumphed, to give way in its turn to the other ever-vary-
ing systems which have succeeded each other in Germany ; to
which systems, however, Kant s writings form a clue which is
wholly indispensable.
Our author was led to his speculations by the account which
Hume had given of the nature of human knowledge, and more
especially of the doctrine of causation. Hume maintained that
our notion of the necessity of causation has no basis deeper than
association and habit. Kant regarded this notion as an essential
dictate of the understanding, the necessary result of our mental
constitution. He tells that he soon found that the connexion of
cause and effect was by no means the only one by which the
* " Immanuel Kant's sammtliche Werke," lierausgegeben von Iiosenkranz unci
Schubert. Leipzig.
f Jjewes's "biographical History," iv. 90.
t " Kritik der reinen Vernunft."
PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT. 495
understanding represents to itself, ct priori, a necessary connexion
of things ; but that the whole of metaphysics consists of nothing
else than such conceptions. He was led in this way to his entire
system of subjective a priori knowledge. We may here remark,
that, in pursuing his speculations, his style and phraseology are
often crabbed, scholastic, and involved. It is not very often
illuminated by examples, of which there is in his writings a great
dearth, so that almost everything is presented in the most abstract
form. The main subject not seldom seems lost in a labyrinth of
entanglements. The " Criticism of Pure Reason," a work of 800
pages, sadly wants condensation. Kant tried to meet the outcry
about its obscurity by writing the " Prolegomenain which he
is certainly more brief, but not much more luminous.
Kant proposes to submit to criticism the powers and limits of
the human mind. His theory is that our speculative knowledge
is wholly subjective?of object 01* thing in itself we know
nothing, but only its phenomena or appearances as presented to
us. He assumes as beyond a doubt that experience is the occa-
sion of all our knowledge. He also lays down the fact of con-
sciousness, as at the basis of all our psychological phenomena.
Here he agrees with Descartes, and his aim is the very same as
that of Locke, so far as that he seeks for truth by an analysis of
consciousness and a survey of the capacities of the human mind.
The sense of self, the " I think" (Ich clenke) accompanies every
act of knowing; that is, we are conscious of it. Moreover, he
adopts as a whole the ordinary principles of formal logic, as being
an expression of the laws of thought; lience some knowledge of
logic is essential to the student of Kant. We know by means of
sense, understanding, reason; but we only know subjectively and
in relation to our faculties. External objects are, to us at least,
only phenomena appearing in space, which though itself unper-
ceived, underlies them all. It is the condition of all outward per-
ception, but not of the object itself. Time is the condition of all
perception of things outward, and of all internal consciousness.
Time, like space, belongs not to things, but only to our mode of
viewing them. Space and time are the mould in which the mind
casts all the objects which it contemplates. They are, in fact,
mental " receptivitiesfaculties by which we receive knowledge.
The understanding prescribes laws to nature, and to the whole
circle of our knowledge: nothing can present itself to us as a thing
to be known, except in immediate subordination to the primary
elements of our intellectual constitution, the conceptions of the
understanding. Reason, as distinct from understanding (as Kant
makes it) is deceptive as a source of speculative or scientific
knowledge; for in its effort to grasp the supersensible, it breaks
down, for the very reason that it aims to transcend the sphere of
K K 2
496 Psychology of kant.
sense, the only proper sphere of the understanding. But when
reason is practical (moral,) it may then attain to the knowledge
of the great truths,?a moral law written on the heart, a moral
lawgiver (God,) and the immortality of the soul.
We now proceed to a more special analysis of Kant's meta-
physical speculations, as nearly in his own language as may con-
sist with our being understood by the intelligent English reader;
and we shall use for this purpose all the sources which his writings
afford, adding, where it seems desirable, illustrations as well as
explanations of our own. " He made three faculties of the
soul," the faculty of knowing (das Erkentnissvermogen); the
sesthetical faculty, by which the sentiment of taste is gratified or
pained (das Gefilhl der Lust und Unlust) ; and the faculty of "appe-
tition" or will (das Begehrungsvermogen). He adds, "I have
expounded the principles of the first," the knowing faculty, " in
the 'Criticism of Pure Reason;' those of the third," the will,
" in the ' Criticism of Practical Reason.' "* He subsequently
published his principles of ^Esthetics in nature and art, and of
Teleology, or the judgment Ave form in regard to the harmonies
and adaptations of the world of nature, in his " Criticism of
Judgment."
Agreeably to the above view of the powers of the human mind,
Kunt regards philosophy, in its immediate relation to the cogni-
tive or knowing faculty, as Theoretical. The object is here to
inquire into the laws of sense and intellect, and to decide upon
the extent and validity of our speculative knowledge. Practical
Philosophy seeks to determine duty, moral law, and their results;
and to this branch belong the truths of man's freedom and im-
mortality, and God's existence, all of which Kant firmly believed,
in opposition to atheism, scepticism, pantheism, materialism, and
fatalism; but which momentous convictions he strangely, as we
shall see, pronounced utterly beyond the province of theoretical
knowledge. Intermediate between the theoretical and the practi-
cal he places teleology and aesthetics, and regards them as belong-
ing to that function of the cognitive faculty which we term
judgment. Each part of philosophy is treated by our author as
founded on a priori principles, that is, on those self-evident ele-
ments of knowledge which are constitutional to the mind itself,
though they are all brought to notice in our consciousness only by
experience: thus, from our sensuous experience of finite dimen-
sions, we at once know that space itself (which underlies these-
dimensions) is infinite,?a proposition which we can never prove,
because our experience can never test it, but which we feel it
would be absurd to deny or doubt. Such a proposition therefore
expresses an ? priori or " transcendental" truth, so called
* "Brief an Eeinhold," 1787; vide Reinliold's " Leben," 1825, s. 129.
PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT. 497
because it transcends all actual experience. What Kant means by
calling space the "form of external sense," we shall see in its
proper place.
In Theoretical Philosophy we have to do with the question,
" What can we know ?" The " Kritik der reinen Vernunft," and
the " Prolegomena," are wholly occupied with the answer. Em-
pirical knowledge, or that which we gain from experience alone,
however valuable, is far from being the highest kind of know-
ledge. Experience can only teach us what is, and what is likely
to be. Metaphysical or a priori knowledge, wherever we can
attain to it, teaches us what must be necessarily and universally.
Metaphysics,* as applied to the soul or mind, is therefore not-
empirical, but rational psychology?a doctrine of the mind which
we arrive at by pure understanding and pure reason, which are
its only sources.")" It is the peculiar characteristic of this meta-
physical knowledge that it is a priori in the strictest sense. We
sometimes use the term a priori in a lower sense. We say that
it may be known, a priori, that an undermined house will fall:
but the general principle that bodies fall to the earth when un-
supported must have been previously known by experience. In
Kant's language, a priori is applied to knowledge which is wholly
independent of all experience and induction. Experience does
not at all constitute or warrant this knowledge, it is only the
occasion of its being elicited from our minds. If we had never
seen the actual following of one event on another, in such a way
as to get the notion of the latter being caused by the former, we
should never have arrived at the principle that every event must
have its cause. Yet, however large may be our experience of
causes and effects, this proposition will always infinitely trans-
cend that experience; for how can we be certain that, because
we have never witnessed or heard of events without real or sup-
posed causes, therefore no event ever happened or ever will
happen without some cause, in all time and in all worlds ? Stilly
we should think it absurd to doubt for a moment of this truth.
Since, therefore, no knowledge of ours is antecedent to expe-
rience in time, all knowledge must begin with it. Thus the
elements of all our a priori knowledge lie latent and dormant in
our mental constitution till experience elicits what virtually lurks
within; just as the occasion which discharges the electric spark
reveals what before was latent and inert.
* Metaphysics, in the most general sense, means the science of ultimate and
general principles, either relating to external things or mind. In Aristotelian
phrase it was: i; 7rpwrjj tyiKoao<pia, the prime philosophy (Aristot. " Metaph."
lib. i. cap. 1); and. nri<rrr]fitj rov ovroc fj ovrof, the science of being as such, or
in the most general sense.?Ibid. lib. iv.
?f* Sie ist Erkenntniss a priori, oder aus reinem Verstande und reinar Vernunft.
?" ProL" ?1.
498 PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT.
Mathematical science furnishes brilliant examples of a 'priori
knowledge, whether we consider the axiomatic truths and the
definitions on which it rests, or the vast logical deductions which
are made from them. Every mathematical proposition is an
a priori judgment, based ultimately and in the last analysis on
purely a priori principles. And here we see clearly that not
only in judgments, but also in conceptions, an a priori origin is
manifest. Thus, not only is the axiom, two straight lines cannot
inclose a space, in the highest sense a priori, being both self-
evident and incapable of proof by deduction from any more
general a priori principle; but the notion of space itself is a
priori?it is already pre-supposed as the necessary condition of
the sensible world. We may, indeed, fancy all that occupies space,
including bodies themselves, annihilated ; but space itself we can-
not imagine by any possibility destroyed. So we cannot but
think of substance, corporeal or incorporeal, as something diffe-
rent from the properties which we experience in objects; and we
cannot, by omitting this, that, or the other property, get rid of
the conception of substance, which still forces itself upon us, of
necessity, because it has its seat in our faculty of cognition &
priori: we are compelled by our mental nature to pre-suppose
substance as the substratum of all properties. Further, accord-
ing to Kant, knowledge a priori, as thus explained, may be
" pure" or " impure": the proposition, infinite space is eternal,
is a priori and pure, as no empirical element is contained in
it, for experience can never teach us either the infinity or the
eternity of space: but every change has a cause is " impure,"
because the conception change is wholly derived from experience,
though the proposition itself is a priori.*
Immediately connected with the above distinctions between
a priori and empirical knowledge, is Kant's distinction of all
judgments into analytical and synthetical?a distinction which
relates to the office and value of the predicate in any given
judgment or proposition. Analytical judgments are merely
explanatory (erlauternd) ; the predicate here adds nothing to
the subject, but merely analyses what was already involved in
it. If I say all bodies are extended, I have not at all enlarged
my previous conception of body, I have only analysed it; for
the very conception of body implies extension, and did so before
the judgment itself was uttered. Now, it must be observed that
in all analytical judgments the predication is a priori, they
are mere necessary developments of their respective subjects;
and this although even both the subject and the predicate may
be " impure," or, in other words, wholly empirical. The term
gold, for instance, expresses a conception entirely framed by our
* Yide " Kritik der reinen Vernunft," Einleitung, 2te Ausg.?"Prol." ? 1.
PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT. 499
experience of nature and the arts; the term yelloiv, and the term
metal equally stand for what we have become acquainted with
by experience; and the term "gold" includes them both in its
meaning. Hence, if I say, gold is a yelloiv metal, I simply unfold
what was already wrapped up in the term " goldI require
(says Kant), in order to know this proposition, no further expe-
rience beyond my conception of gold, which conception contains,
that it is a metal, and yellow. It is evident that the charac-
teristic " a ?priori" cannot be generally applied to these " analytic
judgments" in the sense previously laid down by Kant, but only
in a much lower sense; and we think that Kant should have said
as much; for surely (to take the last example) all we know of
"gold" is exclusively from experience; and he says that, when
we know what it is, we know the predicate of the example; yet
he defines knowledge a priori such knowledge as is absolutely
independent of all experience.* The judgments which Kant dis-
tinguishes as synthetical, are not merely explanatory, like the
analytical, but augmentative (erweitemd); they do not merely
analyse the subject by linking it with the predicate, but they add
in the predicate something not contained in the subject. Of this
kind of judgments are such as: some bodies are heavy, and (to
use a former example) two straight lines cannot inclose a space*
In both these cases, the subjects do not necessarily contain the
predicates: we might attach a correct meaning to the word body
without being obliged to think relative weight as between diffe-
rent bodies: we might have a true notion of a straight line or
lines, and yet not think of them in reference to an area or
bounded figure.
But while the two last examples are synthetical, in distinction
from analytical judgments, they differ inasmuch as that the
former is a 'posteriori, and the latter a priori. We will repeat
these two last examples, for there is perhaps an advantage, when
it is practicable, in viewing the same examples in different lights.
Let us take the first, which is a posteriori; for how do we know
anything about the weight of bodies ? surely only by experience,
which here enables us to add by predication something not con-
tained in the meaning of the subject " bodies." All such propo-
sitions, then, are synthetic judgments a posteriori. The second
example is synthetic, and it is also a priori: for here something
is added which is not contained in the conception " two straight
lines," as they can be thought without any reference to what they
may or may not inclose; and we never can give any general
proof from experience that " two straight lines cannot inclose a
* Wir werden also im Verfolg unter Erkenntnissen d priori nicht solche ver*
stehen, die von dieser oder jener, sondern die schlecterdings von aller. Erfahrung
unabhangig statt finden.?" Yernunft-Kritik," supplem. iv. 2. Bosenkranz.
500. PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT.
space." Farther, our philosopher holds that not only all geo-
metrical, but also all arithmetical judgments are synthetical &
priori, for they add new matter to the subject, and carry with
them necessity, which is non-empirical. Kant admits that the
identical equation 7 + 5 = 12 looks like an analytical propo-
sition. Can I have the conception 7+5 without having that
of 12, and the relation of the latter term (the predicate) to the
subject ? He would say that I can, notwithstanding the material
objective equality of the two conceptions. Our cognising that
equality is another affair, and is subjective. We may see this if
we try large numbers, when the two sides of the equation
are not at once recognised as equal. Take 29,897 + 98,086 =
128,583 : here the thought of the two numbers which form the
subject of this materially identical proposition, and the bare
thought of their addition, do not involve at the same time the
thought of their sum; we must actually add them to obtain this.
It may be admitted that the theory seems at least pushed to its
extreme limits in such examples as these; and if they can be
accounted as subjectively synthetic, they are so, evidently, in a
very different sense from that in which those examples are, on
which Kant lays the greatest stress, and which lie at the very
root of his entire metaphysical system ? those examples, we
mean, in which the predicate can in no possible way be thought
out or worked out from the mere subject of the proposition?as,
for instance, in the former example every change must have its
cause : here the conception of cause lies out of the conception of
change or of a mere event; it is the unknown x which the under-
standing grasps as necessary and universal, but to which neither
experience nor calculation could ever lead us.
In regard to " some few principles" which belong to mathe-
matics, Kant somewhat modifies his theory: such are a = a,
or the whole is equal to itself; and a + b > a, or the whole is
greater than its part. He admits they are " really analytical."
He adds, however, that they are so only by a sort of ambiguity.
They, in fact, derive their validity from pure conceptions (i.e. by
synthesis), and we regard them as having the predicate already
contained in the subject (that is as analytical) only because the
predicate, though truly not thought in the mere conception of
the subject itself, is so thought by virtue of an intuition
(anschauung)* which we add to the conception. Kant repeats
this qualification of the theory in the " Prolegomena." It is only
because these judgments can be presented in intuition that they
axe admitted into mathematics: and but for their being so pre-
? * By an intuition, Kant understands any act of consciousness which, consists of
individual object presented as existing in space or time, either to sense or imagi-
nation.
PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT. 501
sented, they would be justly regarded as synthetical. He says
that such propositions are to us analytical only because of
our sensuous experience?that, for instance, our seeing wholes
actually divided into parts leads us to regard the predicate
" greater than a part," as contained and thought in the term
" whole." We suppose Kant to mean that but for this expe-
rience the term " whole," as standing for a bare conception,
would not necessarily have contained in itself the other term,
" something greater than a part," in such a way as to appear
only an explication of that term, and so to make the proposition
analytical.
We must not omit to say that some have altogether called in
question or denied the truth of Kant's theory of analytic and
synthetic judgments, or, as Sir W. Hamilton would term them,
" explicative" and " ampliative." M. Guiran,* for example, a
strict adherent of the Hegelian school, maintains that every
judgment is in itself analytical and identical, and that the dis-
tinctions of Kant are merely relative to the information of the
individual. Now, if we say a circle is a plain figure ivhose
boundary is everywhere equi- distant from a certain point within
called the centre, this we may admit to be an analytical or
identical proposition. But when we say a circle may be drawn
around any point for a centre, it is evident that in this postu-
late we have gone beyond the mere definition of the circle.
Again, M. Guiran's theory that all judgments vary only with
the information of the individual, renders all our knowledge
strictly empirical: but how can any experience tell us that space
is infinite; yet who does not know this ? We are not, however,
sure that Kant has not in some of his examples extended his
theory of synthetic judgments (I priori too far.
On the general distinction between analytical and synthetical
judgments, Kant grounds his entire theory of speculative or
theoretical knowledge. Analytical judgments are often needful as
leading to clearness of conceptions; but it is on synthetic judg-
ments that we must rest for all the ultimate principles of rational
science: not on judgments of experience, though these are
always synthetical; for as they are entirely the result of expe-
rience, on which account we call them d posteriori, they can
never be attended with absolute necessity. In the judgment, all
horned animals are cloven-footed, for instance, we could never
extract from the subject " horned animals" the predicate " cloven-
footed." We learn the fact from experience, and we then make
a synthesis (combination) of the predicate and subject. But
though we thus generalize, we are prepared to suppose that fur-
ther experience might possibly show exceptions to the rule.
* " M^moire sur la Philosophic Allcmande," 1845.
502 PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT.
Not so in synthetic judgments a 'priori; for in these we annex
the predicate to the subject with the conviction of their belong-
ing to each other universally and necessarily: we can never
imagine the possibility of any exception to the principle that
every event must have a cause.
All the theoretical sciences contain synthetical judgments a
priori as principles. The question, therefore, is?how these
judgments are possible ? in other words, how is pure rational
knowledge possible ? Analytic propositions are possible, being
founded on the principle of contradiction: thus we cannot deny
that a circle has all its radii equal, without virtually saying that
a circle is not a circle. Synthetic judgments a posteriori are
possible, as we know by the experience on which they are
founded : thus we know that ivatcr freezes at 3?? of Fahrenheit.
In synthetic judgments, a priori, as we have already seen, we
cannot extract the predicate by analysis out of our conception
of the subject, nor can we get at the predicate by experience, and
yet we are certain that the predicate belongs to the subject neces-
sarily and universally, as in the above example on causality.
How does this happen ? We may reply, summarily, by the con-
stitution of the human mind : but the complete solution, in detail,
is the object of the Kantian critical or transcendental philosophy
?called critical, because it is founded on reason's criticism of
the powers and limits of our cognitive faculties?and transcen-'
dental, because it aims at bringing out the validity and the boun-
daries of all the knowledge we can have which transcends our
actual experience.
, Hence our author divides what he terms the main general
transcendental question (allgemeine transscendentale Hauptfrage)
into four parts :*?how are pure mathematics possible ??how are
pure physics possible ??how is metapliysic in general possible ?
-?how is metapliysic possible as science ? Mathematics are
possible because they rest on the basis of space and time, out of
which all the conceptions of pure mathematics (geometrical and
arithmetical) are constructed a priori: for space and time are
forms of that part of the cognitive faculty which we call sense;
so that we are able to have intuitions (anscliauungen) a priori,
by means of which we attain to the corresponding mathematical
judgments. This will be better seen presently, when we come to
speak of Kant's remarkable theory of space and time, which is
fundamental to his system. Pure physics are possible also,
because they contain certain universal and necessary principles.
Nature is to us only the existence of things as determined by
general laws, and these laws Kant maintains are to us wholly
subjective, they are the laws under which alone we can haveintui-
* Vide "Prol." ? 5.
PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT. 503
tions (perceptions) of objects, or conceptions of tliem. He gives
as an example of a pure d, priori synthesis in natural philo-
sophy, substance remains permanent?i.e., amidst all changes of
phenomena. Metaphysic is possible, just because synthetic
judgments a priori are possible. Metaphysic consists properly
of pure a priori knowledge, and such knowledge we find lying at
the basis of all the rational sciences. In treating of the question,
whether metaphysic as a science is possible, our philosopher thus
replies:?In order for metaphysic to be a science, possessing self-
evident transcendental truth, its foundation must be laid by first
exhibiting conceptions a priori (as distinguished from judg-
ments). These must be separated, and analysed, according to
their different sources in sense, understanding, and reason, and
complete tables made of them, which will contain time and space
as the forms of sense, the categories as the forms of understand-
ing, and the psychological, cosmological, and theological ideas as
the forms of reason. Such a Kritik, says Kant, must expound in
detail all that can be inferred from these a priori conceptions,
and must establish from their deduction the possibility of syn-
thetic knowledge a priori. It must also fix the boundaries of
their use, and thus we shall have the basis of a science of such
a priori knowledge. We shall see that this science has to do,
not with the objects of reason, but with reason itself merely. Yet
it is not the mere anatomy of our conceptions which belongs to
empirical psychology, but metaphysics proper which aims at a.
priori knowledge synthetically.
Prom what has preceded, Kant concludes that there results the
<c idea of a particular science, which may be called the Criticism
of Pure Reason," since reason is the faculty which furnishes us
with the above principles of knowledge a priori. He does not,
he says, propose an Organon, or complete system in all its range,
but a review of the resources and limits of reason, a kind of pre-
liminary guide (Propdcleutik) to a fall system. Hence he pre-
fers the name "Transcendental Criticism" to Transcendental
Philosophy. His aim, he says, is rather negative than positive 'r
he wishes to purify our reason from error, rather than to build a
fabric by its aid. He seeks here to lay the foundation. He
hoped to be able to carry out his deductions to a complete
system, under the title of "Metaphysic1 of Nature." This work
was not to extend to half the length of the " Kritik der reineri
ernunft, and would be to him, he says, an amusement rather
than a labour. Unfortunately it was never published. In the
meantime, the present " Kritik" is to contain a complete list of
principles for the construction of such a work,*
* " Vorrede zur ersten Auflage,'rs. 14, Rosenkranz.
504) PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT.
Preliminarily to his division of the subject of his "Kritik," our
author remarks that there are two sources of human knowledge,
sense (Sinnlichkeit) and understanding (Ver stand). By sense
objects are given to us; by understanding they are thought*
Sense, as well as understanding, belongs to the Transcendental
Philosophy, so far as sense can contain representations (Vorstel-
lungen), a priori, as the conditions under which objects are given
to us: for, by means of these conditions?namely, space and
time, sense furnishes us with knowledge which, though manifested
on occasion of experience, transcends its actual sphere, which is
always limited to the particular and contingent, never embracing
the universal and necessary.
We now proceed to Kant's general division of his great work,
the " Criticism of Pure Reason," which is as follows :?I. Trans-
cendental Doctrine of Elements (Transscendentale Elementar-
lehre), which occupies three-fourths of the whole volume. Under
this head, we have?1. "Transcendental ^Esthetic." We may
observe that the word " (esthetic,"f here, has no meaning in
common with the criticism of taste, by which we take cognizance
of the sublime and beautiful. What Kant here propounds is, as
we shall see, the doctrine of sensuous perception on his transcen-
dental principles. 2. "Transcendental Logic;" under which
head we have the two topics: (a) " Transcendental Analytic
(6) " Transcendental Dialectic." II. The Transcendental Doc-
trine of Method (Transscendentale Methodenlehre). This is
divided into four parts ; namely: the Discipline, the Canon, the
Architectonic, and the History of Pure Reason.
The first part of the Elementary Doctrine is termed Trans-
scendental ^Esthetic. The English reader must not be too
much alarmed at Kant's strange and scholastic phraseology: it
is, after all, generally intelligible. Our author here deals with
the passive faculty of sense, by which alone objects are given to
us. Sense is the faculty of intuitions. We have an intuition of an
object when it is presented directly, in any way, to any of our senses
or to our imagination?for Kant makes imagination sensuous,
not intellectual. Our intuitions are of phenomena, of things as
they seem: of things as they are (Ding an Sich) we can knoAV
* Kant says nothing, at the outset, of the essential distinction which he subse-
quently makes between Understanding and Reason (Vernunft), which will appear in
its proper place. We need only say, just at present, that when this distinction is
not immediately in his view, his use of the term " Reason " is found in the vague,
general, and diversified senses in which it has been employed in ancient and modern
times. Even the term idea {Idee), which is afterwards exclusively appropriated to
Reason (in distinction from the term conception [Begriff], which is appropriated to
Understanding), is repeatedly employed, previously, in the lax popular sense.?
Vide Krit. d. rein. Vera., Einleitung, i. ii. s. 17. 26, 27. Rosenkranz, 1838.
-f ataOavonai, to perceive ; atadrjai^, perception : hence the ancient distinctions
aiadtjra, things perceived ; votjra, things thought.
PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT.
'505
nothing, though these objective realities do exist. We only
know their manifestations; that is, we know them only as they
are to us. When an object produces a sensation in me, that of
sound, for instance, or of vision, what corresponds in the pheno-
menon to my sensation is the " matter" of the phenomenon. This
matter, then, is given a posteriori, or by actual experience.. But
phenomena must present themselves to sense, also, under a cer-
tain " form." Let us separate from our representation of body
all the conceptions which the understanding annexes to sense?
snch as those of substance, force, etc.; and having thus isolated
the sensuous faculty, let us suppose taken away from our intui-
tion all that is empirical?all that belongs to mere sensation?
as colour, hardness, solidity, &c., and what remains ? only the
form, or pure intuition, which is all that sense can give us, a
priori. Now, says Kant, there are two pure forms of sensuous
intuition?namely, Space and Time. External sense places before
ns objects as without us, and always in space, in which alone
shapes, dimensions, and mutual relations are determined. Inter-
nal sense, by means of which the mind contemplates its internal
state?gives us, indeed, no intuition of the soul as object, as ex-
ternal sense gives us intuitions of body; still there is a determi-
nate form under which alone the contemplation of our internal
state is possible: all our mental processes must go on in time.
We have no external intuition of time?we cannot see it (that is),
hear it, or the like : nor have we any internal intuition of space,
our intuition of it is wholly external. Time and space are not
real things?they are not relations of things: what, then, are
they? They belong only to us subjectively: they are, in fact,
properties of our minds.
Space is not an empirical conception (Begriff),-that is, one
which is derived from external experiences: for I am always
obliged to presuppose its existence as the very background of all
my experience of objects. It is the condition which renders
phenomena possible. Imagine a new orb created?space must
already be in its place. Imagine all nature annihilated?space
still remains. Space, then, is a representation a priori?a pure
intuition; it is prior, that is, to all phenomena, and is pure
from, or independent of, all our empirical knowledge of given
dimensions : for they only overlie portions of its all-comprehend-
ing infinity. No mere conception can reach this infinity: yet
every part of space may be infinitely produced. Hence, though
it gives rise to conceptions, its original representation is intuition1
a priori?not conception. Further: Kant argues that our re-'
presentation of space must be originally intuition?that is, an;
affair of sense, because we can never get out of any mere concep-
tion, by its analysis, more than was before contained in it (hence
506 PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT.
analytical judgments, as above); and yet, in geometry, the
science which determines the properties of space, we get proposi-
tions which go beyond the subject of them, and obtain predicates,
such as to make them synthetic and a 'priori. For this intuition
of space stretches far beyond all experience, and underlies all
perception of objects, showing that it is independent of them, and
so rendering geometry possible, and its principles necessary.
Kant gives us examples of such a principle: " space has only
three dimensions" different spaces are not successive, but co-
existent." And how, he asks, " can an external intuition anterior
to all objects, and in which our conception of things can be
determined a priori, exist in the human mind ?" Only so far
as it is native to the mind itself, having its seat only in us the
subject; only inasmuch as it is our capacity of being affected by
objects.
From these conceptions which we are obliged to form of
space, Kant concludes that space is only the " form of external
sense," or the subjective condition under which alone perception
is possible. In regard to our cognizance of phenomena, or
things as they appear, space has objective validity, for everything
presents itseif to our senses as in space. It has, therefore, so
far empirical reality; but space is nothing the moment we regard
it as belonging to things in themselves?that is, it is merely ideal;
for things in themselves are to us a blank, we know nothing of
them. What we call outward objects are truly nothing but mere
representations given us by our sensuous faculty, of which space
is the form; but the correlates of the phenomena thus repre-
sented, or the things in themselves, we can never know by sense;
and as we have no intellectual intuition, (whatever any other
beings may have,) we cannot know them at all. In one word,
according to Kant, space is in us?not in the universe around
us : it is a condition of the exercise of our sensuous faculty?not
a condition of real objects. Yet, strange to say, Kant strenu-
ously maintained the real existence of material objects as the
basis or substratum of the phenomena which these objects occa-
sion in us, while he would not allow it to be said that the real
object requires space to exist in! It is no wonder that in disr
cussing this subject, Kant's language is perpetually at war with
his subjective theory?just as Berkeley cannot help talking of
matter as a real thing every moment, while he denies its exis-
tence, and pronounces it an impossibility. It seems obvious
enough, surely, that if material objects really exist independently
of us, as Kant said they did, space must be as much a necessary
condition of their existence, as it is a necessary condition of
our perception of the phenomena which belong to them.
We must not omit a curious illustration which occurs in the
PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT, 507
" Prolegomena,"* brought forward as a convincing proof of the
ideality of space as being a mere form of perception ; in other
words, a mere function of our sensuous faculty, having no true
externality, but being exclusively in us. The glove of one hand
cannot be used on the other: the two objects are similar and
equal, bat not congruent?why so ? " because space is nothing but
a determination of our sensitive faculty." A more singular argu-
ment, surely, can hardly be imagined. We should rather say
that the case was an illustration of the real externality of space :
for it is evident that when the left-hand glove is reversed, the
separate four fingers each fit those of the right hand well enough,
but the thumb is awkward because it is now pitched backwards in-
stead of forwards. It is extraordinary what a passion for a
theory will do ! We confess that if such an argument has any
meaning, to us it seems to go against the ideality of space rather
than in its favour. The same may be said of two other illustra-
tions which Kant brings forward?the incongruency of the equal
images of the hand in a mirror?and the incongruency of equal
spherical triangles on the globe, one in each hemisphere, when
the triangles have for their common base an arc of the equator.
Time, adds our author, is also not a conception which is drawn
from any experience: for neither co-existence nor succession
would come into perception,f if the representation of time did
not lie a priori as a foundation. Things could never seem to us
contemporaneous or successive, unless time for them to exist in,
either together or one after another, were presupposed. We
cannot think away time from phenomena, we must always per-
ceive them in time : it is the universal condition of their possi-
bility, though we may imagine time void of ail phenomena. The
empirical conceptions of change, and therefore of motion, are
only possible through and in time; and from this necessity of
time as the indispensable condition of these conceptions, and of
all phenomena, Kant terms it an internal intuition a priori, and
the form of internal sense, as space is the form of external sense.
On this neoessity is founded the possibility of synthetic judg*
ments a priori (as before explained) in relation to time : such as
time has only one dimension (linear, or that of continuous pro-
gress) ; different times are not co-existent but successive. These
axioms cannot be derived from experience, which can never give
either absolute universality or absolute necessity to our know-
ledge. Such axioms in fact give law to experience, and render it
possible. ^ They are the results of the pure form of our sensuous
intuition a priori. Such is another example: different times are
* Sect. 13.
?j- Wahrnehmung?Kant sometimes uses this word as synonymous with An-
schauung (intuition).?Vide "Prol." ? 10: " Anschauung, d. i. Wahrnehmung
wirklicher Gegenstande." -
'508 PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT.
but parts of one and the same time. Again we could not say
. time is infinite, unless we had the original unlimited representa-
tion of time in us as a basis. We may here remark, in passing,
that, to us time seems more perplexing than even space. Kant
has not remarked this. Indeed, his wholly subjective views
probably prevented him from seeing the difficulty we allude to.
Even Kant, however, notwithstanding his idealism of space and
time, cannot avoid speaking of them objectively. Now we feel
able readily to imagine space as wholly denuded of all objects?
in fact, as an infinite void; but can we so readily represent to
ourselves, as our author says, "time void of all phenomena?"
The pure intuition (as Kant calls it) of time, is not more d priori
on his system, than the axiom " time has only one dimension."
We see well enough what he means by this, for time has only
length : but can we represent time to ourselves at all, excepting
as a kind of flow ? A flow of what ??of changes surely?of
successive phenomena. How do we know that time has " only
one dimension," but by our being quite unable to represent it to
ourselves otherwise than as marked by perpetual progressions or
successions ? Grant that successions are in time?yet, again,
what is time apart from all successions ? It will be seen that
we here hazard no theory of time : we only start a difficulty?
perhaps an objection to Kant's statement " that we can very well
represent to ourselves empty time."
Our author further remarks that space, being the pure form of
external intuition, can only be the condition of external pheno-
mena. That is, space is not the condition of thought. Time,
however, is the pure form & priori of all phenomena, whether of
nature around us, or of mind itself. When he calls time the form
of the internal sense, he means that it is the a priori condition of
"the intuition of ourselves and of our internal state."* Time is
the immediate condition of all internal, and thereby the mediate
condition of all external phenomena. It will be observed that
Kant makes time as well as space sensuous : for man's intuition,
he says, is always sensuous. I can only " intuit" (have a sense
of) myself through this form of internal intuition. It is true
enough, as Kant says, that there is a difficulty, common to every
theory, in saying?how the subject or ego (the me) can have an
internal intuition of itself. The reflex act of self-conscious-
ness?the cognizance we take of self?the introversion, as
it were, of the mental eye upon itself, in our being conscious of
our own personal psychological phenomena?this is a fact, how-
ever inexplicable. But it is quite another thing to say that our
consciousness of self is a sensuous, not an intellectual plieno-
* Des Anschauens unserer selbst, und unsers innern Zustandes.?" Kritik d.
reinen Vernunft," s. 42. Itosenkranz, 1838.
PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT. 509
menon: this, however, is what Kant says, and it is a peculiarity
of his doctrine of Transcendental ^Esthetics. His argument is,
that the representations of consciousness, in the ego, the con-
scious subject, are given without spontaneity?that is, passively:
hence, consciousness is wholly an affair of the sensuous faculty.
On this principle, our consciousness of thoughts is as sensuous as
our consciousness of sensations, or of the intuitions and percep-
tions of which sensations are the " matter."
Oar philosopher, before closing his remarkable theory of the
absolute ideality of time and space, and of the wholly subjective
character of all that belongs in any way to sense, specially
guards the reader against supposing that his theory of the sub-
jectivity of all phenomena, as essentially connected with that of
the subjectivity of their pure or a priori forms (time and space,)
by any means involves the assertion that phenomena are mere
illusive appearances. No; objects as phenomena are really
given ; but as they are only given relatively?that is, so far as they
are related to the conscious subject?we must distinguish the
object as phenomenon, from the object as a thing in itself.
Kant maintains very strenuously, in this part of his subject,
that everything would truly be changed into mere illusory appear-
ance, if we regarded space and time as objective?that is, as having
any functions or relations out of our minds ; though he does not:
make very evident how he deduces such a conclusion. He
holds, too, that even our own conscious existence would become
a mere illusion if we made it to depend on the objective reality
of time, which, like space, can only be a form of the human mind,
which, as a mould, gives its own shape and figure to what is
applied to it.
The above is Kant's doctrine of perception: let us sum it up.
What we call objects, are only revelations of them as they appear
to our sensuous faculty. The real object we know not. What
is variable in our sensations, varies with the agency which the
objects exert on us ; but there are two invariable elements which
attend all our sensuous experience?space and time. Everything
without us presents itself as in space: everything without us, and
all our inward consciousness, are presented to us as in time. The
reason is, that space and time are furnished by the mind itself. They
have no existence apart from the mind : they do not adhere to the
leal objects themselves, as is commonly supposed. Time and
space are not in the universe; they are only in us: they are
essential constituents of our sensibility, or sensuous faculty
they are the forms or modes under which external objects and
our own mental processes present themselves to us. As our
knowledge of external objects is thus only phenomenal, not real
or substantial, so our knowledge of ourselves, our souls or
NO. XI.?NEW SERIES. L L
510 PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT.
minds: our inward consciousness only presents to us tlie me, as
phenomenon?that is, as it appears, not as it really is. It will be
seen at once how Kant's idealism of perception differs both from
Berkeley's and Fichte's: from Berkeley's, in holding that there
are in the universe positive, real things apart from our minds,
though we know nothing more of them, in themselves, than
though they existed not; while Berkeley maintained that there
was nothing but minds or spirits?all that seems real in nature
being only modifications of our minds : from Fichte's, in holding
that the mind is passive in sensation, being acted on by an out-
ward non-ego, or not-self; while Fichte said that the mind un-
consciously and spontaneously spun from itself the whole uni-
verse, and then mistook it for a reality. It is worth remark, that
Kant pronounced Berkeley's idealism "fanatical,"* (calling his
own "critical," and "transcendental;") and Fichte was named in
Germany " the consistent Kant," because he boldly accepted the
consequences of Kant's denial of all objectivity to time and
space, and went the whole length of idealism.
No doubt, time and space are, as our author says, conditions,
the one, of all our psychological phenomena, the other, of all
the psychological phenomena of sense. Time, to us, underlies
all thought and all perception: we can think and perceive only in
time. Space, to us, underlies all perception : we cannot perceive
any external phenomenon, or even imagine it, but as presented
in space. But is this all ? " Yes," says Kant, " space and time
have no connexion whatever with things themselves?the realities
which present to us the phenomena. Space and time are wholly
in us." This doctrince is, we hold, perfectly gratuitous, and we
may say inconceivable, if there be, as Kant says there are, real
tilings. We may admit with our philosopher that all our know-
ledge is relative to our faculties. Things are known to us only
as they appear to us ; we only know substance as that which we
cannot but suppose is the basis of the properties which appeal to
our senses. We cannot know substance in itself, for we cannot
imagine it apart from its properties, nor can we know the pro-
perties but as properties of substance; we cannot conceive of
external or internal phenomena as the ghosts of nothing?we
can only apprehend them as phenomena of matter or mind. No
doubt, sensation is the result of the constitution both of the
object and of the subject ; just as a table is the result of the
matter (wood) and the form which the workman gives to it, or as
a piece of pottery is what it is both from its material and from its
mould. So our perceptions of things can only be as things are
exhibited to us, and as our perceptive powers enable us to receive
* . . . . mit dem mystichen uiid schwarmerischen des Berkeley. . . ?. Proleg.,
? 13. Anmerk iii.
PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT. 511
them. But all this, surely, does not interfere with the objectivity
of time and space. Surely it is not only of our nature to know
things as in space and time, but it is also of the nature of things,
if they exist at all, to exist in time and space. If we may say
of physical phenomena that they present themselves in time and
place, why should not their acknowledged causes (and Kant admits
that real objects are the causes of phenomena) also exist in time
and in place ? And as the existence of the soul is also admitted,
and its phenomena or processes go on in time, why should not
the soul itself exist in time ? How can the real being, the cause
of the manifestations, be out of time, any more than the mani-
festations themselves ? Surely the soul is as enduring as its
phenomena; and how can either endure apart from time ? How
can effects be limited to time, or space, or both, and not their
causes ? It is quite inconceivable that a material object can pro-
duce effects where it is not present. Our not understanding the
nature of substances or existences in themselves, does not at all
militate against our bringing them under the time-and-space
conditions, but the reverse; for all we know of them is, that
they are something inseparably connected with their pheno-
mena, and we are unable even to think of them apart from the
latter. If things in themselves, or noumena, act at all, they
must surely act somewhere?at some time. We need not say that
we have empirical knowledge of the existence of real objects in
time and space, as we have of objects as phenomena; but reason
cannot but necessarily infer that, if they exist at all, they must exist
in time and space. In this inference, reason only does just what
she does in pronouncing that there are substances at all; for the
conception of substance itself is not empirical, but a priori,
being necessary by a law of our mind to the conception of pro-
perties and manifestations.
It is evident that, to have been consistent in denying the exter-
nality of time and space, Kant ought to have denied a material
world; his entire subjectivity of nature would square very well
with Berkeleianism or Ficliteism, but with his own avowed
realism it is quite at variance. He believed in the real planets ;
but what, on his theory, would become of their motions round
the sun in space and time, supposing all sensuous faculties to cease
to exist ? If time and space are mere " receptivities" or forms
of our minds?what if there were no sentient beings ? Is it
conceivable that their annihilation would annihilate the time and
space in which motion alone is possible ? What imaginable effect
could the destruction of all sentient creatures have on the move-
ments of the planets ? Kant's admission of realism may safely
be pronounced to be opposed to the whole spirit of his specu-
lations.
L L 2
512 PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT.
Again, it is a capital error of Kant's system that it makes time
and space wholly sensuous. No doubt, time and space are the
a priori conditions of our knowledge?the former, of our know-
ledge of our mental phenomena; and both, of our knowledge of
the phenomena of sense. Yet it should not be said, on this
account, that our knowledge of the necessity and universality of
time and space, as such conditions, is of the province of sense.
True, it is our sensuous nature that enables us to receive sensa-
tions, and to receive them as the signs of the external phenomena
which cause them; but though sense is the occasion of our a priori
conceptions of time and space, these conceptions themselves surely
belong to our intellectual faculty. To call them "pure intuitions,"
in distinction from the empirical intuitions (representations which
actual experience gives us) of objects, is merely to beg the
question. It might as well be said, that because our conception
of cause is occasioned originally by our experiencing actual
changes in the external world through the medium of our senses,
therefore this conception belongs to sense. This, however, even
Kant himself expressly denies, and affirms that our notion of
causality belongs to the understanding. In fact, there is no
proper distinction between this latter faculty and Kant's " pure
sensibility."
We actually see limited spaces?we rise, in thought, from this
sensuous experience to the conception of an infinite, eternal
space, which renders all our experience of limited extensions pos-
sible ; but surely this latter phenomenon requires another faculty
?intellect. With regard to time, we are, if possible, still more
obviously shut up to the understanding. For how can our most
limited notions of time be regarded as sensuous ? Here time,
we cannot but think, differs greatly from space; and Kant is
not, in our judgment, the only philosopher who has erred by
attemping to run a forced parallelism, throughout, between time
and space. Grant that our muscular sense, or our visual percep-
tions, primary or acquired?that, in short, our sensuous nature
alone enables us in the first instance to have any limited extension
presented to us in the concrete, as, for instance, the length of a
book in our hands, or lying before us: but, on the other hand,
can we say that our notion of an hour or of a minute is a
sensuous phenomenon ? May we not have this notion quite
abstractedly from sense, by means of the mere succession of
our own thoughts ? May we not be looking constantly at a
clock that is before us, and see the continued progress of its
hands, and yet, under different circumstances, have very different
notions of the lapse of time; the notion of a long time, with
weary waiting; the notion of a short time, with absorbing and
agreeable ideas and emotions?and yet the actual time elapsed
PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT. 513
shall be the same ? True, we measure time accurately by numbering
the visible beats of the pendulum; bat can anything really be more
intellectual than all our notions of time, even of its briefest
intervals? Yet Kant makes time as well as space wholly sen-
suous, though he speaks of them frequently as " conceptions"
(Begriffe).
More than this: Kant even attaches our consciousness to the
faculty of sense. We not only take cognizance of external pheno-
mena as occurring and existing in time; we are also compelled
to regard all the facts of consciousness as taking place in time?
this no one doubts. But Kant is hence led to make conscious-
ness itself an affair of sense; for time is as much the form of our
internal as of our external intuitions?that is, it is the form of
consciousness. He first makes time sensuous, and then conscious-
ness is sensuous too. In consciousness we have presented to us
what is going on within our minds: we know our internal state by
observing that it undergoes certain changes or modifications; only
in this way is consciousness possible. In being affected with these
modifications we are wholly passive, just as we are when affected
by outward phenomena. Hence, while sight, hearing, smell, etc.,
constitute external sense, having space and time for its forms,?
consciousness is nothing more nor less than internal sense; and
Kant tries to justify his attaching it to our sensuous rather than
to our intellectual nature, by dwelling upon its passive character,
and denying to it all spontaneity. His argumeut would equally
prove that our capacity of appreciating the sublime and the
beautiful is sensuous, for certain affections or emotions are
awakened in us by certain objects, involuntarily; yet it is only
rational beings that can discern cesthetical relations, and Kant
himself refers them to our intellectual faculty. If by conscious-
ness of what passes within us be meant our cognizance of our
various internal modifications as our own, surely consciousness
is essentially intellectual, however accompanied or even empiri-
cally originated by sense. Even our judgments are not always
voluntary: Kant himself says, that the categories according to
which we pronounce our judgments are not subject to our
will, but are necessary laws of thought. In thus making con-
sciousness sensuous, we hold that our author is again placing at
the basis of his system another capital error. We shall see what
he says further of consciousness under the next head of the
" Kritik;" and let us not be surprised if we shall find it hard to
reconcile his assertion that consciousness is a modification of the
sensuous faculty, with his subsequent theory in which he views
consciousness in relation to the understanding.
We now proceed to the Second Part of Kant's "Elements;"
namelv, his Transcendental Logic.
514 PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT.
" Our knowledge," he says, " is wholly by intuition, and by
conception. Intuition and conception are both necessary in
every case in which we can be said to know with the understand-
ing. Both may be either pure or empirical. "When we have an
object presented to us by our receptive faculty of sense (as when
we actually see or hear anything), we have an empirical intui-
tion of it. When we think an object in relation in some way to
its representation, we have a conception of it. A savage sees a
distant house merely as an object, not knowing its use : he has
only an intuition of it. Another person recognises it as a
dwelling for man; he has in addition to the intuition also a
conception, which the other has not." Kant would say, that
as to the matter of their sensuous impressions, both were
alike: both saw the object; but the form of the cognition is
in the one only intuition, in the other both intuition and con-
ception.* All, however, is here empirical (only through actual
experience). So also the conception of change is empirical:
to make it intelligible, we must refer it to some actual pheno-
menon. But both intuition and conception may also each
be pure. We necessarily must have all external phenomena pre-
sented to us in space?space is a pure intuition, as we have
already seen. Our conception of cause is a pure conception; for
we cannot see causes, or have them presented to our senses : we
only see changes?we think their causes. Sense is a passive
faculty (a mere receptivity) : understanding, by which we can
have conceptions, is a- spontaneous faculty; without sense, no
object would be given: without understanding, no object would
be thought. Thought without some object to think of, is void:
intuition, or any sensuous representation, without conception, is
blind. It will here be borne in mind, that it is a peculiarity
of Kant's theory, that we can have no conceptions, whatever,
but such as have a relation to sensuous objects. Of this more
hereafter.
Pure logic is strictly formal, relating only to the form of
thought, and apart from the matter or subject of thought. This
alone is properly the Science of Logic. By Transcendental Logic,
our author understands an inquiry into the origin and validity of
the pure forms of the understanding. There are intuitions a
priori, the necessary forms under which all sensible objects must
be presented to sense: these are time and space. There are also
conceptions a priori, the necessary forms under which all thought
which relates in any way to these objects, must occur in the
understanding. Now, Transcendental Logic is the pure science
of these laws in their origin: it is an exposition of the source and
basis of Universal Logic.
* ^ ide Kant's "Logik," Einleitung v.
PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT. 515
Logic, whether general or transcendental, may be divided into
Analytic and Dialectic. Analytic unfolds the elements of the func-
tion of the understanding, and comprises the necessary laws of all
formal truth?truth being the accordance of our knowledge with
its objects. Still, Analytic only furnishes a negative test of truth,
a sine qua non: it furnishes no test of the matter of our know-
ledge. Grant that if there be a painting which could only have
been painted by one out of four given painters ; then Logic will
tell you that if it was not painted by A or B, it must have been
painted by C orD; but Logic will not tell you by which. By
Dialectic, Kant (agreeably, as we shall see in the sequel, to his
peculiar theory of understanding and reason) means the erroneous
application of the analytical or formal Logic to our knowledge,
by way of deciding on its objective truth?its application to
things which Logic can never teach. From this practice, all
sorts of delusions arose among the ancients and the scholastics.
Hence, according to Kant, Dialectic is a " logic of mere appear-
ance" (ars sopliistica disputatoria). In the Transcendental Logic,
Analytic inquires into the elements of a priori knowledge in the
understanding?the forms with which the understanding must
clothe all the intuitions of sense, and the principles without
which no object can be in any way thought. He here expressly
maintains that we can never, without illusion, apply these forms
beyond experience. Dialectic, transcendentally considered, is a
criticism of the dialectical illusion which arises from attempting
to use the analytical elements and principles beyond the objects
and limits of experience.
I. Transcendental Analytic; under which head are two divi-
sions?the Analytic of Conceptions, and the Analytic of Prin-
ciples. This Analytic proposes the analysis of all the a priori
knowledge which the understanding can give us. The discussion
concerns only those elements which are pure, not empirical ; and
which at the same time belong to understanding and thought, not
to sense and intuition. All must be strictly elementary, not de-
duced ; and the enumerations must be complete. One part of
the inquiry contains all the conceptions; the other, all the prin-
ciples of pure (or a priori) understanding.
1. The Analytic of Conceptions (Analytik der Begriffe). The,
analysis of conceptions is not resolving them (as we do complex
ideas) into their constituents, and so making them clear. This
Analytic relates directly to the faculty of understanding itself,
and its a priori use. We must trace the germs of all the pure-
conceptions as they lie in the understanding itself, until they are
elicited on occasion of experience. We must remember that the
understanding is not a faculty of intuition; according to Kant,
it presents no objects?only sense can do this: but its concep-
516 PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT.
tions are such that sense must present objects always according
to them. All that the understanding can do is to judge by means
of its conceptions. A judgment is a predication, real or virtual?
a saying that A is B, or is not B. All acts of the understanding
are reducible to judgments, so that it may be defined the "faculty
of judging." Conceptions, as predicates of possible judgments,
relate to some representation of an object as yet undetermined.
The conception of " body" in general, for instance, is undeter-
mined ; but it may be the predicate of a great variety of judg-
ments ; for this conception contains a great many representations
under it, the very thing which makes it a conception. In this
way it can relate to objects, as all conceptions must: thus we can
say, for instance, metal is body, or every metal is a body.
Now, says our philosopher, if we analyse what takes place in
the actual exercise of the Logical Function of the Understanding
in Judgments (Propositions), we shall immediately obtain all the
pure or a priori forms or conceptions of the understanding, just
as the inquiry into our sensuous faculty gave us the pure or a
priori forms or intuitions of sense?namely, space and time. We
have, therefore, first a Table of all the kinds of judgments. Here
all that relates to the matter or topic of the propositions is re-
jected (as all that related to the matter of the object of sensuous
intuition was rejected), and only the form is retained. It will be
seen that this Table takes for granted most of the distinctions of
propositions as found in the common formal Logic, and adds to
them some others of a psychological nature, merely, rather than
logical. Now, the functions of thought, in a judgment, says
Kant, can be brought under four heads, each containing three
momenta or divisions, as follows:?
TABLE OF JUDGMENTS.
1. Quantity.
Universal,
Particular,
Singular.
2. Quality.
Affirmative,
Negative,
Infinite.
3. Relation.
Categorical,
Hypothetical,
Disjunctive.
4. Modality.
Problematical,
Assertorical,
Apodictical.
This Table is given as including all possible'judgments. We
will explain it to the non-logical student, a little more particularly
than Kant has done. The quantity of a judgment consists in the
greater or less extension of the subject of the proposition?
namely, that of which something (the predicate) is said: thus, all
men are fallible, is universal; some men are poets, is particular ;
this man (Mr. A.) is a sculptor, is singular.
The quality of a judgment consists in the position of the sub-
ject with regard to the predicate?that is, whether it lies within
or without the sphere of the predicate: thus, each of the three
PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT. 517
above examples are affirmative; and no men are perfect, some
men are not wise, this man is not an artist, are all negative.
What Kant singularly terms the infinite (unendlich) judgment, is
not found in the common logic. There would be less of ambi-
guity in calling it " limitative and this would exactly agree, as
we shall see, with the category of "limitation," which is at the
foundation of it. This limitative judgment is one which is affir-
mative in form, though with a negative predicate. Psychologi-
cally there is negation, logically there is affirmation: thus, to use
Kant's own example, while " the soul is not mortal" is a negative
judgment, " the soul is non-mortal," though affirmative in form,
is really limitative, for it restricts the soul to the sphere of beings
that are not mortal.
The relation of a judgment consists in the way in which the
terms of it are connected with or subordinated to each other.
In the categorical judgment, the terms are connected merely as
subject and predicate, without any condition; as, A is or is not B.
In the hypothetical (conjunctive) judgment, the terms are con-
nected as antecedent and consequent; as, if A is B, C is D. In
the disjunctive judgment, the relation is that of the logical oppo-
sition of two or more propositions, so far as the spheres of the
propositions respectively exclude each other: but there is
also a " relation of community," so far as the propositions make
up, in common and altogether, the whole sphere of a cognition;
as, either A is B, or C is D, or E is F, etc. Kant's example is,
the world exists either through blind chance, or through internal
necessity, or through a cause external to itself. Here each propo-
sition contains a part of the sphere of our possible knowledge in
regard to the existence of the world; all of them together con-
tain the whole sphere.* To reject any one of these assumptions
is to adopt one of the rest; and to adopt any one is to reject the
others.
The modality of a judgment consists merely in the " value of
the copula." In problematical judgments, a predication is made
as merely possible ; as, the soul may be immortal: in assertorical,
the predication is made as actual; as, the soul is immortal: in
apodictical, it is made as necessary; as, the soul must be immortal.+
In an hypothetical (conjunctive) syllogism,?such as if A is B, 0
is D ; but A is B ; therefore 0 is D,?we have a combination of
all the three kinds of modality. The antecedent, A is B, is given
problematically in the first proposition (major); it is given asser-
torically in the second (minor); and in the third proposition,
which is the conclusion, C is D follows apodictically,?that is,
* "Kritik der rein. Ver., Elementarlehre," s. 74. Rosenkranz, 1838.
f "Logik von den Urtkeilen, ? 30.
518 PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT.
necessarily; for when once A is B is admitted, it follows that
C must be D.*
For the sake of the non-logical and non-metaphysical reader,
we volunteer two or three examples by way of further illustrating
Kant's whole doctrine of judgments: all men are mortal is uni-
versal in quantity, affirmative in quality, categorical in relation,
and assertorical in modality. If A is B, C is D, is (according to
what A stands for) individual, particular, or universal in quantity,
affirmative in quality, hypothetical (conjunctive) in relation, and
problematical in modality. No circle can have more than one
centre is universal, negative, categorical, and apodictical.
Such is our philosopher's account of the " logical function of
the understanding in judgments;" which, as it is connected with
the categories, and indeed with his whole theory of understanding,
we have dwelt on at some length. These categories (so called
from those of Aristotle) are, in fact, pure conceptions of the
understanding. They are involved in the above judgments, and
they render possible all our cognitions (knowledge) by synthesis,?
that is, by the mental process of joining different representations
in one notion. Thus, if I say, there is a tree, I have a notion
which is formed by the putting together into one of diverse repre-
sentations or qualities which go to make up the notion. The
synthesis here is empirical, for I only know the properties of a
"tree" by actual experience. The synthesis is pure when the
elements which it unites are given a priori; thus our notion of a
decade is formed by a pure synthesis of unities, and unity is one
of the pure or a priori conceptions of the understanding. Now,
says Kant, all that we can possibly say of any object that we can
know anything about, we must say in one or other of the ways
contained in the Table of Judgments; and from this Table we im-
mediately obtain all the possible categories of thought, or ways in
which objects can be viewed by the understanding, which by its
pure conceptions must give law to all our possible experience.
Hence the categories will exactly correspond with the judgments.
There can be no more and no fewer ways in which the understand-
ing can take cognizance of its objects. Kant adopts the term
"categories" from Aristotle, though with an entirely subjective
* This is a case of the modus ponens of the schoolmen (in which the antecedent
is admitted). The case of the modus tollens (in which the consequent is denied)
would, of course, do as well for the illustration.
The logical reader will notice that, according to a strictly formal common logic,
the distinction of modality, or the matter of propositions (which Kant has intro-
duced into his Transcendental doctrine,) is extralogical, notwithstanding that
Aristotle adopted it in his logical treatises, along with a vast mass of other extra-
logical things. In this he was followed by his successors. The modality of propo-
sitions was one of the most perplexing and useless disquisitions in which the
schoolmen engaged. They had a saying, De modali non gustabit asinus.
r
PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT. 519
meaning, his design being merely to exhibit the forms of the
understanding, or the ways in which objects must, if given at
all, be given to it. We request our readers carefully to compare
the following Table with that of Judgments, when the correlation
of the two will be at once evident. The conceptions which it
contains are indifferently termed " categories," or pure concep-
tions of the understanding (reine Verstcindesbegriffe).
TABLE OF THE CATEGORIES.
1. Of Quantity.
Unity,
Plurality,
Totality.
2. Of Quality.
Reality,
Negation,
Limitation.
3. Of Relation.
Of Subsistence and Inherence (substance and accident).
Of Causality and Dependence (cause and effect).
Of Community (reciprocity between agent and patient).
4. Op Modality.
Possibility?Impossibility.
Existence?N on-existence.
N ecessity?Contingence.
Our author gives the above as a complete list of all the pure
conceptions of the understanding. Only by means of these con-
ceptions can it think any object of sense. All the conceptions
arise, as we have seen, from the faculty of judgment, which Kant
identifies with the power of thought.* He compares his cate-
gories with those of Aristotle, whom he speaks of as having
sought for these fundamental conceptions without any guiding
principle. Kant, however, here evidently overlooks the fact that
Aristotle's categories were objective, his own subjective. Aris-
totle's enumeration is of objects and their qualities and relations
as viewed by the understanding; Kant's is an enumeration of the
subjective determinations of the understanding itself, in reference
to possible objects.
The classes of conceptions under quantity and quality are
termed mathematical; those under relation and modality, dyna-
mical, as having correlates. The former refer to objects of intui-
tion: empirical, as, for instance, tree; or pure, as space, time.
The latter refer to the existence of objects, either in reference to
each other or to the understanding. Further: in each triad, the
third category arises from a combination of the other two. Thus,
Totality is nothing more than plurality combined with unity; for
one whole is constituted of all its parts. Limitation is only
reality, joined with negation of the same. Thus, a finite
* Diese Eintheilung ist aus dem Vermogen zu urtheilen, welches eben so viel ist
als das Vermogen zu denken. " Kritik," s. 79. Rosenkranz, 1838.
520 PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT.
right line has a real length, beyond which there is a negation of
further length?that is, the line is limited. Again, in the general
category of Relation, we have the relation "which exists between
things or substances, and their attributes or accidents which
inhere in them; the relation between causes and their effects
which depend on them; the relation between things which reci-
procally act and re-act on each other. Now, here, again, the
third sub-category arises from the combination of the other two:
for Community or Reciprocity combines causality (as implying
the dependence of the effect) with the inherence of causality (as
an attribute) in the substance; in other words, Community is the
causality of anything in reciprocal determination or agency with
something else. Under the fourth head, of Modality, how do we,
by combining possibility and existence, obtain Necessity?* and
how do we (in the opposites) obtain Contingency from the com-
bination of impossibility and non-existence ? In order fully to
explain these points, we must more articulately compare the
Table of Categories with the previous Table of Judgments.
The correspondence between the judgments and the categories,
in the cases of Quantity and Quality, are sufficiently obvious.
In Quantity, it is evident enough that universal propositions
would not be possible without the previous (? priori) conception
of totality?all. So, 'particular propositions, in like manner,
imply the conception of a part, or a number less than the whole
?some. And singular propositions are founded on the pure
conception of unity?one, as this or that individual. We have
already remarked that totality is the unity of parts or particulars.
In Quality, affirmative propositions imply the reality or actuality
of the connexion between subject and predicate. Negative pro-
positions rest on the conception of negation. Limitative pro-
* Kant himself says: "Necessity is nothing but existence, which is given
through possibility itself" (Ed. JRosenkranz, supp. xii.). If this means that before
anything actually exists it must be possible, and that being thus first possible, and
then actually existing, its existence has now become a necessary fact, which can
never cease to be a fact, even though the existing object were afterwards annihi-
lated, we understand the meaning. But we are told by an able student of Kant,
that "his meaning is, that a necessary existence is an existence whose existence is
given in the very possibility of its existence." Some of our readers will be aware
of the Cartesian method of argument, borrowed from Anselm, and remodelled by
Leibnitz, as follows: '' God alone has this peculiar distinction (hoc privilegio
gaudet), that if he be possible, he necessarily exists; and since nothing stands in
the way of his possibility, this alone suffices for our knowing the existence of God
a priori"^ (Leibnitzii Opera, Dutens ii. 16, 17). Now, we are not here called on
to examine the validity of this argument for the Divine existence, but only to
remark that it is distinctly repudiated by Kant, who says: "It is a contradic-
tion to introduce under whatever term disguised?into the conception of a thing
which you are to think of solely as to its possibility, the conception of its existence"
(Ed. liosenh'anz, 465). If, therefore, Kant means to illustrate the category of
Modality by this example, he is using for this purpose a theory which he himself
rejected.
PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT. 521
positions have at their basis the conception of limitation. We
have before seen that reality and negation combined amount to
limitation.
In the Category of Belation, we obviously see the accordance
of the two first sub-categories with the corresponding logical
function of judgment. The categorical proposition pronounces
that some attribute (accidens) named in the predicate inheres in
(belongs to) the subject?as snow is white, man is an animal;
for though, in the common logic, such propositions (except
singular ones) are regarded as expressing classes of things, still
the predicate (" animal," for instance) admits of being viewed as
expressing a property?animality. In the hypothetical (con-
junctive) proposition, we find the principles of causality and
dependence, or cause and effect; for the existence of the con-
sequent depends on that of the antecedent?as, if A is B, C is D.
The disjunctive proposition makes its subordinate parts mutually
dependent on each other, throughout: either A is B, or C is D,
or E is F, etc., means that the whole complex proposition here
given is divided into parts which mutually exclude each other,
one position only being admitted, whichever it may be. One
part is not contained in another, but they are all thought co-
ordinately and separately, and determine each other mutually.
Hence the basis of the disjunctive judgment is the conception of
the reciprocity of certain agencies or co-ordinate positions. We
have before shown how Kant makes the sub-category of reciprocity
or community arise out of those containing the correlates inhe-
rence and subsistence, and causality and dependence.
Under the general head of Modality, we must premise that our
author's problematical judgment is not peculiar: it is identical
with the hypothetical (conjunctive) or the disjunctive judgment,
as the case may be. His assertorical judgment is, in fact, cate-
gorical. His apodictical judgment is really the same, but he
defines it as expressing logical necessity. Indeed these three
judgments of modality are, as we have before remarked, strictly
extralogical. The conception of possibility, of existence, and of
necessity, are evidently essential, respectively, to each of these
three modal judgments. It is not difficult (though Kant has
nowhere logically exemplified it) to see how, if we keep close to
the Table of modal judgments, we may get necessity out of pos-
sibility and existence combined. Thus, the following argument is
correct; though the " necessity of the conclusion is only the same
as that of any other syllogism : If A is B, C is D ; A is B; there-
fore 0 is D. Here the possibility of C being D, combined with
the assertion that A is B, gives the necessary conclusion that C
is D, which follows apodictically from the premises in the ordinary
way.
522 PSYCHOLOGY OF KANT.
But bow shall we obtain the opposite of necessity?namely,
contingency?from impossibility and non-existence combined ?
We see no way at all (and certainly Kant has indicated none) in
which the conception of contingency, which is closely allied to
that of possibility?the possibility of an event really happening?
can arise out of the union of the conceptions of impossibility and
non-existence: German philosophy had not, up to the time of
Kant, attained to a dialectic quite so subtile and Hegelian as
thus to transmute nothings into something. Our author himself
has not even intimated that the category of modality was to be
dealt with in the way of syllogism, in order to illustrate the
general principle that each third sub-category arises from the
combination of the other two ; yet it is in this way only, so far as
we see, that the third sub-category can be obtained, at least in
the case of the second members, in the Table of Modality. We
offer, therefore, the following argument, which is founded on the
laws of hypothetical (conjunctive) propositions: If A is B, C
cannot be I) (impossibility); A is not B (non-existence), there-
fore C may or may not be D (contingency); in this way, con-
tingency results, in the conclusion?if conclusion it may by
courtesy be called, where formally there is none?and this result
arises from the combination of the premises.*
We must defer, for the present, Kant's further remarkable
developments of his Categories, and any criticisms we may have
to offer on them, and on his doctrine of the understanding in
general.
* The reader who is ever so slightly imbued with logic, hardly needs to be
reminded, that, in conjunctives, if the antecedent be granted, the consequent is
inferred (modus ponens); and if the consequent be denied, which is the same thing
as granting its contradictory, the contradictory of the antecedent is inferred
(modus tollens): but the affirmation of the consequent, or the denial of the ante-
cedent, authorizes us to infer neither of the alternatives. For instance?to give a
familiar illustration, which will speak for itself : from saying of a man: if he has
a fever, he is ill; but he is ill; we cannot infer that he has a fever, for he may be
ill from some other disorder. And from saying, if he has a fever, he is ill; but he
has not a fever; we cannot infer that he is not ill, for the same reason. In the
former case, he may have a fever or not, for anything that the premises contain ;
in the latter, he may be ill or not?all is left in uncertainty and contingence. The
latter example corresponds with the one in the text.
