i.
567
Art. III.-
ON THE PSYCHOLOGICAL BASIS OF THE
LANGUAGE OF ORATORS, POETS, AND PHILO-
SOPHERS.
BY A. F. MAYO, ESQ., BAEKISTEK-AT-LAW.
It is my object in this paper to suggest some distinction as to
the varying necessities under which the orator, the poet, and the
philosopher lie in regard to the possession of an abundant voca-
bulary. Some light may thence be thrown upon the necessities
of the ordinary intercourse of mankind; for no man can talk
with his neighbour without evincing the presence of mental in-
gredients, which in their highest energy become poetry, oratory,
or philosophy.
The orator is frequently in want of language under the strin-
gency of that very emotion which he must needs yield to if he is
to animate his audience with kindred fire. The danger to which
he is exposed is that, if he may not possess such a sufficient
repertory of language out of which he may select the words
which may paint the passing shade of intensified thought?
what happens ??his inspiration may be suddenly chilled in
consequence of his intellect being turned into a channel
divergent from the main stream of his discourse. He has to let
down his plummet into the depths of the ocean of language and
laboriously to examine its contents. No longer like a ship career-
ing over the surface, the orator is like the diver, subjected to the
heaviest pressure of the element which he fain would master.
How often those sympathies are chilled which, if they were rightly
seconded by language, would carry the orator to the highest
summit of success; unable at the lucky instant to marry his
thought to burning words, what liappeus to him ? He falls into
some philosophic generality, from the cold trammels of which he
is himself unable to escape; and all this from his impotence to
find the right word at the right moment.
The consequence is that men of high philosophic power require,
if they are to become orators, a copious vocabulary and a ready
memory to evoke it, though the want of both is sometimes com-
pensated for in the persuasiveness of an electric sympathy irra-
diating the most distant portions of the argument. Let me
explain this more fully.
An orator who makes use of a general term because he is un-
able to find a more specific one, becomes himself entangled in
that sense of the term which has least to do with the subject in
hand, very much as the owner of a vast estate frequently envies
the petty freeholder who owns the outlying angle which is wedged
568 ON THE PSYCHOLOGICAL BASIS OF
into a corner of it. In the same way, a general term ever invites
a philosophic mind to explore the remotest boundaries of its
meaning. But this meaning is often the very one which has
least to do with the subject in hand ; and which is therefore also
the feeblest in exciting the sympathies either of the orator or his
audience. And thus it happens that the electric bond of sym-
pathy which must have otherwise been indefinitely intensified
becomes suddenly dissolved. The steed no longer feels the magic
touch of a confident and easy sway; that sway has now become
vacillating, uncertain, infirm.
Thus the orator has lost the command over his audience
regarded as men of like passions with himself; and he can only
now address their intellect, for this is the only principle which
remains at work within himself. Nature ever throws her strength
to the support of the weakest part; and for the moment, the
Aveakest part of the speaker is his vocabulary. During the
remainder of his speech, the speaker may still be the dialectician,
and even the rhetorician; but he can become an orator again
only by igniting his emotiveness from fuel derived from the
central storehouse of inflammable associations. And as the
captain of a vessel can by the process of tacking avail himself
of the aid of nearly every wind that blows; so also the practised
speaker can often from sources deep-laid within his own breast,
yet most invisible to his audience, replenish the flame of his
oppressed oratory.
Yet in this way, to regain a mastery over his audience, the
orator must have a mastery over himself. If he cannot suborn
it to his purpose of guiding the minds of his audience, the
speaker must learn how decently to stifle the philosophic abstrac-
tion which perplexes him, he must quell the ambition that seeks
in the forum the conquests of the study. But to do this well
requires great skill, as much, in fact, as that which is required
of a mason to conceal the junctures of his slab. A quick transi-
tion unexplained by point or contrast is as injurious to the orator
as an obscure or indeterminate idea.
An orator, then, is bound to be acquainted with and thus also
to predict the dip, direction, and the sensitiveness of his own
intellectual compass; and he must be acquainted with the causes
which are likely to deflect it. Thus he will learn in what way,
when involved with an unmanageable idea, he may be able to
expel it, if not indeed by main force, and the entrance by which
it came, at any rate by some other; an orator's mind should in
truth be like a theatre, facile in routes of departure as well as of
access. Thus, if any idea cannot be suitably entertained, it
should have an opportunity for departure, and this without
decomposing the others.
THE LANGUAGE OF ORATORS, ETC. 569
A great speech may be likened to a game of chess ; the open-
ing of the game affords us the choice of many well-trod paths
the immediate consequences of each of which it is not difficult to
predict; it is towards the close that the energetic individuality of
a great player is called forth.
So, in the commencement of a mountain ascent, the road is
fair and open. The routes, whether convergent or divergent, have
been scanned beforehand. The foundations of the mountain are
comparatively of easy conquest. So, too, to a practical orator,
the exordium is a work of art rather than inspiration. It is in the
sudden emergencies provoked by the unseen depths of the emo-
tions and thoughts of his audience that his proper prowess is
evoked. As the regions of snow and ice are approached, no track
will save the traveller from the necessity of labour; though even
then superior knowledge will enable him easily to cross ravines
where former travellers have perished. And so it is at the climax
of the speech, as in scaling the battlements about the mountain-
top, that man's energies are strung up to the highest, or, failing
in that, are relaxed into despair.
The same general considerations also apply to a poet, but with
a difference.
The danger of the orator is, as I have shown, of breaking down,
if the harmony between his emotive and logical powers is dis-
turbed. The search for language induces an anxious interroga-
tion of thought which mars the effect of his emotions. The dis-
cursive power of the orator varies with the ease and mastery with
which he can control his ideas; and I assume that it is in this
discursive power alone that the orator has any confidence of being
able duly to sustain his strain. On the other hand, the rapidity
and harmony of the inventions of the poet depend mainly on the
brightness of his associations, which are themselves connected
with emotive agencies.
Again, while the loftiest flights of oratory are winged by the
emotions, the greatest genius in poetry which the world has seen
(I mean of course Shakspeare), sought its most fitting throne in
the harmony of Nature herself; and this is ever the appanage of
the intellect proper in its function of the imagination.
The associations are ever-present aids to the poet; and far
from involving toil in exciting them, require that natural condi-
tion of the mind in which the will is passive. Now, the
poet seeking no end but inspiration itself, can follow the asso-
ciation where the orator dare not do so, unless he can make them
intellectually serve his end; and the consequence of a failure
in this I have shown.
There is another reason why an even tenor is more easily
.attained by the poet than the orator; it is this?that the men-
570 ON THE PSYCHOLOGICAL BASIS OF
tal conditions required of the poet lie more in one plane than
those required of the orator. For instance, in a poem the tone
is either intellectual or emotive, and no sudden emergencies
necessitate the rapid changes which are obligatory upon the
orator.
Add to this, that the poet can take his own time and recast his
piece at leisure, opportunities whicli'are denied to the orator under
the stringency of sudden occasion. Thus the intellectual action of
the poet, however intense it may he, requires less versatility in
its management than is the case with the orator. The ideas
of the poet, possessing a more natural flow of their own, the flow
of the language corresponds in unity of tone and character ; ami
the mind, in seeking a right expression, is notftrammelled by that
constant attention to the ideas themselves which the variety of
their gesture renders incumbent on the orator.
As a set-off, however, to the poet's freedom from sudden occa-
sions demanding a large and flexible vocabulary, there is in the
superior intellectual possession which the ideas of the poet assert
over his mind, a compensating necessity for a wealth of language.
Sometimes, too, the absence of any immediate necessity to clothe
those ideas which are silently matured in retirement, in the garb
of language, may surprise the poet with an inability to convert
his ideas into that current coin whereby alone they can affect
the world; and this, too, at the very moment when they may
vanish altogether unless so converted. And thus the poet may
be in the plight of a miser who has been so intent upon the idea
of his treasure itself, that he has mislaid the key of the very
cabinet which contains it.
There are some peculiar considerations affecting philosopliv,
metaphysics, and deep speculation in general, in regard to their
demands for richness in the vocabulary of language.
Let us see how the metaphysician stands in this respect as
compared with the orator and the poet taken together.
A poet and an orator who are, both of them, intellectually defi-
cient?the one feeble in his imaginative?the other feeble in his
dialectic powers, can each of them succeed better with a given
vocabulary than a strong poet or a strong orator, at least in the
first instance. For long use and training of their respective en-
dowments will at last give the strong poet and the orator know-
ledge of their own strength, and they also will obtain the power
of making their intellectual energy tell in the production of
clearness as much as of profundity of conception, thus enabling
them respectively to convert what was at first only a command
over processes of thought, into a command over the resources of
language; just as the increasing skill of the hardy workman, who
became such from mere strength of arm, will at last engage him
i
THE LANGUAGE OF ORATORS, ETC. o7l
in delicate manipulations, to whieli in the first instance he may
have been incompetent from deficiency in a sense of touch.
At first, however, orators and poets of genius are apt to evince
rather extravagance or faintness, under stress of poverty, as re-
gards the resources of language; and thus with a given stock of
the latter, the halt and the lame often succeed where the other-
wise vigorous and athletic fail. The man who is not overwhelmed
by the immensity of his ideas or his emotions can afford to
wait for the proper term with which to describe them. He need
not fear that, while he is seeking how to attire them in language,
others may possess and usurp their hold upon his attention.
On the contrary, ideas and emotions which are grand or multi-
tudinous, where they cannot find a vent for escape through the
portals of language, are too apt to trip up their owners altogether
under that confusion of thought which is the legitimate offspring
of confusion of terms.
That currency and abundance in the coin of language so
necessary for the evolution of poetry and oratory is not required
of the metaphysician, or of all those in whose writings, be they
historians, biographers, or what not, abstract and philosophic
views of life prevail over that which is concrete and ornate.
The metaphysician has, in proportion to his strength, a happy
opportunity of waiting for the full development of his ideas before
lie clothes them in language; for, regarding but few objects
comparatively at the moment, lie can safely arrest the vehicle of
thought. Without this power of arrestation language could not
be held in suspense; as it is, he coolly waits till he has found
the right word for his purpose.
The ideas of the poet and the orator are often as quick and
transient as the " Gay motes which people the sunbeam?as rich
bedecked as the woof of Iris." But the results of the philo-
sopher, slow indeed in their incubation, are not evanescent, and,
like the cub of an elephant, they are long-lived also.
The case of the poet and the orator may be likened to that of
an army which, if it is to move quickly, must have large at-
tendant resources of baggage, animals, and vehicles. Unless,
either naturally or artificially, the poet and the orator possess a
large fund of language, they are likely to be starved and paralysed
by the way.
Thus both the poet and orator, with a view of insuring that
rapid transit of the associations which are usually required to
stir up their own emotions, are obliged to throw away correct-
ness of phraseology as an encumbrance, or, retaining the latter
advantage, to make a sacrifice of the former principle.
Such sacrifices are much more rarely required of the philoso-
pher. The comparative paucity of the ideas excited at any one
NO. XII.?NEW SERIES. P P
I
-
572 ON THE PSYCHOLOGICAL BASIS OF
time by liis studies, and tlieir separate clearness and vividity, are-
such as to insure their depth and permanence; and these quali-
ties confer upon him an immunity from anxiety lest his ideas
should glide away from the disc of thought before they have been
photographed in language.
For myself I believe that no clear and definite idea need ever
be lost to the world for the want of a due vehicle of expression;
provided only that, whenever his resources of terminology fail the
thinker, he will deign to express his meaning by a definition.
The essence of the idea conveyed by this definition the speaker
may gather up into a new term if required. Thus, a man who has
lost his hat may throw his cloak over his head. This cloak
(answering to the definition) may suggest some covering more
suited to the climate than even his hat. New terms are thus
the expression of new wants, or sometimes of old wants, for which
the acquired resources of language are to the particular thinker
unavailable.
It would appear, therefore, that the language required by phi-
losophy consists of terms of art, and definitive expressions, rather
than of the common words which are so valuable in illustration.
These latter words form a capital without some power of drawing
upon which no poet or orator can start.
In the case of the philosopher there are certain words which
are the keystone of the solid bridge with which he connects
distant provinces of thought. The airy structures of oratory
and poetry require, indeed, more various and flexible materials.
But none are of such weight, or require such accurary of line,
measurement, and equipoise as those which, few in number, are
yet indispensable to the philosopher.
Now it is clear that the emotive region in which, more or less,
all poets and orators move must be sustained at a certain degree
of tension; that is, if their own sympathies and, by contagion,
those of their audience are to be duly excited.
In the degree, then, in which this tension is continuous and
can be reckoned on, so long does it form a sort of atmosphere
exercising a constant pressure upon their intellectual energies;
and thus, whatever terms they use, their ideas, by the pressure of
emotive associations, are constantly moulded into a proper shape
and cohesion ; and in this way they harmoniously blend.
In philosophy, however, there is no extrinsic force thus binding
up the parts ot a whole. Ilere the cohesion of the ideas must
depend on their proper affinities; and these affinities will not tell
unless language, which is the exterior covering of the ideas, act
as a conductor to such affinities; just as in chemistry bodies
possessing the strongest tendency to combination may be kept
at a distance by a non-conducting medium.
L
THE LANGUAGE OF ORATORS, ETC. 573
On these general principles it is that, while wealth of language
is peculiarly the food of the poet and the orator, appropriateness
of language is the very life-blood of the philosopher, and each
term in a definition which he uses is a counter, which ought to
denote a given quantity and quality of meaning.
As regards the capital of language with which he is required
to commence, the philosopher clearly has this advantage over the
poet and the orator,?that, whereas the two latter require the
abundant use of concrete terms, to separate which into their ele-
ments would deprive their conceptions of all their life, force, relief
and symmetry, the philosopher can dispense with them. For the
demands of the latter are satisfied, if he can instil into the reader
a clear comprelieusion of his meaning by a definition itself con-
sisting of a multitude of words; and this is a sort of set-off
against his need of a large store of words of art.
On the contrary, were an artist to endeavour to resolve his com-
pound ideas into their elements, the central fire of inspiration
which united them would become evanescent,?and that which he
sought to adorn would seem a multitude of dead atoms and not a
glorious compound bound together by a tie which should not be
unloosed,?with the philosopher things are different. However
deficient in elegance a definition may be, the philosopher, being
careless of the emotive sympathies if he can secure the intellect of
his reader, can achieve his end by clearness of language alone.
This, then, is my conclusion, that, subject to the necessity of
using in philosophy correct tei-ms of art, a man of high capacity
may often achieve large results by the application of but a small
vocabulary; that is, if he possesses a delicate discrimination of
shades of meaning, and a thorough determination, in the use of
terms, not to allow the meaning of one term to overlap the
other. And though in this respect he may be in some degree at
the mercy of the delinquents of former ages, who have stamped
such errors with currency, he may neutralize their ill results with
proper provisoes and exceptions, and where necessary by new
terms.
It must, however, be remembered, that the fusion into the
popular mind, and the verification thereby of the speculation of
great thinkers, demand a copious vocabulary. For upon the un-
educated terms of art fall with an oppressive weight; at the same
time their own experiences are denoted by language which pure
abstract thinkers regard as familiar and vulgar; and thus great
thinkers often enter the market to purchase popularity with their
thousand-pound bank-notes, while the common traffickers know no
currency except in pence and silver. Hence, then, to be popular,
the greatest thinkers must ever take account of the lowest cur-
rency by which the thoughts of men are represented; otherwise
p p 2
574 ON THE LANGUAGE OF ORATORS, ETC.
they run the risk of starving in the midst of fancied wealth, for
the want of a medium of exchange.
Yet to a weak mind, indeed, dealing with a vast subject
this wealth of words may prove a source of confusion. Just
as one of the Argonauts would find himself more at home in
navigating a Chinese junk than a full-rigged man-of-war, or
the " Great Eastern." Yet a man of inferior calibre, when con-
fining himself more prudently to the examination of single ques-
tions, may derive an insight into his subject by a knowledge of
all the terms with which it has been canvassed. An ancient Argo-
naut would navigate a pinnace more easily than the " Great
Eastern." But if patient of instruction, he would learn more from
the structure of the " Great Eastern" than from that of the
pinnace.
Dr. Roget, in the masterly introduction to the invaluable work,
" Thesaurus of English Words and Phrases," has shown us how
great is the suggestiveness of a large vocabulary by the mere juxta-
position of words of various shades and various meanings, and
even how a mere catalogue of names may often suggest relations
and interdependencies between ideas; and often to that central
idea round which they latently revolve.
Wealth of language, then, like all other wealth rightly wielded,
rightly distributed can never do harm; only let each man take a
gauge of his own capacity. In so doing he will not attempt to
grasp at a larger mass of ideas (of which words are the counters)
than his faculties warrant. So will he be able to carry his bur-
den with ease, without confusion, and without losing integral
portions of it.
To minds such as Plato's, Bacon's, or Shakspeare's, language
must ever halt behind the majestic tread of their genius. Such
indeed was the affluence of Shakspeare's thoughts, that, in
order to give a vent to them, he had to ransack the English
language to its extremest verge, rejoicing in those sharply cut
vernacular terms and idioms upon which the stamp of the great
Anglo-Saxon intellect is so clearly impressed; in expressions
which, though the prejudices of such men as even Johnson and
Voltaire have branded them as vulgar, are alive with the fire of
nature, and which under the hand of such a master are landmarks
by which we may estimate the almost boundless extent of the in-
comparable experience of the human mind. Just as the force of
the Atlantic is more conspicuous as its waves rush into the deep
recesses of the sliore-hid inlets on the Cornish coast, than wrlien
the expanse of the ocean itself is gazed upon. With Shakspeare
language is both the sheatli in which the sword of thought is hid
and the hilt with which it is grasped. Both hilt and scabbard
are mean compared with the weapon which they subserve.
ON A PARTICULAR CLASS OF DREAMS INDUCED BY FOOD. 575
For no capital, no stock of that current coin of language which
more than serves the wants of common men could suffice the
needs of Shakspeare's traffic with the commodities of thought.
A mind so vast had to institute a system of credits and exchanges
of less tangible material to supply its daring purposes. Such
was the pressure of his thoughts upon his language, that they
seem to exercise upon it a sort of domination testified by the
homage paid by mankind to the new force and virtues impressed
on ancient idioms and words.
So vigorous was this silent compression of language to his
will, that mankind gives an intuitive assent to his innovations.
Here is the triumph of thought over language, of the soul over
its embodiment; here is the outbreak of nature overcoming con-
vention. Language, in fine, may stint the greatest minds by its
deficiency, yet it cannot oppress them by its redundancy; while
to those of humbler lot, rightly used, it is the fruitful mother of
its offspring?Thought.
\/
