On Dipsomania
=============

Aet. VII.?

:Author:  David Skae, M.D., F.E.C.S.,

Physician to the Hoyal Edinburgh Asylum fov the Insayie.*
Read at the Medico-Chirurgical Society, January 20th, 1858.
When Dr Peddie read liis very interesting and valuable paper on
this subject to the Society, at its last meeting, I intended to have
made some observations; but the lateness of the hour when the
paper was concluded and my seniors in the profession had spoken,
and the fear of hazarding rashly, in an unpremeditated and hurried
speech, opinions upon a subject of such difficulty and delicacy,
determined me to forbear, and to offer these opinions to the
Society in the form of a written communication. This com-
munication I beg you will consider not as a reply to or a criticism
on that of Dr Peddie, but as a sequel to his paper,?as a con-
tribution to the solution of the difficulties of dealing with this
disease, such as may occur to one occupying my point of view,
that of the superintendent of a large asylum, where I have had
daily practical experience with all the varieties of the disease, and
all the difficulties of treating it, for a period of nearly twelve
years.

It appears to me that very much of the difficulty of dealing
with the question of the isolation of the insane drinker from
society disappears, when we have a clear and precise idea of the
distinction between the ordinary drunkard and the insane drunkard
?between the habit and the disease. To have this, and to esti-
mate properly the mode of treatment and the legality of restraint
or isolation, we must be familiar with the differences we meet
with in the habits of sane drunkards, and the various features
which distinguish the numerous groups or varieties of those who
drink because they cannot help it,?from an incontrollable and
morbid appetite.

At the risk of repeating some of the valuable descriptions given
by Dr Peddie, I must briefly point out a few of the distinctions
referred to, in order to clear the way for the remarks which I
have to offer on the treatment of this disease.

A man is a drunkard who gets drunk at the festive board
who seeks occasions for getting conveniently drunk without in-
terfering with his oidmaiy occupations?who takes a few days'
drinking at a time, when he has plenty of money, and returns to
his duties and employment when he has finished his superfluous
cash and his " ramble, or " spree," as it is called among the
* ^r' ?!rae /iaS to transfer to our pages bis valuable paper
from tbe Marcb number of tbe " Edinburgh Medical Journal."
350 0N dipsomania.

humbler classes in Scotland. Some men, on the other hand, get
systematically and regularly drunk every day after dinner, some
every night before going to bed, and -will perform their daily
duties with propriety and efficiency. There is a large class who
drink continuously, and consume large quantities of stimulants,
and seem to have a constant craving for them, which they satisfy
by constant potations; yet they do not come under the deno-
mination of insane drinkers; they exercise a certain amount of
self-control, a sufficient amount of restraint upon their appetites
not to allow the quantity which they drink to affect their aptitude
for business, or driving a good bargain. These are the decorous
drunkards of society, and some of them are perhaps the hardest
drinkers of any.

The effects of intoxicating drinks vary very much, as is well
known, in different individuals, according to the temperament or
some peculiarity in the constitution. Some men get hilarious,
and others stupid; some become amorous, and others maudlin in
their cups; and some, again, become pugnacious, and even dan-
gerous. It has been often observed, that men who have suffered
from severe blows or injuries of the head become very violent,
and even maniacal, when intoxicated. Such persons as these
frequently come under the notice of the legal authorities, for acts
of violence committed while intoxicated. But in these cases, if
the individual has voluntarily become intoxicated, knowing that
in that state he is liable to be dangerous, he is justly held amen-
able to punishment for acts of violence committed when drunk.
The responsibility of a person of this kind for any of the con-
sequences of his getting drunk, knowing what may ensue, has
been compared to that of a person firing a gun out of a window
into a crowded street, who would unquestionably be punished for
the effects which resulted from his folly.

It would be a tedious task to describe all the different effects
and kinds of drunkenness. It may suffice to say, that in all cases
of mere drunkenness, the characteristic feature, as distinguishing
them from insane drinking, is the preservation of the power of
self-control. In the mere drunkard, there is a method in his
madness ; it is a systematized or regulated, or at least a voluntary
habit. A morbid craving may be, and is generated, after drunken-
ness becomes a habit; but it is regulated, as to the time, and
mode, and extent, and frequency of gratifying it, by certain con-
siderations,?such as a regard to outward decency, to the duties
of life, or to the calls of business. And it continues to be so
regulated, perhaps by a very low standard, and by one which is
gradually made lower and lower; but still the habit is regulated
and controlled as long as the person is merely a drunkard, and
until the habit degenerates into a disease.

The principal, the diagnostic feature of this disease?that of
insane drinking, dipsomania, or oinomania is, on the other
hand, the absence or loss of the power of self-control or self-
regulation. Persons affected with this form of moral insanity do
not drink from the pleasure which the social board affords, but,
on the contrary, will not unfrequently preserve a certain amount
of decorum while in company. Neither do they drink for the
pleasure which the wine gives them, they will drink any kind of
intoxicating stuff. Nor do they drink at a convenient time and
place, and only occasionally; they drink as often as they can,
and whenever they can, and as much as they can ; their craving
for stimulants is incessant and incontrollable; no considerations
of self-respect, no regard to public opinion, or common decency,
or domestic ties, or religion, or the certainty of impending ruin,
degradation, or even the fear of death, can prevent their drinking
till they can drink no longer. Such persons will often deplore
their fatality, their inability to control their desires, and will say,
with tears in their eyes, as some have done, that if hell were
yawning at one side of them, and a bottle of brandy standing at
the other, they would drink, although the next moment they were
to be thrown into the bottomless abyss. In fine, such persons
drink because they cannot help it; and if they really cannot help
it, they must be regarded as no longer responsible agents?as
therefore insane, and proper objects for being restrained and pro-
tected against themselves.

The loss of self-control is, indeed, the most essential condition
of almost all cases of insanity. The most constant symptoms of
insanity are those referable to altered affections, perverted desires,,
and morbid propensities. Delusions, so much dwelt upon by
some writers, particularly among legal authorities, as essential to-
insanity, are but its accidental concomitants, like hallucinations
of the senses. Every form of madness, from acute mania down
to dementia, may be met with where there are no delusions. In
mania, there may be a morbid exaltation of all the emotions and
passions, over which self-control is entirely lost, and the indivi-
dual riots in unrestrained laughter, singing, anger, destructivenes&v
and violence. The loss of control may extend to the thoughts
and ideas, which succeed each other with extraordinary rapidity,
and give rise to incessant talking and incoherence. In partial
insanity, one particular emotion or desire may be morbidly ex-
cited, and we may find a deep melancholy and depression without
any delusion a hopeless but abstract gloom, leading, by the total
overthrow of the power of self-control, to an act of suicide. There
may be, as has been fully established by numerous well-authenti-
cated cases, a morbid impulse to destroy life, without any delusion ;
an impulse over which the affected person loses all control, and
under which he commits some homicidal act. The morbid ex-
citement of the sexual appetite only becomes insanity when the
person loses self-control, and the victim of satyriasis or nympho-
mania outrages all considerations not alone of morality, but of
ordinary decency and the common instincts of humanity.
It is, in fact, the loss of control over morbidly excited pas-
sions, whether of an exalted or depressing kind, that constitutes
insanity, and distinguishes it from ordinary excitement or depres-
sion. So it is with insane drinking; it is the loss of control
over the morbid appetite that distinguishes it from ordinary
drunkenness, and constitutes it a form of moral insanity.

I prefer the term moral insanity, in describing this disease, to
the terms oinomania or dipsomania, for three reasons: First,
because neither of these names conveys a correct idea of the
disease, which is not an insane thirst, nor a thirst for ivine only,
but may consist in a morbid craving for stimulants or narcotics
of any kind ; Secondly, because it is under the denomination of
moral insanity that this disease is recognised by the Commis-
sioners in Lunacy for England ; and, Thirdly, for the most im-
portant reason of any?namely, that the craving for stimulants
is generally only one of many symptoms of moral perversion
which characterize the disease, and which it is of great importance
to recognise, as they render the duties of the medical attendant
comparatively easy, when they are met with in any particular case.
Of these other symptoms of moral perversion, the most com-
mon is the habit of lying. In almost all cases of this variety of
moral insanity, there is a total disregard for truth. Such persons
are singularly mendacious. They will resort to every possible
device to procure stimulants, to excuse their conduct, to deceive
their friends and medical attendant, and will display an ingenuity
and fertility in deceit which is truly marvellous. They will
become faint, or be in agony with toothache, or tic, or cramp in
the stomach, or colic, or dysmenonhcea, or they will take
diarrhoea or haemorrhage, and be on the verge of dissolution,
unless brandy, wine, or opium is administered. They will pawn
every available article of dress, or furniture, or jewellery. They
will borrow from servants or cabmen. They will get whisky
smuggled home with their clothes from the tailor or the laundress.
They will evade the most vigilant surveillance, and tell the most
deliberate falsehoods in their attempts to deceive, solemnly ap-
pealing to God for their truth. When shut off from the ordinary
sources of stimulation, they will sometimes resort to almost any-
thing in order to relieve their craving. I have known a young
and delicate lady, after being prevented getting wine or spirits,
and deprived of red lavender, lavender water, and eau de Cologne,
take creosote, vinegar, vitriol, and tobacco.

Allied to this disregard of truth is the total denial, often in-
sisted upon by such persons, of their habit of over-indulgence.
They will very frequently disavow most solemnly having ever
exceeded the bounds of strict temperance in their use of
stimulants ; and, if admitting at all that they ever have been the
worse for drink, they will blame some other person or circum-
stance as the cause of it. The wife will blame the husband;
the husband, the accident of meeting on one particular occasion
some one, or being engaged in some circumstances which rendered
it unavoidable. And in this way, one or two undeniable overt
acts of intemperance are conceded, when it cannot be avoided,
while the habit or the loss of self-control is generally indignantly
denied, except at moments of remorse.

Accompanying this disregard of truth, there are often other
indications of moral perversion in the insane drunkard, such as
extreme licentiousness, or a propensity to theft, or a delight in
fomenting quarrels and creating mischief by leading other parties
into trouble.

Again, this disease is very frequently met with in persons
presenting certain mental peculiarities which are natural to them
?that is, congenital. It is by no means uncommon to find it
develop itself in youth who have always been regarded as having
a want about them, to use a vernacular phrase. They have never
made progress in their education like others of their age?have
never, perhaps, been able to learn to spell, and so forth ; and,
although illiterate and ignorant when they come to manhood, are
often very vain, and at the same time credulous and silly. Or,
again, they have been characterized, even from childhood, by
certain perversities of disposition, such as a delight in cruelty
to animals, disregard of personal appearance, love of solitary and
gratuitous destructiveness, extreme obstinacy and selfishness, or a
violent and mutinous temper upon slight occasions.

Lastly, the disease is very frequently hereditary ; and it will be
found, on inquiry, that a grandfather, or father, or mother, or one
or more brothers, have died of delirium tremens, or have other-
wise shown the fatal propensity. The constancy with which the
hereditary predisposition to this disease is transmitted is most
remarkable, and, in a vast majority of cases, can be traced either
through the maternal or paternal side of the family.

To illustrate the truth of these remarks, I have analysed the
record of feO of the cases of this form of moral insanity which I
have had under my care, of which 20 were females and 66 males.
I find, as the result of these comparisons, that of the 20 females
one-half presented natural peculiarities in their mental constitu-
tion, being either of weak minds, of very violent and incon-
trollable passions, or subject to hysterical attacks of great
violence, combined in some instances with great moral depravity.
Of the males, 30, or nearly one-half, were naturally of weak
mind, or presented some mental peculiarity, such as silly vanity,
general depravity of disposition, and, in some cases, considerable
talent, but combined with eccentricity of some marked peculiarity.
In both sexes, the disregard of truth was a common feature in
most cases.

In regard to hereditary predisposition, it is difficult generally
to trace this in a public hospital, partly because many cases
come in without any information regarding them at all, and
partly because the friends, when they have friends, are gene-
rally very solicitous to deny or conceal the existence of a
hereditary taint in the family, and will not unfrequently posi-
tively deny that any other member of the family is insane,
while, perhaps, at the time there may be a mother in one asylum
and a sister in another. Notwithstanding these difficulties, I
find the hereditary predisposition distinctly traced in 32 cases
out of the 8G.

Of the females, this hereditary taint was found to exist in 10
out of 20. One had a brother insane ; one a mother half-witted;
one had two cousins who died of intemperance ; another had a
father and mother who were both intemperate; another had a
father, and another a father and brother, who were hard drinkers;
three had mothers who died from the effects of intemperance ;
one had two sisters, both prostitutes and drunkards, one of
whom committed suicide ; and another had a brother, father, and
mother all intemperate, and the hitter of whom committed suicide.
Of the males, two had brothers affected with the same disease
in the asylum, and three brothers who had the same disease, but
were not sent to any asylum; one had repeatedly attempted
suicide, and inherited, with his whole family, a loathing of life,
which at times affected all the members of his family. Four
had brothers who suffered from other forms of insanity; two
had each two brothers insane; three had insane sisters; two
had drunken fathers; one a drunken father and brother, and
one a father and graudmother drunkards ; and of several others
it was admitted that insanity was in the family, although the
relationship of the members affected was not ascertained.
Before discussing the question of treatment, and isolation in
an asylum or special establishment, it is necessary to complete
this sketch by enumerating briefly the varieties of this form of
moral insanity, and the causes which induce the disease.
Its varieties group themselves naturally into three divisions,?
the acute, the periodic, and the chronic forms of the malady.
Under the head of acute, I would include all those cases of
incontrollable drinking which occur to persons of previously
temperate or regular habits, but in whom this insane craving has
been generated under the influence of some accidental cause,?
such as the novelty and excitement of a new sphere of duty,
and the temptations of new associates and habits, all combining
to lead to intemperance; or the depressing effects of some over-
whelming calamity, or of some debilitating accident, or disease, or
other agency, such as excessive heemorrhage, protracted nursing,
fever, and such like. It is well known that the use of sti-
mulants, begun and indulged in under any of these circum-
stances, has gradually merged, in many instances, into an inor-
dinate and incontrollable craving, and an insatiable and destruc-
tive use of them.

Cases of this kind are, however, if taken in time and treated
judiciously and firmly, generally curable without recourse to any
step for depriving the patient of his personal freedom.
Periodic or recurrent attacks of the disease are generally de-
pendent upon some constitutional or hereditary peculiarity.
Sometimes they occur at the critical age in females, and preserve
a periodic form coinciding with the menstrual period. Some-
times they arise from injuries of the head. In many cases the
cause is obscure.

Cases of this kind are less amenable to treatment than the
former, particularly where there is a hereditary predisposition.
They hardly justify confinement, however, or isolation from
society. Where this has been tried, it has generally been found
that the incontrollable impulse comes back at its accustomed
period, when the imposed restraint has been removed. Nor does
this form of the disease interfere materially, in many cases, with
the duties of life. Many individuals have distinguished them-
selves in literature, or in professional or mercantile life, who have
been known for a long term of years to retire periodically into
the privacy of their own chamber, and, after indulging this morbid
appetite to satiety for a week or two in their voluntary seclusion,
to reappear again on the stage of life, and pursue their usual
avocations with credit and success. Such cases are perhaps rare,
and more frequently it happens that the recurrent or periodic
form gradually degenerates into the chronic variety of the dis-
ease, the intervals becoming shorter and the attacks longer, until
the intervals cease altogether, and a chronic disease or a fatal
issue ensues.

It is the chronic form of this disease which is the least curable
and most troublesome to manage. Here the craving for stimu-
lants, brought on perhaps by indulgence and irregular habits,
?operating upon a constitution hereditarily predisposed, becomes
constant, insatiable, and incontrollable; and the daily or hourly
indulgence suffers only now and then a temporary check by ill-
ness induced by it, by attacks of delirium tremens, or outbursts
of mania.

I believe it is agreed by all parties, that this form of the dis-
ease can only be treated effectually by prolonged and complete
abstinence from all stimulants. This has been attempted in two
ways: First, by boarding the patient in some house where, in
consequence of its remoteness from places where ardent spirits or
other stimulants can be procured, or where, by the stringent rules
of the house, and the watchfulness of those connected with it, a
barrier may be placed against attempts to gratify the morbid
craving. Of the first kind is the boarding-house mentioned by
Dr Christison, in Skye, where for many years patients of this
kind have been sent. Of the latter is the House of Refuge in
Edinburgh, which has been used for a number of years as a
reformatory school for patients of the humbler classes affected
with this disease. In addition to these houses, a number of in-
dividuals?clergymen, medical men, and others, in different part&
of the country?have been in the habit of taking boarders affected
with this malady, with the view of curing them. In none of these
places can the principle of treatment be efficiently carried out.
The parties having charge of the patients have no legal authority
to detain them, or to interfere with their personal freedom; and
the consequence is, that they either leave before a sufficient
length of time has elapsed to do any good, or they evade the sur-
veillance under which they are placed, and manage to keep up
the craving for stimulants by a constant system of smuggling
and secret indulgence. It consists with my experience that this
has been the result in all the institutions and houses of the kind
mentioned, which I know of, in this country; and I believe every
one will agree with me, who has had much experience in the
treatment of this deplorable malady, that, in its chronic and con-
firmed form, complete abstinence from stimulants can only be
effected by depriving the patient of his personal freedom.
In the present state of the law, this can only be done by ob-
taining a warrant for the detention of the patient in an asylum
for the insane. -And this method of treatment is now very com-
monly adopted in well-marked and obstinate cases. I think
some medical men, particularly in the country and in provincial
towns, still entertain doubts as to the propriety of granting cer-
tificates of insanity in such cases. But the scruples of such are
gradually wearing away, as the disease becomes better known and
more fully recognised as a variety of moral insanity. It is now
found, accordingly, that in all the asylums of England, Ireland,
and Scotland, such cases are constantly admitted, and regarded
both by the medical superintendents, the Commissioners in
Lunacy, and the sheriffs of our counties, as the proper objects of
asylum restraint.

Lest there should be any doubt in the minds of any one as to
the legality of certifying such patients to be insane (and I think
some doubts were expressed by Dr.'Peddie, and by others, in the
discussion which followed his paper), I may mention that in one
or two cases sent to the asylum under my care, the medical cer-
tificates distinctly set forth that the patients laboured under an
incontrollable or insane craving for stimulants, and the sheriff
granted warrants upon these certificates. In one case sent to the
asylum by Dr Christison and Dr Douglas Maclagan, in 1854, the
medical certificate was as follows:?" We consider his case to he
a very aggravated one of insane propensity to drinking ; that he
appears for a long time past to have been never sober, except
under compulsion; and therefore we consider him to be insane,
and a fit subject for confinement in a lunatic asylum, both for the
safety of himself and others, and likewise for treatment."
Under the new Lunacy Act for Scotland, the medical certifi-
cates must now contain those facts observed by the medical men
themselves, and those communicated to them by others, on which
their opinion has been founded as to the insanity; yet no diffi-
culty has as yet been experienced in obtaining warrants for the
confinement of such patients in asylums. In England these
forms of certificates have been in use for years, and I have never
understood there was any difficulty in sending such cases to
asylums there.

In the First Report of the English Commissioners in Lunacy,
issued in 1844, the form of insanity under discussion is distinctly
recognised and very graphically described.

The term "moral insanity," they say, "is used to designate a
form of mental disease in which the affections, sentiments, habits,
and, generally speaking, the moral feelings of the mind, rather
than the intellectual faculties, are in an unsound and disordered
state. The common distinctive character of all these cases is of
a negative kind?viz., that the faculties of the understanding
remain apparently unimpaired, and that no delusive impression
can be detected in the mind of the patient, which may account
for the perversion of his moral disposition, affections, and inclina-
tions. Cases of this kind were formerly looked upon as unac-
countable phenomena. They are, however, now recognised as a
distinct form of mental disorder in nearly all the public asylums.
They are characterized by a total want of self-control, with an
inordinate propensity to excesses of various kinds?among others,
habitual intoxication. This is often followed by an attack of
mania, which, however, speedily subsides when the patient is
confined, but is generally reproduced by the same exciting cause
soon after he is discharged."?(Report, p. 108.)
In the Eighth Report of the Inspectors-General for Ireland,
1857, the disease is specially, and with even more distinctness,
recognised and defined.

"As formerly, they say, "so within the last year, cases of
moral madness, originating in drink and dissipation, have been
frequently admitted into pi'ivate licensed houses. Some of tliem,
discharged after a few months' confinement, were not since
readmitted, whilst others have been brought back. These latter
cases are most perplexing: even after the lapse of a few days,
the salutary effects of control are visible in their regard; once
free, however, they become the mere children of impulse, reckless
of personal respect, regardless of the value of money, and scorn-
ing even decency itself. Rational in conversation, and most
plausible in manner, within the asylum, their conduct is dis-
played out of doors in a series of the most irrational actions. It
is painful to keep such parties confined, but still more so to let
them run at large to certain destruction. As an illustration, we
may adduce the case of a lady, at present in confinement in a
private licensed house, avIio has been admitted and discharged
four or five times within our knowledge, and who, when at
liberty and mistress of her allowance, spends it in one continued
orgie of drink and dissipation. We may here observe that a
characteristic of this class is, at all times, an utter disregard of
truth, together with an unceasing desire ,to impose upon the cre-
dulity of their hearers by the most specious pretensions to sense
and wisdom, and the most solemn promises that a future morality
would efface the errors of their past life."?(p. 24-5.)
With these statements before us, it cannot be doubted, on the
authority of the highest judges in the country, that persons
affected with the moral insanity I have described are proper objects
for confinement in asylums. A consideration of the general
moral perversion referred to by the Irish inspectors, of the mental
imbecility apparent in so many cases, and of the hereditary
tendency so commonly to be detected, will tend to confirm this
view of the subject in the minds of any who may still hesitate to
adopt it.

Dr Peddie referred to the legal definitions of insanity, as laid
-down by Hume and other distinguished legal authorities, in order
to show that this form of the disease did not come under the
legal definition of insanity, and that medical men, by inference,
might not be legally justified in certifying a dipsomaniac to be
insane. The same argument would apply to all other forms of
moral insanity; and if a medical man were liable to prosecution
or penalties for certifying a dipsomaniac to be insane, he would
be equally so for granting certificates of insanity in a case of
homicidal or suicidal madness, or in one of nymphomania, or
indeed in any case of partial insanity where there was no delusion.
But I conceive the legal definitions of insanity, as laid down
in legal works, have nothing whatever to do with the distinctions
recognised by physicians as rendering a person insane with a
view to his treatment in an asylum. The legal definitions have
a legal bearing only, and refer to the kinds of insanity recognised
in our courts of law as exculpating from crime, or as nullifying
wills or otlier civil acts. Tlie certificates of insanity granted for
the purpose of confining a patient in an asylum, and the warrant
of the sheriff, do not make him legally insane in these respects;
they neither disqualify him for civil acts, nor exempt him from
criminal responsibility. A will executed by an inmate of an
asylum might be held to be good, on proof of his not being
affected with that kind or degree of insanity which incapacitated
him in the eye of the law from disposing of his property; and a
person committing a criminal act, an act of homicide, might not
claim exculpation in a court of law on the mere plea of being in
an asylum, unless the insanity were such as to prevent him from
distinguishing right from wrong in the act which he committed.

In the same way, the appointment by the Court of Session of
a curator bonis to a party, on tlie ground that he was insane and
incapable of managing his own affairs, would not of itself be suf-
ficient to make that person a proper object for confinement in an
asylum, nor would it exculpate him from a charge of assault, or
any other criminal act.

Lest these opinions may be cavilled at as loose or conjectural,
I think it right to add a few remarks in explanation, with one or
two references to facts in support of them. I by no means assert
that confinement in an asylum does not affect a person at all in
relation to his civil rights or responsibilities. It affects him to
this extent, that it affords an a priori presumption that he is
insane, and therefore incapable?e.g., of executing a valid will,
or irresponsible for a crime. But that is only a presumption,
which can be set aside by evidence. The burden of proving
insanity, in such a case, is shifted to the opposite party.' When
a man, not in an asylum, executes a will or commits a crime, the
presumption is that he is sane till the contrary is proved; and the
parties wishing to set aside the will, or to exculpate from crime,
must prove insanity. But, on the other hand, if a will were exe-
cuted, or a crime committed, by a person in an asylum, the pre-
sumption would be that the person was insane, and that the will
was invalid, or the person irresponsible, until the contrary was
proved. And in this case the parties wishing to establish the
validity of the will, or the responsibility for crime, would require
to establish by proof that the person enjoyed a lucid interval at
the time, or that he was sufficiently sane to be able to dispose of
his property, or to distinguish right from wrong in the criminal
act which lie committed. That these are not mere theories could
be established by numerous references. Many disputed wills
have been declared to be valid, although made by persons who
were undoubtedly and confessedly insane, to a certain extent, at
the time at which they were executed ; and many have been con-
victed of criminal offences, and punished for them, who were
insane at the time of their commission, hut whose insanity was
not, in the opinion of judge and jury, of such a nature or degree
as to render them irresponsible for their acts. I shall cite only
one or two cases in corroboration of these statements. In the
case of Cartwright v. Cartwright and Others, the testatrix wrote
her will with her own hands, loosened from their ligatures for the
purpose; and, while writing it, she was observed frequently to
leave off writing, throw torn pieces of paper into the fire, and
walk about the room in a wild and disordered manner. Yet the
will was held to be valid, because it bore no marks of agitation
or insanity, and was consistent with her attachments and impres-
sions when sane.* In another case (that of Coglan), the person
made his will while in an asylum ; but, on proof that at the
time he made it lie was as competent to converse on the subject
of testamentary dispositions as before, and that he had before his
insanity intimated his intention of leaving his property as he did
in the will, it was held to be good.

In regard to the responsibility for crimes, need I refer to the
well-known case of Bellingham, who was convicted and executed
for shooting the Hon. Spencer Perceval; to that of Howison,
executed in Edinburgh in 1832, for murdering the woman
Geddes; or to many others, in proof that partial insanity does
not exculpate from the guilt of murder in every case ? And
surely it will not be questioned that Bellingham and Howison
might have been justly detained in asylums, and indeed ought to
have been in asylums, in order to prevent the acts which their
insanity prompted them to commit. In the case of Thomas
Bowler, an epileptic maniac, tried and executed for shooting at
William Burrowes,J a Commission of Lunacy finding the prisoner
insane for some months previous to the commission of the act
was actually produced in his defence, yet he was convicted.
These facts, and many others of a similar kind which might be
cited, leave no doubt, I think, that the legal definitions of
insanity do not affect the question of committal or detention in
an asylum for the purposes of treatment, but refer specially and
only to the capacity of the person for civil acts, or to his re-
sponsibility for acts of a criminal nature.

I conceive that a man is insane, and legally so, for the pur-
poses of confinement in an asylum, if two medical men certify on
soul and conscience, and do not wilfully or falsely so certify, that
he is insane, and a fit object for an asylum, and if the sheriff
grants a warrant accordingly, whatever the definitions of insanity
given by Blackstone, Erskine, Hume, or the twelve judges
may be.

I may add, that petitions for liberation, on the ground of
* Shelford " On the Laws concerning Lunatics," &c., p. 382.
f Ibid. p. 387. t Ibid. p. 590.

wrongous detention, have been uniformly, and in innumerable
instances, forwarded by me, from parties labouring under this
disease, to the sheriffs, to the Lord Advocate, and the Secretary of
State; and in no instance have any of those authorities ordered
the release of such patients, on the ground that they were im-
properly or illegally detained in the asylum. In one case, referred
to by Dr Peddie, that of a gentleman confined under the 4 and
5 Vic., c. 60, as a dangerous lunatic, whose case was confessedly
one of moral insanity of the kind before us?one of insane drink-
ing, there was an appeal made in due form to the High Court of
Justiciary for liberation, yet the Court refused to interpose or
reverse the order of the sheriff.

It cannot, therefore, be doubted, on a review of such facts, that
persons affected with this form of moral insanity may be legally
and properly consigned to asylums, and detained there for treat-
ment.

The principal ground, however, upon which it is contended
that some new legislative enactment is required for the treatment
of the cases of moral insanity under consideration is, that they
cannot be detained long enough in asylums, under the present
laws, for the purpose of effecting a cure of the disease. In regard
to this point, I must confess that the difficulties I have had
chiefly to contend with are such as could be obviated by no new
act of legislation. Such patients, when removed too soon, have
been so removed almost invariably by their own relatives, or on
the advice of their own medical attendants. When they recover
from the immediate effects of their habits of uncontrolled drink-
ing, they appear so sane, they make so many plausible promises,
and they are so full of self-reliance, that they generally succeed
in persuading their friends that they ought to have a trial; or
they try the art of intimidation?threaten to quarrel with their
friends and cut them off without a shilling in their wills, unless
they take them out, or threaten the medical attendants who con-
signed them to the asylum with actions of damages, unless they
are immediately liberated, and so succeed in getting the one
* Since tlie preceding pages were written, an important case, bearing upon the
subject, has been decided in the English courts, before Lord Campbell and a
special jury. In this case (the Queen v. Armstrong), the lady had been found a
lunatic under a commission ; and the issue tried was whether she was justly found
to be of unsound mind, and incapable of managing herself and her property. The
evidence was to the effect that, although not of strong mind, she had no delusions,
but had a craving for stimulating drinks which she could not control, and she said
she would have wine if she died for it. She would have it for all her father, the
doctor, her husband, or God himself. When she was at large, she acted honourably
in her monetary dealings, but drank to a great excess. Lord Campbell agreed in
the law that intemperate or immoral habits alone would not be enough to consti-
tute insanity j but, after reviewing the whole evidence, the jury found that she had
been of unsound mind at the time of the inquisition, and was now " incompetent
to manage her own affairs on account of her habitual drunkenness."?Times, 11th
and 13th February.

party or the other to recommend their liberation, rather than
encounter the threatened alternatives. I cannot recall to my
recollection a single instance in which any such case of moral
insanity has been ordered out of confinement hy the legal authori-
ties contrary to my advice, and before I considered the patient
was justly entitled to a trial. I am quite willing to admit that,
in many of the cases I have had under my care, the sheriff might
have intimated his opinion that they ought to have a trial by
being set at large, had his interference not been forestalled by
that of his friends; but I feel confident that if such cases, by
premature liberation, had relapsed and been sent back, their
detention would not have been interfered with during a very con-
siderable period of probation. And admitting, as I do, the
necessity of a pretty long period of confinement, extending even
to one or two years, or even more, for the cure of confirmed and
chronic cases of this moral insanity, I cannot but admit at the
same time the justice and propriety of giving patients of this
class a trial, after their first confinement, at the end of three or
six months, if they give anything like a reasonable hope of doing
well, and if their powers of self-control have been tested with
favourable results. It has been my practice, and I believe it has
been that of the physicians of other chartered asylums, to test the
powers of self-control of such patients, after they have been suffi-
ciently weaned by abstinence from their morbid cravings ? to
permit them to go beyond the asylum on their parole, to visit
their friends, to spend a day or two with their relatives, or even
to lodge for a week or two in the neighbourhood; and if they
display, under those circumstances, the ability to control their
appetites and regulate their conduct, then I consider myself
bound to liberate them; while, on the other hand, if they.break
through the restraints imposed upon them by their own voluntary
pledges, and are unable to keep their promises and purposes of
temperance, I consider myself entitled to prolong their period of
confinement, and, in doing so, I have never yet been interfered
with by the arm of the law.

The practice in other parts of the empire may be different?
the views which some sheriffs, or the views which our newly-
appointed Commissioners in Lunacy may take of such cases, may
be different; but I do think, as the real nature of this deplorable
disease becomes more fully known, the administration of the
existing laws must expand, so as to permit all that can be pro-
perlv and wisely asked as to the duration of time required for the
effectual treatment of such cases, with a view to their complete
cure of a morbid, and incontrollable, and self-destroying appetite.
There is, however, another objection to the management of
such cases in asylums,?and that is, the natural repugnance felt
by the friends of patients, and by the patients themselves, to
their being associated with persons affected with other forms of
insanity. It is considered very hard that persons who, in a few
days after their isolation, recover apparently the use of their
reason and all their other faculties, should be compelled to asso-
ciate with raving maniacs, with the fatuous and demented, and
with melancholy or violent companions.

To meet this difficulty, and the more serious one already dis-
cussed?viz., that such persons cannot generally be detained long
enough in asylums to effect a radical cure of their disease, Dr.
Peddie proposes that an effort should be made to obtain some
legislative enactment for the management of such cases, and that
separate establishments should be provided for their treatment,
under the powers to be granted by such an enactment. I am far
from saying that this is not desirable; on the contrary, I believe
it would be a great boon to society, and would remove most of
the difficulties which must continue to be experienced, under the
present law, in the treatment of moral insanity.

I fear, however, the prospect of any legislative Act on the
subject is very distant and very problematical. The difficulty of
dealing with it, the fear always dreaded of interfering with the
personal liberty of the subject, the apprehension that the opera-
tion of any such Act might extend to mere drunkards, or might
be otherwise improperly used, must operate, I fear, at least for
many years, to prever+ any attempts to legislate regarding this
disease.

My object in this paper, therefore, has been to show that,
under existing laws, there are facilities for the isolation and treat-
ment of undoubted cases of dipsomania, which may serve all
practical purposes. It is impossible to foretell what the laws
regarding the detention of such cases in asylums for a proper
term of probation and treatment may be under the administration
of the recently-appointed Commissioners in Lunacy for Scotland;
but, judging from the tenor of the Report of the late Commission
of Inquiry, and from the known character and ability of the
medical Commissioners, it is not to be anticipated that a narrow-
minded or restricted view will be taken of the nature of such
cases, or the necessity of prolonged confinement for their cure.
The English Commissioners, in their first Report, say " It
has been oui piactice, in cases of this sort, to liberate the patients
after a short confinement, if it be the first attack of insanity from
this cause, and if he appear to be aware of his misconduct, and to
have a desire to reform his habits. In the event, however, of his
being confined a second time owing to the same cause, we have
felt that his probation ought to continue for a much longer
period; and indeed we have felt that great responsibility has rested
upon us in sucli a case, and have at all times very reluctantly?
and only after vainly endeavouring to induce the patient's friends
to take charge of him?resorted to our power of liberation."?
(P- 176-)

I have uniformly found the authorities in Scotland influenced
by the same principles ; and I have no doubt, as the true nature
of this disease becomes more fully recognised, that these prin-
ciples will continue to be acted upon, and made to reach the
requirements of the proper medical treatment of the disease by
sanctioning a sufficiently long isolation.

In regard to the second objection to asylum treatment, that
can be met at any time, if these observations are correct, by esta-
blishing either a private or a public asylum specially devoted to
the reception of such cases. The patients would be sent there,
of course, under the same certificates and warrants as other cases
of insanity; but the institution preserving its distinctive cha-
racter as an hospital for such cases only, and having, if it were
thought proper, a special designation, would not be liable to the
objections urged against an asylum for the insane.

In fine, if the disease which we call moral insanity, or dipso-
mania, is not really a form of insanity, it would be very dan-
gerous to legislate on the subject; but if it is a form of insanity
?and of this, I think, ice have no doubt?the existing laws re-
garding the insane ought to meet the requirements for its treat-
ment; and, by a liberal and enlightened administration of those
laws, I do not doubt they will be found to do so, without the
necessity for new legislation. . If anything more is wanted, let
some enterprising individual, or company, with a moderate
capital, license a country-house surrounded with an agreeable
landscape, and with grounds affording extended walks or drives,
and the amusements of fishing and shooting; let the establish-
ment command all the sources of recreation which a well-arranged
asylum possesses; and let it be designated by some appropriate
and agreeable name?not "Asylum, noi Inebriate Asylum,"
like the American institution of the kind, which, I believe, did
not succeed; let the patients of this class be sent to that sana-
torium under a warrant of the sheriff as insane ; and let them be
treated according to the most approved principles of our art,
under the direction of an enlightened physician, with an efficient
staff of trustworthy attendants; and let patients be taken at dif-
ferent rates of board, suitable to their means,?and I doubt not
most of the difficulties at present felt in dealing with this disease,
if not all, will be successfully met, and that such an establish-
ment would soon be distinguished for its usefulness, and prove a
valuable source of revenue to its proprietors.
