A Manual of Psychological JSledicine
=====================================

:Author: Joiin Chas. Bucknill,
M.D., and D. H. Tuke, M.D. 1858.

The want of some systematic work to which the student and prac-
titioner might refer for information on the varied questions involved
in the diagnosis, treatment, and general management of insanity has
so long been felt, that we hail with peculiar satisfaction the appearance
of a " Manual of Psychological Medicine," by Drs. Bucknill and Tuke,
both of whom are sufficiently known to the profession to warrant us
in expecting much from their joint labours.

The work before us is divided into two portions, the first embracing
the history, classification, statistics of insanity, is from the pen of Dr.
Tuke; the remaining chapters, which treat of the diagnosis, pathology,
and treatment of mental disorders, are by Dr Bucknill.

Our space will not allow us to do more than briefly refer to some of
the more important features of this excellent work.

The first two chapters are devoted to the history of insanity and its
treatment as known to the ancients, in which the author displays an
extensive acquaintance with the medical writings of antiquity, and
a happy facility in selecting the leading features in these writings,
which cannot fail to render this portion of the work interesting to those
who regard an acquaintance with the progress of opinion as of impor-
tance to the psychological physician. These are followed by one on
modern civilization in its bearings on insanity?a subject in itself
almost inexhaustible, yet, nevertheless, of paramount importance, to the
student of psychology, if he wish to render himself familiar with the
influence which the ever-changing circumstances in which society is
placed exercise in the production and modification of insanity. A.
true knowledge of the varied phenomena of insanity can only be ob-
tained by patient and careful observation of man, his habits and pecu-
liarities as he exists in general society, aided by the more limited but:
equally important observation of the various manifestations of disor-
dered intellect as they are presented within the walls of an asylum.
The alienist who limits his attention to the condition of the human
mind as it manifests itself in hospitals for the insane can have but a.
very imperfect acquaintance with those nicer shades of mental distur-
bance by which sanity slides into insanity, and the moral and respon-
sible man passes into the irresponsible maniac. To the physician
engaged in the investigation of disorders of the mind, no subject which
can, even in the remotest degree, exercise an influence on the social or
moral condition of man, is without interest. The varied forms of
mental disease, when viewed in large groups, have invariably been
found to be modified by the prevailing social condition of the time, and
we are satisfied that nothing tends so much to advance our knowledge
of psychological medicine as the habit of taking a wide and comprehen-
sive view of the various social conditions which, even in a remote
degree, tend to develop insanity. This the author has done to the
fullest extent in the present chapter, which is replete with important
facts and valuable deductions. Dr Tuke frankly contrasts the oppo-
site conditions of barbarous and civilized life, and draws what seems to
us a necessary conclusion, however repugnant it may be to our notions
of modern civilization, in the following paragraph:??

" What can be a greater contrast than that which is presented by the un-
tutored savage, on the one hand, and the member of a civilized community, on
the other ? The former passes his time chiefly in the open air, engaged in
hunting and other pursuits, requiring much physical and but little mental
exertion; never exhausts his brain by thinking, suffers very slightly from grief
and sorrow, and knows little of the anxieties and sufferings connected with
poverty. The latter, very generally, is obliged daily to infringe, more or less,
the laws of health. He is subjected to the c steady, soaking intoxication of
habitual over-work.' If the brain demands rest, that rest is denied, and the
brain perhaps goaded on by alcoholic stimulants. The very same person is
possibly also the subject of ever-present anxiety and apprehension, in conse-
quence of a precarious income. In a highly civilized community, the highest
standard of intellectual attainment is constantly presented to the aspirations of
its members; and minds, without reference to calibre, promiscuously enter
the lists of an unequal contest. Prom these and other points of difference
do we rashly draw the conclusion, that there are reasons for expecting a
greater susceptibility to mental disorders among the civilized than the un-
civilized nations of the world?"

Our limits will not allow us to consider this subject further; closely
connected with which is that of the condition of the insane in modern
times, on which the author bestows a chapter giving a succinct account
of the change which has taken place in the management of the insane
during the present century. On the subject of the classification of the
different forms of mental disorder, Dr Tuke, after a brief sketch of the
various classifications of insanity adopted by different authors, submits
the following modification, which, though imperfect, as all classifica-
tions must be until our knowledge of the pathology of insanity shall
have been considerably extended, is perhaps, in the present state of
our knowledge, as practically useful as any we could select, arid conveys
an approximative idea of the characters displayed by the leading types
of mental disease.

" IDIOCY
{ Primary.
DEMENHA . . . . j
( Of a melancholy character.
delusional insanity < Of an exalted character.
( Of a destructive character.
(^Melancholia without delusions.
Mania with general extravagance of conduct
('moral insanity').
Mania with disposition to homicide.
j Mania with disposition to suicide.
(jMania with disposition to theft, &c., &c.
emotional insanity
i
Acutc and
_ Chronic.
rUEEPEKAL INSANITY. '
" All of which may be complicated with epilepsy or general paralysis."
One hundred and sixty pages are devoted to the consideration of the
various forms of mental disease enumerated above, the descriptions of
which are forcible and accurate, displaying an extensive personal ac-
quaintance with the subject, and amply illustrated by cases carefully
selected from the practice of the author and from well-recognised
authorities.

In considering this portion of the work, excellent as it is, we regret
that Instinctive Mania has not received more attention and a fuller ex-
position of the grounds upon which it is recognised as a form of mental
disease, believing as we do that a large proportion of cases generally,
comprehended under the somewhat vague term emotional insanity,
may be clearly traced to disorder of the instinctive faculties, which
viewed through this light become capable of far more accurate defini-
tion than can possibly be whilst they are considered as but disordered
emotions; indeed, the emotions themselves are closely allied to [the
instincts, and are to a considerable extent shared alike by man and
animals.

Closely related as we are in physical organization to the other-
members of the animal kingdom, it is only reasonable to look for some
similarity in our mental manifestations, and this, if it exist at all, is
to be found in the instincts, which in the lower animals constitute the
predominating, if not the sole guiding principle: in man these instinc-
tive faculties are held in abeyance by the force of the will, any failing
of which at once renders him a prey to their influence. Society pre-
sents us with numerous examples of men who, whilst in the possession
of moderate intellectual powers, are, nevertheless, from disease or con-
genital defect, wanting in the power of self-control, and a prey to their
instinctive propensities; a knowledge of which may be gained by a
careful attention to their healthy and disordered manifestations in the
lower animals. Comparative anatomy and physiology teach us much
in reference to the structure and functions of the body ; why may we
not look to the same source for information in the higher attributes of
our nature ?

We have ventured upon these observations because we believe that
the present state of our psychological knowledge warrants us in
approaching much nearer to a correct estimate of what constitutes
instinctive mania than has hitherto been done by writers in this de-
partment of medical science ; and we feel that correct statement of what
medical writers really include under this term is much needed to prevent
so frequent collision between medical men and the opinions of the law.
In the chapter on the causes of insanity, Dr Tuke enters at some
length into the various questions of interest connected with this
subject, and presents to us a valuable array of statistics in support of
his opinions. Everything relating to the cause of insanity is involved
in difficulty and doubt. Many of the supposed causes may be, and in
numerous instances unquestionably are, but the first indications of
mental decay. Vicious indulgences of every kind induce a proclivity to
mental disease ; but who can say liow often these are hut the first faint
mutterings of the storm? The valuable work of Dr B. A. Morel will
lead us to look to those wide-spread social evils which result in the
physical and moral degradation of a people, as a fertile source from
whence both our criminal and insane population are augmented. Pau-
perism, and its attendant evils of filth and imperfect sanitary arrange-
ments, play sad havoe with the mental powers of the lower orders,
especially in large towns. The feeble parent begets a feeble offspring,
who, born to all the miseries of poverty, sinks still lower in the scale
of humanity; and thus pauperism becomes hereditary, and crime
almost the only refuge for the man whose feeble mental and physical
organization renders him unfit to compete in the battle of life with
the healthy and robust. Thus through poverty do the causes of decay
become cumulative, and our asylums become filled with unhappy
imbeciles, the produce of our social condition. These questions perhaps
belong to the political economist more than the medical man ; yet they
are of vital consequence to the alienist who seeks for the true cause of
many of the diseases he has to treat. With this notice we must take
leave of Dr Tuke, to notice the important contributions to the work
by his colleague.

Dr Bucknill is so favourably known to the profession by his valu-
able contributions to psychological medicine, that it is scarcely neces-
sary to do more, in noticing the portion of the work before us which
he has contributed, than to say that it fully sustains the reputation
he has already earned as a sound and comprehensive writer in every-
thing pertaining to the insane.

The following paragraph from the chapter on the diagnosis of in-
sanity, so fully indicates what we believe to be the qualities requisite
for the investigation, that we cannot forbear quoting it as an example
of the comprehensive view which our author takes of his subject:?
" The physician is compelled to bring to the investigation" (the diagnosis of
insanity) " not only a knowledge of those functions which are subservient to
the vegetative and animal life of the individual, but also a clear and analytical
conception of those which collectively constitute mind. He must not only be
a physician but a metaphysician; not, indeed, in the almost opprobrious sense
of the term, but in that better sense which designates a lover of truth seeking
to ascertain not the cause of mind or any other unattainable abstraction, but
the laws of mind, which arc as regular as any other natural laws, and the
knowledge of which offers to philosophy a wholesome and legitimate object of
research."

The whole chapter is admirably written, bearing the stamp of
originality, and a perfect familiarity with the subject in all its bear-
ings ; free from vain speculations and hypotheses on the one hand, or
a narrow dogmatism on the other. The maxims it contains may be
followed as a safe and practical guide to the investigation of this sub-
ject, which forms perhaps the most anxious duty of the alienist. The
author has paid considerable attention to the physiognomy of insanity.
The varied appearances presented in the facial expression of the insane
form one of the most important aids in the diagnosis of the disease,
and to the skilful physician are frequently alone sufficient to guide his
inquiries to the true nature of the malady. In the detection of feigned
insanity, to which the concluding portion of the chapter is devoted, a
knowledge of the facial expression of the different forms of mental
disease is of much importance. Few men, unless possessed of extra-
ordinary histrionic talent, and a familiarity with the insane, can at
once and for a length of time copy not only the manners but also the
expression of disease. In disease the expression of countenance is
involuntary, requiring no effort of the will, whilst in the simulation
this can only be sustained by the most constant effort; in feigned
madness the patient is always anxious to convince bystanders of his
insanity?an effort which, fortunately for psychology, few can sustain
for any length of time. Dr Bucknill has illustrated this subject with
several important cases and much valuable criticism.

In the limits of a l'eview it is impossible to notice even the leading
features in the section devoted to the pathology of insanity ; suffice it
to say that throughout the author displays an acquaintance with all
that is valuable in the writings of others on this obscure subject, and
has brought to its investigation an extensive knowledge of the phy-
siological science of the day. The following quotation will afford some
idea of the grounds on which he endeavours to found a theory of
mental pathology:?

" In default, therefore, of real knowledge respecting; the conditions of nerve
function, we must he satisfied with the recognition of the fact that the great
organ of this function is subjected to the general laws of decay and reparation
of animal tissues, and to some other laws having special reference to its own
degeneration and repair."

" It is upon this physiological basis only that, in default of more precise and
extensive knowledge of the changes in the nerve-cell and the generation of
nerve-force, cerebral pathology can be established."

" The physiological principle upon which we have to build a system of
cerebral pathology, is that mental health is dependent upon the due nutrition,
stimulation, and repair of the brain; that is, upon the conditions of the ex-
haustion and reparation of its nerve substance being maintained in a healthy
and regular state, and that mental disease results from the interruption or dis-
turbance of these conditions."

Having thus stated the principles on which to establish his patho-
logy, our author takes the following broad view of the organic condi-
tions which lead to the production of insanity :?

" The brain, like every other organ of the body, for the perfect performance
of its functions requires the perfect condition of its organization and its free-
dom from all pathological states whatever. Consequently, the existence of any
pathological state in the organ of the mind will interrupt the functions of that
organ, and produce a greater or less amount of disease of mind?that, is in-
sanity."

How far the principles thus enunciated are sustained by the argu-
ments of the author, we must leave his readers to judge; at all events,
he has brought to their elucidation much sound reasoning, and a full
appreciation of tlie importance of cerebral physiology in its bearings
on tlie questions at issue.

The concluding chapter is occupied with the treatment of insanity,
and embraces a full and comprehensive estimate of the relative value
of the different medicinal remedies recommended by various writers.
The author speaks highly of the use of small doses of antimony in
some forms of mania, not given with the view of producing nausea or
depression. Of the value of this mode of treatment in the cases
referred to by the author, we can bear the testimony of our own
experience.

Opium, Dr Bucknill, in common with most practitioners, regards as
a valuable remedy in various forms of insanity, when selected with a
due regard to their pathological condition.

The general or moral management of the insane recommended by
the author is based upon the broad and liberal views entertained by
most enlightened physicians of the present day. The insane are as
amenable to all the good influences of a well-regulated household as
any other portion of the community. Order, regularity, the judicious
combination of firmness with kindness, and the force of example, are
with the man of unsound mind, equally with the sane, the most power-
ful means of bringing him under control. A kind word and gentle
persuasion will do more to calm the unruly than harsh and violent
treatment.

To the physician and the philanthropist, the interior of an asylum
having all the adjuncts of a comfortable house, and its inmates living
together 011 terms of intimacy and kindness, must be a far more
pleasing spectacle than the chains and bars of former days. In con-
clusion, we can confidently recommend this work to our readers as
one of the best treatises on the subject in the English language.
Throughout it bears the evidence of much careful study and accurate
observation, which cannot fail to obtain for its authors an increased
reputation.
