News and Notes
===============

Parliament and Voluntary Organizations
On June 22nd, in the House of Lords, a long
debate took place on the subject of " Voluntary
Action for Social Progress when the need for the
continued existence of voluntary organizations was
pleaded by Viscount Samuel, the Earl of Selkirk,
Lord Beveridge, Lord Nathan and others. Attention
was drawn to the financial plight of such organiza-
tions and some proposals were made for relieving
that plight without at the same time adding to the
burdens of the tax-payer. One interesting sugges-
tion to this end was that we should follow the
example of Scotland by instituting " Common
Good " funds to which testators could leave money
they wished to be devoted to useful purposes ;
another (put forward originally by Lord Beveridge
in his book, Voluntary Action) was that the
large amount of derelict money now frozen in banks,
in the Court of Chancery and in various obsolete
charitable trusts, might be transferred into such
funds, if the necessary legislation could be enacted.
In the course of the various speeches warm
tribute was paid to voluntary organizations?to
their blazing of trails, to their function in filling
gaps which cannot be filled by statutory action, to
the " humanizing " touch they bring into services
provided by Government Departments. Once
again, however (as in Lord Beveridge's book),
only a passing reference?in quoting from informa-
tion supplied by the National Council of Social
Service?was made to the voluntary service which
has and is being given in the Mental Health field,
and no doubt the prevalent view that the needs of
the mentally handicapped are completely met by
statutory obligations is held by the noble Lords as
by so many other less exalted citizens.
The debate drew from the Government, in the
person of Lord Pakenham (Minister of Civil
Aviation) an assurance that the value of voluntary
effort was appreciated and would be encouraged :
" We are certain that voluntary service
organizations have a part to play as essential in
the future as any they have played in the past
and, with the steady development of our social
conscience, we must look to them as time goes
on to put even their own fine records in the
shade.''''
and again
" It seems to me that to-day there is a clearer
recognition all round, to which the Government
certainly subscribe, of the truth that the statutory
and voluntary social services are not contradictory
but complementary, and that neither will be able
to fulfil its highest purpose except in partnership
with the other."
Lord Pakenham enunciated the principle by the
Government in relation to the making of grants to
voluntary associations, viz. that " as proof of their
vitality such aided bodies should raise a significant
amount from voluntary sources
Finally, he agreed that the proposal made to free
the monies tied up in obsolete charitable trusts
and frozen bank deposits should be examined more
closely, although he could hold out no hope of
legislation in the near future.
In winding up the debate, Viscount Samuel said
that he proposed to take steps to communicate
MENTAL HEALTH 15
with some of the organizations concerned, to see
if a group could be brought together which might
be taken into consultation by the Government
t when future policy was being framed.
A summary of the debate has been issued
by the National Council of Social Service from
whose publications department (32 Gordon
Square, London, W.C.I) it may be obtained at a
cost of 6d. A conference on the subject is being
arranged by the Council.
Reception Centres for Deprived Children
Early in July the Home Office issued a circular
(No. 128/1949) under the heading, "Centres for the
Temporary Reception of Children", drawing
attention to Section 15 (2) of the Children Act,
requiring Local Authorities to provide such Centres
for purposes of observation prior to permanent
Placement. With the circular is enclosed a
Memorandum, based on advice given to the
Secretary of State by the Advisory Council on Child
Care to guide Authorities in establishing Centres.
It is urged that a beginning should be made with-
out delay despite the difficulties of obtaining
suitable premises and trained staff, so that provision
may be made for those children whose need for
trained observation and assessment is most urgent,
and attention is drawn to the work of the Reception
Centre at Mersham, Kent.*
The Memorandum deals at some length with the
staffing, running and general organization of
Centres, and the categories of children for whom
they are intended. Their general purpose is aptly
summed up in the introductory paragraph as follows:
When a child is received into care by a local
authority under Section 1 of the Children Act,
1948, or is committed to their care as a fit person
the best method of providing him with a substitute
home cannot be decided without a close study of
his needs as an individual. The children will
differ widely and will come from a great variety of
homes, and it is essential that there should be
opportunity for preliminary investigation, and
for obtaining accurate and co-ordinated informa-
tion about each of them. A right decision about
placing, taken at the outset, will reduce the risk of
subsequent changes and the disturbing effect on
the child of breaking his relationships by trans-
ferring him to new surroundings. In order to
obtain the fullest possible knowledge and
understanding of a child's health, personality,
conduct, intellectual capacity, emotional state
and social history, provision must be made for
his reception and temporary accommodation in
a place where facilities are available for enquiry
into these matters and for observation by a
skilled staff.
The categories of children for whom Centres are
primarily intended are stated to be :
(a) Boys aged 2-12 judged to be likely to remain
in care for more than six months.
Cb) Girls aged 2-16 judged to be likely to remain
in care for more than six months, except
adolescent girls who, because of sex experi-
ence or for other reasons, could not suitably
be accommodated with the generality of
children coming into care.
(c) Boys and girls in the age ranges mentioned
above who are likely to be in care for less
than six months but are judged to require
observation of their physical or mental
condition.
id) Children under age 2, exceptionally, where
children of the same family are admitted at
the same time.
In addition to their use in determining, in the
first instance, the type of home to which a child
should be sent, it is pointed out that Centres should
.also be used for the observation of children who '
have to be removed from foster homes owing to
behaviour difficulties, before re-placement is
attempted. In emergency, they may serve as
places of safety and in suitable cases as remand
homes for children under the age of 12.
With regard to the time which a child should
spend in a Centre, it is recommended that this
should in no case exceed four weeks and should
always be as short as possible ; if more prolonged
observation is called for or if the right type of
placement cannot at once be arranged, it is suggested
that there should be an intermediate Home accessible
to the Centre's skilled staff.
The size of a Centre should be limited to accom-
modation, for 25 to 30 children, and the full-time
staff under a superintendent, who should have
recognized qualifications in social work or in
teaching, might include one or more trained house-
mothers, one or more qualified teachers, someone
with nursing experience, one or more workers able
to organize recreations and occupation and domestic
workers who should also have an interest in the
children. One or more members of the staff should
be men. It is urged that every worker in the Centre
should feel responsible for taking a share in the
work of observation and assessment. Careful
daily records should be kept, and the final assess-
ment should preferably be made at a case conference
consisting of those who have had the child under
observation and including a member of the staff of
the Children's Officer who will.be responsible for
carrying out the recommendation made. It is
essential that each Centre should be able to call
upon the services of a Child Guidance team and the
joint employment of specialist staff by more than
one Authority should be explored. The setting
up of joint Centres by adjacent Local Authorities is
also advocated.
The attention to detail which has been given in
the preparation of this Memorandum is shown in
the paragraph about" Arrangements for Reception"
which we quote in full :?
It is important that a child's first impression
of a reception centre should be of a bright,
* Interim Report, 1948. Obtainable jrom the Centre, price Is. 3d.
16 MENTAL HEALTH
homely, welcoming place. His responsiveness
and co-operation are likely to be coloured by his
first experience of care. The child's confidence
should be gained by explaining to him in an
understanding way what is happening to him.
If a family are received, every effort should be
made to keep the children together. If they
have to be parted, every member should
know where the others are.
Probably the next stage will be cleansing and
physical examination, which should preferably
take place in the sick bay. A child should not be
rushed from the front door to the bathroom,
but should have time to look round the room
into which he is first brought, and possibly
be given a meal there. His own clothes and any
other belongings should be treated with
respect in his presence, even if they have later
to be destroyed, and he should not immediately
be asked questions about ration books,
birthday, etc.
The circular and Memorandum are shortly to be
printed and made generally available. We com-
mend them to the attention of our readers.
Juvenile Delinquency
As a sequel to the Conference on this subject
convened by the Home Office and the Ministry of
Education which took place in March, a Joint
Committee was formed to organize a further
Conference to deal with the problems raised on a
more scientific level in the hope of elucidating
the underlying causes of delinquency. The
organizations represented on the Committee are :
The Howard League for Penal Reform, the Institute
for the Scientific Treatment of Delinquency, the
British Psychological Society, the Royal Medico-
Psychological Association, the Institute of Sociology,
and the National Association for Mental Health.
The Conference will be held on the morning and
afternoon of Saturday, October 1st, at the Royal
Institution, and the speakers will be sociologists,
psychiatrists, psychologists and social workers
belonging to various schools of thought.
Invitations have been sent to all the organizations
which were represented at the March Conference.
It is hoped that there will be a large attendance.
A Memorandum issued jointly by the Home
Office and the Ministry of Education in April, 1949,*
gave provisional figures as to the incidence of
juvenile delinquency. These are now available in an
amplified form in the 1948 Criminal Statistics.f
To quote from the Memorandum, there was in 1948
as compared with 1947, an increase of 26 per cent,
in the number of children under 14 found guilty
of indictable offences (principally larceny and
breaking and entering), and of 23 per cent, in the
case of children between the ages of 14 and 17.
For non-indictable offences the figures were respec-
tively 36 per cent, and 15 per cent.
The Memorandum urges Local Authorities to
hold representative conferences on juvenile
delinquency and to institute an intensive study of the
subject in their own areas, to investigate causes and
possible remedies.
Such a Conference held by the London County
Council on July 22nd resulted in the setting up of a
Committee of 21 members from various organiza-
tions (including the N.A.M.H.) with 3 teachers and
6 representatives of the Council itself.
The Training of Mental Defectives as a Career
Four years ago the N.A.M.H.', with the approval
of the Board of Control, initiated a Year's Course
for men and women wishing to work in Occupation
Centres and Children's Departments of Institutions
for defectives. To the 48 students previously
trained, 20 have just been added on the completion
of the fourth course. The majority of the students
who hold the Association's Diploma are not new
recruits to the profession but have sought training
in order to make themselves more efficient. Four
Indians have taken the course and several ex-
students are members of religious communities
carrying on work for defectives in Eire.
Of the total number so far trained, however, 26
are new entrants to the profession and 13 new
Occupation Centres have been opened under
supervisors trained by the Association. The
demand for qualified people in this field continues to
be far greater than the supply, and it is satisfactory
to be able to record that for the next course begin-
ning in September the number of students will
be considerably larger than it has ever been before.
Amongst these students it is hoped to include two
or three selected by the Northern Ireland Hospital
Board which is contemplating the opening of
Occupation Centres as part of its scheme under the
recently initiated Mental Health Service.
Education in 1948
In the Ministry of Education's Report for 1948
recently issued, an attempt is made to assess the
general effects of the extension of the school leaving
age. It is interesting to note that, despite the
difficulties due to inadequate premises, equipment
and teaching staff, the gains are considered to be
substantial. The results have been seen at their
best in :
" an increased maturity and poise, a growth of
independence and resourcefulness and a greater
confidence in speech. Whilst still at school,
these boys and girls were able to achieve a more
adult and equal relationship with their teachers.
They were helped, too, to feel that they could
make a real contribution to the social life of the
school.
It is noted, however, that the success or failure of
the extra year is dependent pre-eminently on the
* H.M. Stationery Office. 2d. t Ibid. 2s.
MENTAL HEALTH 17
quality of the teaching staff. Where they showed
energy and initiative, there was success, in the
absence of these qualities " the year was largely
wasted and the children themselves were resentful
and frustrated This factor counted far more
than the presence or absence of material amenities
and adequate equipment.
Chapter V of the Report deals with " Special
Services ", from which we learn that a certain
amount of progress has been made in the provision
?f accommodation for educationally subnormal
and maladjusted children. Thus in 1947 and 1948,
taken together, 12 new Boarding Schools (accom.
687) and 9 new Day Schools (accom. 693), together
with 5 new Boarding Homes (accom. 162) were
opened for E.S.N, children. For maladjusted
children, 3 new Boarding Schools (accom. 105) and
15 new Boarding Homes (accom. 255) were opened.
In addition, Local Education Authorities, with the
Minister's approval, have given financial assistance
to a small number of Independent Schools receiving
9ategories of handicapped children for whom
'^sufficient accommodation exists. In such cases,
the responsibility for deciding on the Schools'
suitability rests with the Authority concerned.
World Mental Health
The second assembly of the World Health
Organization took place in Rome during June this
year, it was especially noteworthy for the impor-
tance given in the discussions to the question of
Cental health, and also for a larger number than
at the first assembly of delegations from among
the countries represented which included psychiatric
exPerts. The World Federation for Mental Health,
which as a non-governmental body having consulta-
t!ve status with W.H.O. and U.N.E.S.C.Q. is
entitled to send observers, was represented by
Dr- J. R. Rees, C.B.E.
A complete plan for mental health work, put
forward by the executive board of the World
Health Organization and based on recommenda-
tions made by the various groups working for the
International Congress on Mental Health, held in
London last year, was considered. Although
sufficient funds were not available for its full
?mplementation at the present time, an allocation for
a mental health programme for the ensuing year
was made which compared very favourably with
allocations made to other health programmes
submitted to the World Health Organization. This
can be regarded as a good beginning, due in large
measure to the work of the World Federation for
Mental Health, and in the words of its President,
Dr. Rees, " the fact that there was agreement from
the 70 nations present, on the necessity, and indeed
the urgency of a mental health programme, is
significant
It is clear that the World Federation will have an
important role to fill with the World Health
Organization, and also in influencing public opinion
in support of its mental health programme designed
to prevent mental illness and to promote the mental
health of peoples throughout the world. The extent
and scope of the Federation's activities will, however,
depend upon the amount of financial help which it
receives from the countries represented on it, and an
earnest plea for further funds in support of its work
is made.
A full account of the proceedings of the second
assembly of the World Health Organization is
published in the August issue of The Bulletin, the
official organ of the World Federation for Mental
Health (annual subscription 5s.), and copies of this
and all information concerning the Federation may
be obtained on application to the Hon. Secretary,
Dr. Kenneth Soddy, 19 Manchester Street, London,
W.l.
The proceedings of the International Conference
on Mental Health, held in London in August, 1948,
have now been published in four separate parts.
They provide a most valuable verbatim record of the
proceedings, and will refresh the memories of all who
attended these stimulating sessions. They also
provide serious reading for those who were unable
to do so. The Report has been sent to those who
originally applied, but further copies can be obtained
from Messrs. H. K. Lewis & Co., Ltd., 136 Gower
Street, London, W.C.I.
" Your Child at School "
Under this general title, the Wallasey Education
Authority has issued a series of pamphlets addressed
to parents and dealing with different stages of a
child's progress from Nursery School to the end of
the Primary Education period. Pamphlets dealing
with secondary education are in preparation. So
far the only ones issued in this latter connection are
" Children Growing Up consisting chiefly of a list
of books suitable for reading by the intelligent
parent, and " The Way Ahead explaining the
local facilities for secondary education and the
factors determining to which type of school a child
shall be sent.
The total series planned consists of 14 pamphlets
of which six are so far available. " The Nursery
School "The Infant School ", and the "Junior
School" briefly describe objects and methods. Each
is prefaced by a letter to be signed by the Head
Teacher addressed personally to the parents
concerned and inviting their co-operation, and is
profusely illustrated by photographs taken in local
schools. One pamphlet on " Children with
Difficulties ", describing the schools' psychological
service, seeks to help parents to understand special
problems and to explain where advice about them
can be obtained. Photographs here are replaced by
humorous drawings by " Ionicus " of Punch,
illustrating the types of situations which may lead
to difficulties if wrongly handled.
This enterprise, which has been carried through
18 MENTAL HEALTH
with the help of experts in the different subjects
dealt with, should be of real value in securing the
intelligent interest of parents in the welfare of their
children.
N.A.M.H. Residential Services
Short Term Home for M.D. Children
The Home at Walmer referred to in our last issue
is now in use as a Holiday Home, but in October it
will become available for the reception of individual
mentally defective children whose mothers are
temporarily unable to look after them by reason of
illness, etc., or who need some respite from the strain.
All types of cases will be taken, including those
needing nursing care, and the charges will vary
between 2 guineas and 3? guineas according to the
amount of care needed. The Matron, Miss Knott,
was formerly in charge of the Association's
Home at Basingstoke and is a fully trained nurse.
Applications should be made to the Secretary of the
Residential Services Committee, 39 Queen Anne
Street, W.l.
Experimental Approved School
The Approved School for adolescent girls in need
of psychiatric treatment for which the Association
was asked by the Home Office to be responsible,
is now open, at Duncroft, Staines. The following
appointments have been made : Psychiatrists
(part-time), Dr. Alfred Torrie and Dr. William
Craik ; Educational Psychologist (part-time), Mrs.
Michaels ; Psychiatric Social Worker (full-time),
Miss Prager. The Head Mistress is Miss A. Brown,
B.A., formerly Head of the Home Office Classifying
Centre at The Shaw, Lancashire. Mrs. Fowle, a
member of the N.A.M.H. staff, is the Correspondent.
Parents of Backward Children
In our last issue, we referred to an interesting new
development in the Mental Health field, viz. that
originating in the efforts of parents themselves to
band together for the purpose of promoting the
welfare of mentally defective children and of calling
attention to their needs.
An account has reached us of the formation of yet
another such group?designating itself as the South
of England Branch of the Association of Parents of
Backward Children (founded by Mrs. Fryd of
Harpenden) whose Secretary is Mr. H. D. F.
Hutchings, 3 Willowhayne Gardens, Worcester
Park, Surrey. It has already a considerable
membership, drawn in part from parents of children
attending Occupation Centres and in Institutions,
and meets every three months. A large part of the
time at meetings is left free for informal discussion
in order that members " may tell each other of their
difficulties ", thus helping in the breaking down of
" the isolation and self-pity which every parent of a
backward child feels The Secretary cordially
invites enquiries from anyone interested and will be
glad to enrol new members from districts South of
the Thames.
There is no doubt that this movement, once
launched, will quickly make headway, and one
urgent need created by it is for literature of a type
untechnical and practical enough to be helpful to
parents. A small pamphlet originally issued by the
Central Association for Mental Welfare under the
title "Children who can Never go to School" has
been revised and enlarged and can now be obtained
from the N.A.M.H.* On another page will
be found a note on a recently published booklet
written by an experienced worker with mentally
defective children, dealing more especially with
educational training but intended primarily for
parents. Booklets issued by the Sunfield Children's
Homes, Clent, Worcestershire, "To the Parents of a
Mongol Child " and " The Brain-Injured Child ",f
can also be obtained and include much helpful
information and advice based on the particular
philosophy which underlies the methods advocated.
We are also glad to draw attention to an attractive
illustrated 60 page booklet on " The Backward
Child " which has reached us from the Information
Services Division of the Department of National
Health and Welfare, Ottawa, Canada. Dr. Stogdill,
Chief of the Mental Health Division, contributes an
encouraging Foreword and every aspect of the care
and training of a defective is dealt with in the 14
short chapters into which the booklet is divided.
Bournemouth Association for Mental Health
Following the successful course of public lectures
held in Bournemouth last autumn under the
auspices of the Local Association and of the
N.A.M.H., a further series of six weekly lectures has
been arranged to take place on Fridays at 7.45 p.m.,
beginning on October 21st, 1949. The subject of
the course is " Aggressiveness in Human Relations "
and the lecturers will include Dr. J. A. Hadfield,
Dr. Alan Maberly and Dr. R. F. Tredgold.
Tickets (15s. for the whole Course or 3s. 6d. for
single lectures) and further particulars may be
obtained from Miss Haskett-Smith (Hon. Secretary
of the Bournemouth Association), 41 Danecourt
Road, Parkstone, Dorset, or from N.A.M.H.,
39 Queen Anne Street, London, W.l.
Durham County Association for Mental Health
During the past few months there has been
considerable interest in Mental Health Work in
Durham City and, as a result of a number of
discussions which the N.A.M.H. Regional Repre-
sentatives had with local people, it was decided to
haveameeting of those interested. This took place in
May in the Education Department of the University
(at the kind invitation of Professor Eaglesham,
Professor of Education) and was addressed by the
Medical Director of the National Association,
* Price lOd. post free.
f Price respectively, Is. 6d. and Is. 9d.
\
MENTAL HEALTH 19
Or. A. Torrie. As a result, a local Associa-
tion for Mental Health was formed with Professor
E- A. Peel, Professor of Psychology, Durham
University as the first Chairman and Miss
Cooper Hodgson, M.B.E., as Hon. Secretary. A
Committee was appointed and is already making
Plans for meetings and discussion groups through-
out Durham County for the winter. The members of
the Committee include the following :?Mr. G. R.
Bull (Town Clerk), Dr. Dunn (Medical Superinten-
dent, Aycliffe Mental Deficiency Colony), Mr. L. S.
Mills (Psychologist, Aycliffe Approved School),
Miss D. M. Daldy (Lecturer in Education, Durham
University), Miss M. Graham (Headmistress of the
Girls' Grammar School, Durham), and Miss M. B.
Swann (Regional Representative).
The establishment of active Local Associations,
able to study and deal with local problems and
^eeds, has always been strongly advocated by the
National Association and we wish this new body
every success in its pioneer efforts.
n-A.M.H. New Publications
Attention is drawn to the list of recent publications
vvhich can be obtained from 39 Queen Anne Street,
advertised in this issue.
Foster-Home Finding : an Experiment (price Is.),
should be of use to Children's Officers and other
s?cial workers and to members of Local Authorities
and voluntary bodies concerned in the boarding-out
?f children. It records an experiment in a selected
area carried out in 1947-48, under a representative
|5cal committee, with the object of compiling a
Central Register of Foster-Homes available for all
authorities and organizations in the area who wish
to make use of it. An appendix gives a detailed
description of four cases illustrative of the varied
types of placements made by the Association's
Worker, Miss Mary Maw.
. From After-Care to Community Service (price 9d.),
ls written by Mrs. Pauline C. Shapiro, who is a
Psychiatric social worker formerly employed as a
Regional Representative of the N.A.M.H. when she
^as responsible in her area for the after-care of
men and women discharged from the Services on
account of psychiatric disability. The pamphlet?
originally published as an article in the British
Journal of Psychiatric Social Work?contains a
record of illustrative cases dealt with, designed to
show the type of work that could be carried on
under Section 28 of the National Health Service Act
which gives Local Health Authorities power to set
UP a preventive community " care and after-care "
service in the mental health field.
The Need for Understanding the Individual
(Price 3d.), is a reprint of the paper given at the
Mental Health Conference in March, 1949, by
Professor J. C. Spence, dealing with this subject in
relation to the training and function of doctors and
nurses. The paper received widespread attention,
and it is hoped that in its present form it may be
read by many members of the medical and nursing
professions who would be unlikely to procure the
full Conference Report.
Local Authority Officers in Mental Health Service
The National Association has during the past
year run several courses for Relieving Officers and
other Local Authority Officials transferred to
mental health social work, and another course is
to be held in London, from Tuesday, October 18th
to November 4th, 1949.
The course is being organized in conjunction with
the Extra Mural Department of the University of
London and will take place at the University
Examination Halls, South Kensington. It will
consist of lectures and discussions, with some visits
of observation, and is intended to occupy the
students' full time. From experience it has been
found that the maximum benefit cannot be gained
from the course if an officer is required to carry
on some of his ordinary duties whilst in attendance,
but Saturday mornings have been left free if inter-
views at the Local Authority's offices are necessary
for purposes of case consultations.
The fee for the course is ?15 15s. Applications
should have been in by September 15th, but those
later than this may receive consideration.
Professional Association of Child Psychotherapists
(Non-Medical)
As an outcome of a working party convened last
year, under the chairmanship of Dr. Kenneth Soddy,
there has now been forrqed a professional Associa-
tion of Child Psychotherapists (non-medical), the
membership of which will ultimately be limited to
those who have successfully completed a recognized
course of training in child psychotherapy. For the
first three years people already employed in this field,
who have not taken such a course, will be eligible.
The scope and content of a specialized course has
also been considered by the working party who
recommended that it should be spread over three
years, and be comparable in standard and quality
with postgraduate courses conducted by universities
by whom it should ultimately be taken over.
Candidates for admission must hold an honours
degree in psychology, or its recognized equivalent
in arts or science, with an appropriate postgraduate
diploma in psychology ; but for the next five years
the certificate in mental health, or certain high
qualifications in fields other than psychology,
together with special experience and aptitude, may be
accepted. In addition, candidates must have had at
least 12 months' continuous practical experience
with children and they will be required to satisfy
a selection committee of their personal suitability
for training.
Enquiries and applications for membership should
be addressed to the Hon. Secretary of the Associa-
tion, Miss D. M. Wills, c/o N.A.M.H., 39 Queen
Anne Street, W.l.
