Rising Twenty
==============

:Author: Pearl Jephcott. Faber. 8s. 6d.

In this book Miss Jephcott, author of Girls
Growing Up, gives us a picture of 100 ordinary
working-class girls in three very different parts of
England. The one thing they have in common is
that at the time of the study they were all over 17
and under 21. From the girls themselves the
author has learned about the interests and thoughts
of adolescents between the ages of 14 and 20, and
the results of this study are very revealing.
On the whole the girls, though limited in outlook
and abilities, were good-hearted and kindly, their
chief virtue being generosity and a thoughtfulness
for younger children. Their lives provided very
little in the way of resources for enjoyment and their
experience tended to be extremely narrow. It was
found that the girls were inclined to adopt a fixed
pattern of weekly activities at a very early age and
this pattern changed very little as they grew older.
Another outstanding feature was the extent to which
the girls continued to be influenced by their homes
although they were going out to work, and the real
affection and concern they maintained for their
families.

One would judge from this book that work to
these girls was merely a stop-gap until they got
married and that most of their thoughts and
activities were directed to this end. Many of the
girls expressed a desire for " fuller and clearer
information about sex Miss Jephcott says that
the " approval of these highly critical readers " of
the booklets put out by the British Social Hygiene
Council would " rejoice the heart of the Council
There appears to be a marked indifference to
further education in this section of society. " Twothirds of the hundred girls " had had no formal
education after leaving school and the number
actually attending classes was about a dozen. Most
of their reading seems to have been confined to the
cheaper magazines and books from the 2d. library,
but there was " a widespread interest in letter
writing

The general impression one gets after reading
this book is that the life of the average working-class
girl is drab and narrow and that something should
be done to enrich it. Miss Jephcott points out,
however, that " no one solution will meet the needs
of people so diverse in background and so varied
in ability and character She maintains that,
although the bodies which have a professional
interest in " youth " could all make a contribution,
" it is the genuine interest and encouragement of the
people whom the girl meets day after day that are
the really powerful factors " in their lives. " If
formal agencies could do more " she suggests " to
harness the energies of the young adult on the
adolescent's behalf, both together could almost
certainly put a brake on the present squandering
of enthusiasm and ability and the consequent
disillusionment of so many youngsters
C.H-S.
