Bread and Circuses
==================

In the past, too little thought has been given
to the relationship of culture to play. That
the forms of play have varied with different
cultural epochs is often forgotten; even more
rarely mentioned is the idea that culture arises
in the form of play, and play needs to be born.
This is the main thesis of Professor Huizinga's
important and absorbing book, Homo Ludens.1
He argues that culture is " played from the
beginning ", and that through play " society
expresses its interpretation of life and the
world ". Play satisfies all kinds of communal
ideals and constitutes one of the main bases of
civilization, " existing before culture and pervading it from its earliest beginnings ". This
does not imply that play has become culture
through a process of evolution, but that " in
its earliest phases, culture has a play character,
that it proceeds in the shape and mood of
play Thus " play adorns life, amplifies it
and is to that extent a necessity both for the
individual?as a life function?and for society
by reason of the meaning it contains, its significance, its expressive values, its spiritual and
social associations, in short, as a cultural
function."

To illustrate and understand this thesis, let
us consider some of the characteristics of play
as a cultural activity.

Play and Reality
-----------------
Play is a phantasy acted out, unconnected
with reality, and takes the players outside and
beyond ordinary reality. The player steps out
of this common every-day life, out of this
" real " life, into a world which he has created
and whose rules are his toys. He creates a
series of temporary worlds within a " real "
world; temporary worlds in which he assumes
a disguise, acts a part and becomes another
person. Hence play appertains to magic; it
is make-believe. But play can be controlled,
begun and ended at will, thus marking it off
further from reality, which is ineluctable and
unalterable.

The play world is a creative act in direct
contact with the conscious and unconscious
elements of phantasy life. It is a " pretending
yet so engrossing as to run away with the player.
This absorption gives to play a seriousness of
its own, which in no way destroys the feeling
of pretence, but rather serves to re-inforce it
and makes the pretending appear more real.
The make-believer now believes. Thus, play
is both knowing and not knowing. " The
savage is a good actor who can be quite absorbed
in his role like a child at play; and also like a
child, a good spectator who can be frightened
to death of something he knows perfectly well
to be no real lion."2 When William Pitt is
shown in a toga as a Roman Emperor, we are
not taken in; he may have believed himself to
have the qualities of the Romans, but there was
never any question of his adopting their way of
life. Thus, play is an interruption in the course
of reality, and hence Huizinga refers to it as an
" interlude " in our daily life, in which there is
a liberation, enabling mankind to proceed to
further creative efforts.

Play exists for itself

It follows that in play the means are more
important than the end. Play exists for itself
with no ultimate objective but itself. It is not
undertaken to order, or it ceases to be play and
becomes a task. It is a voluntary activity and
hence is an expression of freedom. In this
connection play is most easily opposed to work,
where the end is all important. As play stands
outside every-day reality and is self-sufficient,
ethical judgements of good or bad, true or
false, do not concern it. Play has no moral
function, as Huizinga stresses, and once an act
acquires an ethical quality it ceases to be play,
since the end is now all important.

This self-sufficiency gives to play a " superfluous " quality, being to life as an ornament is
to dress. Indeed, it is to be expected that those
cultures where the play element is important
will be rich in ornamentation, as, for instance,
Rococo architecture, with its luxuriant friezes
and embellishing curves. The churches of this
period have a boudoir elegance more akin to
play than piety, and are in sharp contrast to the
mediaeval cathedrals. Men's dress in the 17th
century illustrates the point further with its
bows, ribbons, festoons of lace and other pieces
of preciousness. The very word " style"
implies a freedom of the mind to play with
artistic forms, freedom to be independent of the
past styles and to express phantasy in new
forms.

Play creates order through rules

Yet within this freedom play creates order.
All play has its rules which cannot be transgressed, and are many times more rigid than the
laws and regulations of the real world. Play is
dependent on the absolute observation of these
rules, and once they are broken the play world
collapses. They are the ritual of play. These
rules, moreover, give an ethical quality to play
of its own; since, caught in the conflict of the
desire to win, whilst having to abide by the
rules, the players' sense of fair play is continually
under test.

Huizinga points out how society is more
lenient to the cheat than to the spoil sport.
For the cheat still acknowledges the need for
rules and is playing at breaking them. His
actions are still part of play and hence can be
affected by punishment. But the spoil sport,
by withdrawing from play, reveals the inherent
fragility of the play situation, by his behaviour
he breaks the spell, lets in the real world and
shows up the illusion. Culturally, the spoil
sports are heretics, prophets, innovators, conscientious objectors and rebels, and arouse
murderous feelings in the play community.
The rules of play mark out play in time and
place. Play starts and ends at a certain
moment; the curtain rises, or the umpire's
whistle ends the game. Nowhere is the difference between play and reality seen more clearly
than in regard to time. The player is unaware
of duration and has no eye for the clock.
Morning comes before the card player is aware
that the candles have been lit, and time is up
before the match is ended. Yet this lack of a
sense of duration is not from time standing
still, but that in play all is change, movement and
succession. Every moment of time flows into
the next in rapid succession, and consciousness
is unaware of a past and lives in an ever
different present.

Culturally the place of play has always been
important. The territory of play is marked
out and rapidly assumes a sanctity; it is
forbidden to all non-players and becomes
unusable for other purposes. The Greek
games were never mere athletic contests, but
sacred religious festivals, where Pindar sang
his odes and Aeschylus produced his plays, the
stadium serving both purposes and becoming
a sacred place of pilgrimage. The 18th century
card player produced the salon, and the age
plays at conversation. To-day the salon has
become the unused front parlour and is equally
sacred.

The full cultural force of the rules of play is
well seen in poetry and music. In these arts,
through rules, order is created out of chaos.
Of those artistic forms most characteristic of
style in aft, the sonnet and the sonata are the
strictest in their rules and are at the same time
pure play. Their inherent difficulties lead
to a pruning of thought, to the extraction of
the essence of emotion and thereby higher
forms of cultural activity are achieved.

Play and Group formation

The importance of play in culture is not only
that it involves individuals in groups but also
that through play new communities are formed.
Furthermore, the acceptance of the rules of
play, its fixed time and place, give to such
communities a permanence. As Huizinga
aptly puts it, " the feeling of being ' apart
together ' in an exceptional situation, of sharing
something important, of mutually withdrawing
from the rest of the world and of rejecting the
usual norms, retains its magic beyond the
duration of the individual game The magic
element in play requires a group of believers and
gives to the group its need for secrecy. Thus,
for instance, in early childhood " the charm
of play is enhanced by making it a secret ".
This point is an important one since often
play has little cultural significance, because it is
played in isolation. Games of patience, and
cross words are culturally unproductive, since
the element of tension is limited to the individual
and does not arouse empathy in the spectators,
who are not enthralled and remain aware of
their individual identity. But once play involves
individuals or groups in some competition, or
opposing way, and requires a display of skill,
knowledge, courage and determination, the
situation is changed, tension occurs and play
becomes part of culture. The skill of the
individual wins esteem not only for its possessor
but also for the group to which he belongs, and
group awareness is thereby heightened. The
group in turn provides an audience for the
player, enhancing his pleasure and further
helping him to lose himself in play. Thus we
are reminded that play is mirth, fun, and is
something to be enjoyed. This element of joy
reinforces group solidarity and thus culturally
play is linked to holidays and festivals. Here
again, we meet the " interlude" quality of
play already mentioned.

Play and Contest

It is, therefore, not surprising to find that
play-culture occurs most obviously in contests
and is closely linked to the relief of repressed
aggression. For through play aggression is
expressed without real consequences. Thus
play has an essential " anti-thetical " nature,
ranging from slanging matches and part-singing
to duels and war. In all cultures the commonest
form adopted by play is a vying between
individuals or groups. It is well known that
the Greeks loved to hold contests?singing,
riddle solving, keeping awake or drinking.
Huizinga quotes as an example of the importance of the contest in the cultural expression
cf play, the " potlatch" of certain Indian
tribes of British Columbia. This is a festival
at which one group gives presents to another
for the sole purpose of showing superiority.
No more is incumbent upon the recipient than
to hold a return feast at which he out-does the
other's generosity. It is also possible to find
many interesting examples of play-culture
expressing aggression. Chess originated in
India among pacifist Buddhists and is played
as a substitute for war. In poker there is
little attempt to disguise the aggression element,
the players mean to get the better of each other
by means, fair or foul, whilst keeping to the
letter of the rules of the game. The Chinese
held contests in politeness, and the Middle
Ages, boasting contests. War provides other
more direct examples; at Crecy the French
king offered Edward the choice of two places
and four separate days for battle. In all these
examples destructive impulses are mastered and
become culturally creative.

Before considering our present cultural
situation, let us examine the relationship of
play to other cultural epochs, taking as our
examples the Romans, the Middle Ages and
the Romantics.

The Romans

Of all Roman ruins the commonest and the
largest are those associated with play, the
amphitheatres, theatres and triumphal arches,
reminding us how constant a feature they were
of every Roman city. As Rostovtzeff3 showed,
the Roman triumph was not merely a celebration
of military success, or mere expression of relief
from the perils of war, but, more important
still, " through such triumphs the people paid
their acknowledgments and tributes of respect
to the divine power (the Emperor) through
whom, and thanks to whom, the Empire
existed The games were not just another
method designed to keep a rebellious and
turbulent proletariat quiet. They were holy
games and the people's right to them was a
sacred one. As Huizinga says, " their basic
function lay not merely in celebrating such
prosperity as the community had already won
for itself, but in fortifying it and ensuring
further prosperity by means of ritual. The
slightest offence against ritual or the most
accidental disturbance invalidated the whole
performance ".

Further, Huizinga reminds us how the
distribution of corn had little to do with
Christian charity, but was " munificence for
the sake of honour and glory, for the sake of
outdoing your neighbour and beating him
it is play. Such ostentatious generosity is
seen to-day at Continental christenings when
money and sugared almonds are thrown to
the local children and poor, the amounts
depending on the social position of the donor.
It is in the " potlatch " spirit.

The Middle Ages
---------------
Play and culture were clearly entwined
throughout the Middle Ages when feasts,
festivals and fairs abounded. Chivalry, with
its tournaments and jousts, was an important
cultural factor inculcating an idea of social
service, of service to the weak, the poor and the
lowly by the strong, the rich and the mighty.
All such services were free from degradation
and disparagement, the more easily carried out
since linked to play by rules unconnected with
the real world and accompanied by mirth,
jollity, banquets and all manner of celebrations.
As a game it was a constant test of skill, courage,
and fortitude. Through chivalry, war was
considerably humanized, prisoners of war being
held to ransom and the essence of the war game
lying in taking an enemy alive. In the 100 years
War, battles were lost through quarrels over
precedence in the French court or the wearing
of heavy tournament armour in the battle
field. In 1389, when England and Portugal
were fighting the Spaniards and the French,
dysentery broke out in the Anglo-Portuguese
camp. The English obtained safe conducts
to recuperate in the French camp, rejoining
their Portuguese allies to fight against the
French when fully recovered. Here the game
of chivalry is more important than the game of
war.

Chivalry was important in raising the status
of woman. The code of courtly love was
particularly strict, enforcing several years'
probation before the lover got his kiss, and to
achieve this was rare. The great principle of
this code was absolute fidelity based on a high
standard of self-discipline; the " Roman de la
Rose " portrays this courtly game and through
its story is the embodiment of it.

What a game is the mediaeval cathedral.
The stonemason includes in the building his
pet dog, or a caricature of a local busybody with
Christ and his saints. The ass at Chartres
plays the lute, and the gargoyles are the more
grotesque for being part of a game of makebelieve. The tomb of Abbot Islip at
Westminster shows him falling from a tree
crying " I slip The awe-inspiring " Last
Judgements " of the French cathedrals show
the dead rising from their tombs in the prime
of life, and Abraham's bosom resembling a
marsupial's pouch, so playful and free is the
artistic phantasy.

The Romantics

As Huizinga points out, an important early
figure of emergent Romanticism, with its
" visions of brooding, melancholy figures,
impenetrable gloom and tearful seriousness ",
is Horace Walpole and his novel The Castle of
Otranto. This historically important novel,
described in its title page as " Gothic ", is
a macabre thriller in a mediaeval setting,
with gigantic ghosts, meetings in graveyards,
murders, prophecies and destructions. Similarly,
Walpole filled his house at Strawberry Hill
with a collection of " Gothic curiosities
But with him, all this is a game and his letters
show how he remained aloof from such Gothic
influences, despising it in others. However,
from this fantastic Gothic villa sprang the later
Gothic revival.

Goethe and Napoleon were fervent admirers
of'Ossian, that other early Romantic character
whose poems of Gaelic legends, discovered in
1763, were everywhere acclaimed by the new
Romanticism. But it needed the stern realism
of Dr Johnson to point out their faked nature.
Much sport was had by Macpherson in writing
them and by the critics in either attacking or
defending them. Dr Johnson's use of reason
is yet another game; nobody enjoyed a
bludgeoning argument so much as the author
of Rasselas, that hero who travelling through
Abyssinia and Egypt discovered that happiness
is nowhere to be found. It is play when
Rasselas finds that the teachers of philosophy
are unable to support their own misfortunes.
The sentimentality of Rousseau, his picture
of the noble savage, is again but play, quite
divorced from reality. Indeed, when it was
suggested that he should examine the noble
savage by personal experience, he curtly declined; that might have broken the charm and
resembled work. Madame de Warens, with
whom Rousseau spent his most formative years,
and the Court were busy being milkmaids
while the realities of the Revolution became
more pressing. Rarely has an age enjoyed its
tears so much. It wept at the pathetic tale of
Virginia, who was ship-wrecked just as she was
reaching the shores of Mauritius coming home
from Europe and about to embrace her faithful
childhood friend and lover, Paul. A naked
sailor tried to persuade her to take off her
clothes and leap from the poop of the sinking
ship, but her delicacy forbade her and she
perished before Paul's eyes. Never were the
dictates of etiquette more disastrously obeyed.

Play To-day
----------
What finally, is the relation of play to the
culture of our epoch ? Where are our bread
and circuses to-day ? Huizinga's thesis is that
modern culture bears few of the characteristics
of play. The 19th century left little room for
play and, with that age, culture ceased to be
played, work and production were the ideals
of the age, imparting a deadly earnestness to
life. " All Europe donned the boiler-suit and
play became work." The growth of technology,
the increased importance of economic factors,
and the subordination of the way of life to
materialistic and utilitarian theories, all hasten
the decline of the play element, leaving us today
culturally bankrupt.

Thus clothes are no longer ornamental but
designed purely for work uses. Colour disappears from men's clothes, and the grey
flannel trousers become ubiquitous. The tailcoat is replaced by the jacket and " ends a
career of many centuries by becoming the garb
of waiterswhere its play function still
continues. Long trousers, the habitual dress
of peasants, are now worn by everyone. Sport
is taken seriously and becomes a business with
gate money, transfer money and shares. The
distinction " Gentlemen and Players " grows
up, marking off those for whom playing is
work and, therefore, no longer a game. Nor
does the modern Olympic Games have anything
of the cultural qualities of those of ancient
Greece. Whist and ecarte are replaced by
bridge, with its professionals, its systems and
its income for the Culbertsons. There seems
to be little gain for the culture of the community
in these activities which are more related to
relieving boredom than to expressing phantasy
outside the realities of life.

The same situation is found in modern
movements in art which are in deadly earnest.
We would like to think of Picasso as play, just
as Munnings and his race horses so clearly are.
What frightens us is that Picasso is a spoil
sport, refusing to play the old artistic game and
breaking the charm of the Chantrey Bequest
pictures of carousing cardinals. To understand
the full strength of cultural traditions represented by Munnings, it is only necessary to
think of Chesterton's remark " the English
working man is not fussed about the equality
of men but only about the inequality of horses
Poetry has become the private property of a
few coteries. To understand Auden and
Isherwood it is necessary to belong to their
circle. The artist everywhere is retiring into
his ivory tower, and the public care little if he
passes the war in Hollywood or at the front
fighting. Art, in acquiring an end by craving
for originality, has ceased to be play and has
become work. Likewise architecture no longer
serves social ends but is at the service of personal
aestheticisms, and hence is socially isolated.
The architect's energies are no longer directed
towards building the Parthenon, Rheims, or
public theatres, but towards the individual and
utilitarian dwelling place. The suburban row
of villas reveals no cultural communal aspiration, save that of the builder's expenses.
Throughout, art has become defunctionalized.
There are indications, however, that
Huizinga's portrait of to-day is too pessimistic
and is over-imbued with the sense of " laudator
temporis acti for essentially the problem of
play and culture to-day is one of participation.
If sport has become commercialized it is because
the possibilities of direct participation are
limited. That the urge to participate, to share
some common experience, is present, can be
seen in the modern phenomenon of football
pools. These provide an opportunity for
sharing in the wins and losses of favourite
teams, and the Saturday " late night final "
edition has given an added purpose to the life
of many. The pools have their strict rules and
sense of magic, and the devotee is taken out of
himself. By laying out his money he shares
vicariously in the dangers of the game. The
desire to participate is there, although it is
proxy culture-play.

Our culture offers two fields in which participation is direct, absorbing and elevating the
concert and the ballet. Music is still written
for community festive occasions, Aida for the
opening of the Suez Canal, or the Leningrad
symphony for the herioc defence of a city.
Shostakovitch is later rebuked by the Soviet
Academy of Arts, precisely because he sought
to revert to a personal aesthetic instead of
expressing the culture-play element of the
Soviet world. Our flourishing colliery bands
and local choirs are further examples of the
way our culture expresses itself through play.
But it is probably in the ballet that culture-play
elements most clearly appear. The modern
ballet has all the play characteristics mentioned
above. It is a direct expression of phantasy
creating a make-believe world for its devotees.
Its ritual is sacred and all is order within it.
The aesthetic appeal is great, as seen by its
ever-increasing popularity.

Through these two culture-play fields, play
to-day has a social function, adds to the culture
of the community and enriches the mind of the
individual and his group. As Aristotle desired
it, play, through music and ballet, purifies the
emotions of those qualities felt to be dangerous
and distasteful. Thus the emotional life of a
culture is enriched, the individual taken out
of himself and a higher degree of mental health
achieved. P.M.T.

REFERENCES

(1) Huizinga, J. Homo Ludens. International Library
of Sociology and Social Reconstruction. Kegan
Paul. 1949.
(2) Mareit, R. R. The Threshold of Religion.
(3) Rostovtzeff, M. A History of the Ancient World.
