Children in Need
=================

:Author: Melitta Schmideberg, M.D.
(Berlin). Introduction by Edward Clove, M.D.
George Allen & Unwin Ltd., for Psychological
and Social Series Ltd. 12s. 6d.

In her book Children in Need, Dr. Schmideberg
reminds us once again of the plight of our deprived
children, of the conditions under which our problem
families live, and of the far from ideal conditions
in some of our institutions.

Few would disagree with her when she states that
children should be helped in their homes rather
than be sent to institutions or their mothers sent
to prison, and that those who are sent away
should be placed in the most suitable foster home
or institution. The scope of the problem, as
Dr. Schmideberg sees it, is vast. She estimates
that there are about "half a million neglected
children " in the country who have " almost no
chance of growing up into happy and self-respecting
citizens Recognizing as she does that many of
these children come from homes in which poverty,
mental defect, apathy and general inadequacy all
play a part, she still seems to imagine that the
problem could be solved by the provision of more
Child Guidance Clinics, more psychotherapy for
parents and more social workers. The families
which Dr. Schmideberg is discussing are on the
whole the most time-consuming and least responsive
group in our society. Attempts to improve them
have been and are being made. The problem is not
a new one arising out of the war. It has been
well known to social workers and reformers for
many years, but it seems doubtful whether an army
of skilled workers would be able to eradicate it.
There are, undoubtedly, bad institutions, apathetic
officials, uninformed magistrates and mishandled
children, but without being complacent there is
surely some justification for hoping that with the
appointment of children's officers, improved social
services and growing public concern, there may in
the near future be fewer neglected children and that
those who are in need will be better cared for.
C.H-S.
