Your Child and You
====================

:Type: Book Reviews
:Author: Cecil Hay-Shaw. John
Murray. 154 pp. 6s.

Too many manuals of child upbringing are apt
to leave parents feeling that the wells of kindness
and endurance in them are just not deep enough to
provide that degree of tolerance and understanding
the expert seems to think a necessity, if the major
pitfalls of growth are to be avoided. Such
approaches fail in their intention because they are not
grounded in real experience of family life, and
because their excess of idealism marks the author as
one with his own axe to grind. Your Child and You
is as far removed from this approach as one would
expect from an author with the experience of work
with parents and children of Cecil Hay-Shaw.
This book is a guide to parents of children of all
ages from infancy to adolescence. It provides a
more detailed account of the needs of young
children and a somewhat more general survey of
the needs of the child of school age and of the adoles-
cent. While it is for the most part about the
normal child, there are chapters on disorders of
personality, the sick child, the backward and the
brilliant child, as well as a reassuring introduction
to the work of the child guidance clinic.
The following quotation (p. 98) is a sample of the
author's approach :

" Parents will have the responsibility of setting
standards which are not too rigid, and which can
be modified to meet the needs of the individual
child at different stages of development. Too
high a standard will cause a breakdown, but no
standard at all will mean that the child will be
deprived of an ideal on which to mould his
character

Whether they are seeking guidance on problems
of early feeding and cleanliness training?to my
mind outstandingly valuable chapters in the book?
or an introduction to child guidance help for some
special deviation, this approach must in itself be a
reassurance to parents. It is combined throughout
with a particularly wide and sympathetic realization
of the kind of worry which is never far away from
the responsibility of bringing up children. The
author's aim is not, however, merely to reassure.
She explains how and why children feel as they do,
often in a way that is not readily understandable
to the adult, and though her aim is to supply
understanding rather than advice, she makes valu-
able suggestions as she develops her theme?in the
section on " tempers " for instance?for practical
education.

It is to be very much regretted that the question of
children's sexual interests and enlightenment is only
taken up in the chapter on adolescence, and not
treated as an integral part of the child's development
and education from early years. R.T.
