Their Own Orchestra
======================

:Author: S. D. MITCHELL, M.A., M.B., D.P.M.
Psychiatrist, Warlingham Park Hospital, Surrey
Last September we decided to have an
orchestra. This was rather like having an idea
and finding the bricks and mortar afterwards.
Actually it was not bricks and mortar, but
human beings, with whom we were concerned,
and we felt that our ground plan would have to
be fairly elastic to allow for their various
idiosyncrasies.

We had had a good deal of music in a passive
way at Warlingham for some time past,
and we felt it was about time that we indulged
in a form of what Slavson calls " Activity Group
Therapy ". This meant that we should confine
our orchestra to patients, if possible. Staff
members generally improve the standard of
performance, but that is not the primary aim of a
therapeutic orchestra. An additional reason
for not having them in the orchestra is that they
may find it difficult to treat patient-members on
an equality with themselves. No doubt this
matter settles itself in time, but meanwhile there
is a considerable risk of disturbing group
harmony. This is liable to be upset anyway,
from time to time, as we speedily found when
rehearsals started.

So far it has been possible to confine the
orchestra to patients, except that the writer has
taken on the conductorship, without any
previous qualifications or experience. Incidentally, Foulkes speaks of the psychiatrist in a
group as the " conductor ".

Returning to our ground plan, we find it
essential to have a pianist who can read music
reasonably well and play with some animation.
The degree of difficulty of the pieces performed
will in fact primarily depend on the skill of the
pianist. If there are any string players, e.g.
violinist, banjoists, etc., so much the better,
but they are not essential.

The rest of the orchestra do not need to be
taught music ; it is much more important
for them to have the feeling of joining in with
others, rather than being side-tracked into
counting bars. In the average mental hospital
it is only a small proportion of the patients who
would even be capable of concentrating on the
latter. The matter is dealt with by the conductor
bringing in groups of instruments with' a wave of
one hand and dismissing them likewise, while
beating time with the other, though sometimes one is quite unintentionally greeted by a
solitary cuckoo immediately after a magnificent
climax !

Now, what about the other instruments ?
Triangles, castanets, tambourines, cymbals,
rattles, cuckoos, bells and nightingales can be
played by anyone after a few moments' tuition.
In case any of my readers are unfamiliar with
?the nightingale, I should mention that this
consists of a metal or plastic container which is
filled with water and which, when blown into by
the performer, produces most delightful warbles
and chirrups. It is, however, necessary to hold
the " bird " at the correct angle, otherwise one
gets its liquid contents down the front of one's
neck. One of our patients has never quite
acquired the knack, so she brings a bath towel
with her to rehearsals. Drums require a somewhat better sense of rhythm than the average,
but a really professional roll should not be
expected. An imitation roll will pass muster.
Trumpets which play one note are also an
advantage to give backing in certain pieces, such
as toy symphonies by Haydn, Romberg and
Gurlitt. Other additions are a xylophone,
fecorder (if anyone can be found to learn to play
1t), and even a whip (in Hunting music).
The purchase of instruments can be quite'an
exciting affair. Our travels took us from a
suburban Woolworths to the West End. At
the former we were nearly arrested for walking
off" with purchases before waiting for them to be
Wrapped up. Amongst various establishments
in the West End, we visited a dance band
emporium. We did very well here, but were
eyed with the greatest suspicion until we laid
our money on the counter. Is this an indication
of the psychology of the dance band
musician ?

The total cost of the toy instruments is only
a few pounds. The hire, or even purchase, of
music is a similarly inexpensive matter, as only
piano and string parts are needed.
At our first rehearsal we decided to try
Haydn's Toy Symphony, and assembled
performers with the following instruments :
piano, two violins, banjuline, mandoline, six
triangles, three castanets, three tambourines,
i

three cymbals, three bells, a cuckoo, four
nightingales, three trumpets and three drums.
The numbers have since varied between 30 and
4?.

The patients have consisted of neurotics and
well preserved psychotics together with the more
demented chronic members of our population.
The latter soon accommodate themselves to
bells and nightingales, but have to be tried out
more cautiously in other departments of the
orchestra.

We have held rehearsals once a week for an
hour, which is all the time that can be spared.
It has been very interesting to watch the growth
of esprit de corps, especially since we have
started giving concerts to the other patients
and their visitors and members of the staff.
The better patients will make a point of bringing
less well-preserved patients along, even guiding
them into their seats. They seem to enjoy themselves a lot, and, if they do not, are quick to voice
the fact. This gives rise to group discussions
which sometimes hold up a rehearsal. On
occasions, paranoid patients have walked out in
the middle, feeling that they have been insulted
by the conductor or by some other member of the
orchestra, but a number of them have returned
next time. One of our * most dramatic
experiences was when our pianist declined to
come at the beginning of a rehearsal, so we
carried on without one until she underwent a
change of heart.

It has been found advisable to conduct
rehearsals in a light vein. Patients enjoy a
laugh, especially when they get completely
out of time in the middle of a piece, or when the
conductor himself gets lost. Incidentally, I
do not think it is necessary for the conductor to
have very much technical knowledge. Pieces
can be conducted from a piano score with the
various groups of instruments written in.
It is as well not to stick too literally to a score
if one has had no previous experience, but to
bring groups of instruments in fairly closely
together, rather than attempt the finer effects.
One can always justify this to oneself by saying
that it makes it easier for therapy !
Apart from toy symphonies, we have found
our orchestra has very much enjoyed playing
Strauss waltzes, short simple pieces like
Schumann's " Merry Peasant and arrangements of traditional songs.

A great advantage of regular concerts, e.g. at
three monthly intervals, is that it gives the
patients something to work for. Also it is very
encouraging for them to be listened to and
congratulated afterwards by fellow patients and
relatives.

In conclusion, I should like to express my
gratitude to my Medical Superintendent,
Dr. T. P. Rees, for his constant encouragement
and interest in our activities.
