The Future of Mental Health Education in England and Wales
==========================================================

:Author: Doris M. Odlum  M.A., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.M.
Vice-President, The National Association for Mental Health
I speak as one who has been engaged in the
educational field in respect of mental health
for the last twenty-five years. When my
interest in this subject started, early in the
'twenties, it was certainly a practically unknown
field, and those of us who have worked in it
will realize that we have had not only to try
to build up something but to break down
something?something which is still not com-
pletely broken down, namely, public apathy
and fear.

The mention of the word " mental " conveys
to a number of people in this country a sugges-
tion of insanity or mental deficiency, whereas,
of course, the education for mental health
which we are trying to build up is predominantly
concerned with the development of harmoni-
ously integrated human beings. That is the
true way of preventing mental illness.

When this job of trying to get the subject
before the public was started, we were handi-
capped because our own knowledge was
extremely vague and scanty ; even now it is
very far from being completely co-ordinated.
I fully agree that a great deal of the publicity
which has taken place on this subject has done
more harm than good. Often it has been vague
and woolly; sometimes claims have been made
which have not been substantiated, and again it
has fallen not infrequently into the error of
vulgar sensationalism. Therefore this entire
field bristles with difficulties.

The subject is one which journalists find
extremely difficult to handle. The journalist
has to pin-point something to get it home
to his readers. That has made our job very
much more difficult, because if we do try
to put some particular point across in this
way, only too often the result is a complete
distortion.

In this country, for the first time in its history,
owing to the passing of the National Health
Service Act, a charge has been laid upon local
authorities to carry out preventive medicine.
One aspect of such preventive medicine is
health education, and happily this includes
mental health education as well as physical.
Up to the present this has been left almost
entirely to voluntary associations and has been
greatly limited by their resources. Adequate
public education involves the expenditure of
considerable sums of money. Moreover, these
voluntary bodies have had no official backing;
but now that mental health has become
" respectable ", and has received official bless-
ing, the position is much more hopeful. The
local authorities, however, as they have never
had to do this job before, are naturally ignorant
as to how to set about it, and there is no doubt
that much public education will remain with
the voluntary bodies for a number of years
to come.

What are the methods of public education
which it can be hoped to carry out ? First of
all, there is the appeal to the specialist groups.
This is of first importance. An endeavour
must be made to get the mental health picture
over to the leaders in various fields?educa-
tionists, doctors (who are often conservative
and reactionary in many ways), teachers of
religion, social workers in every field, industrial-
ists, legislators, magistrates and all who have
to do with criminals. In fact, this question
concerns all those who play any part in the
handling of other people. Industrial medicine,
by the way, is for the time being left out of the
new state service, but it is to be hoped that it
will be included in the near future.

There is only one way of educating such
people and that is to get them into groups
where they can discuss and try to find out
where their own fields and the fields of those
actively interested in mental health adjoin.
The National Association for Mental Health
is doing a great deal by organizing special
meetings for such groups and arranging courses
v
* Summary of address given at a Specialist Meeting of the National Association for Mental Health in connection with
the International Congress on Mental Health, August 20th, 1948.
of education in mental health, dealing both
with principles and practice, for parents,
teachers, and nurses, and especially for all
those who have to do with children and adoles-
cents. The Association, moreover, tries so to
arrange matters that the demand for such
assistance comes from the special groups them-
selves ; it is felt that this is much more satis-
factory than organizing meetings of its own.
It is much easier to get something across to
a small group than to a big one. Public
lectures on a large scale nevertheless have a
useful role in creating general interest.
It would be most desirable to have in every
town and every country area a mental health
organization, either a voluntary one or one
supported by the local health authority, and
I think that such a body should be responsible
for mental health education in the area. A
relatively small unit could work much better
locally than a body working from the centre.
The central body deals with over-all policy,
but the main work should be done by local
groups. Any local group should make it its
business to stimulate the local health authority,
asking it, for example, what it is doing for
its unstable children, defectives, neurotics,
delinquents, the ageing, and all the different
groups who need help. One of the ways in
which we can all help is to get groups formed?
a social research group, for example, into the
problems of delinquency in an area. We all
know how much keener people feel about a
problem if they are all expending some personal
energy over it, and it is important to get these
groups, and every member of them, to work.
Another method is to get local health authori-
ties to hold " Health Weeks " in which mental
health aspects will be well stressed. There is
some tendency to hold Health Weeks and to
forget mental health altogether. It is necessary
to see that mental health material is provided
for the Health Week, including exhibitions
and talks, and that there is an Information
Bureau where information on this subject can
be obtained. An Information Bureau in each
locality, to which people can go and find out
about their problems, is essential.

Another very important thing, of course,
is the appeal to the eye. If we are to have
posters, leaflets, and pamphlets dealing with
the different aspects of mental health this will
mean the spending of a great deal of money.
The more important thing is to ensure that the
literature is of the right kind. It is necessary
to avoid the " jargon " of an academic presenta-
tion, and yet at the same time the subject must
not be vulgarized. It is difficult to be at the
same time dignified, not to over-simplify, and
yet to avoid academic terms. Very few people
are expert both in mental health and in the
public presentation of it. The person who is
a good mental health expert may not be able
to prepare a popular document or design an
attractive poster. Yet these latter are things
which we must learn to do, and every member
should try to develop a technique to that end.
Broadcasting is a powerful means of pro-
paganda for mental health. In this country
there is only one broadcasting system, the
B.B.C., and " time" cannot be purchased.
During the last few years a good deal of psycho-
logical material has been broadcast, most of it
very well done. The people concerned have
gone to the experts and some good work has
been put out. I am sure that broadcasting is a
very important " arm ". Films are another
most important field, still quite unexplored.
Another method adopted by the National Asso-
ciation is the holding of an annual conference
?invaluable because among others it interests
local authorities in the subject. The conference
is attended by perhaps 1,200 people, of whom
400 or 500 are delegates from local authorities.
There are thus many fields of public education
waiting to be tilled; only the workers are needed
and a certain amount of money to get going.
Fortunately, in Great Britain the Government
is beginning to get interested in this work.*
Only last year it appointed a committee under
the chairmanship of Sir George Schuster to
investigate the human factor in industry. We
are very hopeful for the future. We have an
opportunity before us such as has never before
arisen, and we have to learn to use it in a
practical and efficient manner.

* See, however, note on page 107.?Editor.
If we are to build a world in which people can work together across political, religious, racial and professional
lines, we need new organizational forms which really embody our new mental-hygiene insights.
Dr. Margaret Mead, Ph.D.
