Child Psychiatry
===================

By Leo Kanner, M.D., Associate
Professor of Psychiatry, Associate Professor of
Paediatrics, and Director, Children's Psychiatry
Service, The John Hopkins University, Balti-
more, Md. Oxford. Second Edition. Blackwell
Scientific Publications. 752 pp. 45s.
Students of child guidance, of whatever
professional discipline, are usually told that there is
at present no satisfactory comprehensive text-book
on Child Psychiatry. At first sight this enlarged
second edition by a leading member of the Psycho-
Biological School will rouse great expectations, for
it is excellently produced, well indexed and wide in
its scope. But while the reader in search of other
people's contributions will find much to excite his
gratitude, he will only experience frustration in the
search for the real reasons why children suffer from
psychological difficulties.
Psycho-biologists make a powerful plea for the
consideration of the whole child, not just the
symptom or the environment. However, in this
book the co-operative approach is not helped by the
unfriendly, sometimes even offensive references to
others, notably school teachers ; while psychiatric
social workers suffer an almost total eclipse. Even
more disruptive to continuity of thought is a
MENTAL HEALTH 21
classification based on epiphenomena, mainly
on symptoms.
The author disposes of psycho-analysis* by the
effective device of bald statement of some of the
more controversial contributions of that School,
given in inadequate context and without explana-
tion. A notable victim of the ensuing massacre is
the concept that the child includes a living, growing
constellation of forces, the nature of which need
further study. One result of this may be illustrated
by an extract (p. 460) from a discussion on
' Problems of Eating Behaviour " :
'' The suggestion that the mother ' ignore ' the
child's refusals, represents good logical reasoning
but forgets the frequent underlying emotional
inability to ignore. It also tends to forget the
child's determination to carry the struggle
through to continued victory. . . ."
The soundness of the first sentence contrasts with
the almost startling irresponsibility of the second.
What is this determination to gain victory : for
what ; over what ? Is it in effect, determination to
starve to gain victory over that powerful instinctive
force on which the continuation of life depends ?
Or is it just a go-slow strike to spite Mama ?
If so why should a child spite his Mama and what
happens to them both when he does ? These are
deep matters and worthy of consideration ; in
fact further progress in understanding maladjusted
children is dependent on more study of them.
. The consequence of this avoidance of deeper issues
ls the limitation of the book to an examination (in
great detail) of the more superficial environmental
mfluences, to an erudite examination of heredity
and to the critical evaluation of other work ;
ah valuable but not satisfying by themselves. In
the circumstances, treatment becomes largely a
Matter of prevention and of manipulation of
the environment ; both advocated by rather
didactic methods. " Intensive psycho-therapy " is
Mentioned at intervals, but beyond references to
' working out aggressionno explanation is
offered of the method or what the term means.
Indeed, from the' underlying psycho-pathology
employed it is quite impossible to guess.
A distaste for psycho-analytical modes of thought,
however rationalized in massive proof of the
ubiquity of the connection between body, mind and
environment, does not fill the need for a spirit
of curiosity into psychological origins ; which,
unfortunately, this volume sadly lacks.
K.S.
