Going to School? The Second Five Years
=======================================

Maintenance of Mental Heal
:Author: MARY DINGWALL, M.A.

Senior Psychologist, National Association for Mental Health
Everyone agrees that going to school is an
important occasion in a child's intellectual life,
but not everyone yet realizes that it is an
equally important emotional occasion?that,
mdeed, it may be considered a final stage in
the process of weaning about which Miss
Hay-Shaw wrote in the August issue of Mental
Health. The young child has to learn that he
may not depend upon his mother for all his
Physical sustenance and gradually to learn that
she will not always be there to gratify immediately all his psychological needs. With growing
independence he looks to others?his father,
his brothers and sisters?for love and interest,
and so his little world changes. But during
the first five years his world is a home world?
composed at most of family and intimate
friends and regularly recurring acquaintances
like the milkman, the postman and the
neighbours.

At five the child goes to school and finds that
he has to leave behind, for several hours a day,
the whole of his known environment. He steps
mto a world quite outside his home, and the
success and ease with which he takes this step
will depend not only on the way in which he is
feceived in the Infant School, but quite as much,
not more, upon the way in which he has
surmounted the emotional difficulties of his
early years. The more secure a child feels in
the affection of his mother and father, the more
cosily he will slip into the wider world of school.
He will welcome school joyously as a new
mterest for which he is ready. But if the child
ls insecure, not feeling in his heart that home
will always be there for him, then going to
school may be a serious traumatic experience.
He may feel that he is being cast off, may cling
weeping to his mother and refuse to be parted
from her. Or he may come to school without
an.y apparent fuss and then sit there quietly
miserable, indulging in fantasies that he is still
at home, still with his mother, still the only
baby. That way lies great danger, for the child
is retreating from the actual life around him
into a life of fantasy. When that happens
intellectual and emotional development are
both retarded.

All good Infant teachers today pay very
great attention to the way in which a five-yearold is admitted to school. Not one of them
would arbitrarily separate a young child from
the big sister, the toy, the book or the penny
that he clutches on his first arrival at school.
For the big sister or the toy represent to him
the family world he has known and is leaving
behind. He can only be expected to leave his
known environment behind when he is assured
that the new one is both pleasant and interesting.
Recent changes in Infant School methods
represent not only new theories about learning
in young children, but also the realization on
the part of educationists that there should
be no awkward gap to be bridged between the
home and the school. The Infant School
should have the atmosphere of a bigger family
and all the activities which go on in it should
arise from the child's natural interest. The
interests of five-year-olds vary, of course, with
different individuals, and they vary according
to the intellectual and emotional development
of each child. But broadly speaking, certain
interests of children between five and seven can
be noted. They are individuals, each still
desiring to be the centre of attention: they
love to do things and make things: and they
have an absorbing interest in human relationships.

If you go into a good Infant School where
great freedom of activity is allowed to the
children, you will probably be surprised to
notice how grown up the little girls are. They
are busy shopping, house-keeping, putting the
children to bed, painting pictures of people and
houses and doing it all in a very competent
and motherly way. They are, in fact, modelling
themselves on mother, and her occupational
interests become the little girls' spontaneous
play. If you observe the little girls closely and
note their running commentary on all the
situations they meet with in their real-life play,
you may find yourself wondering at the wit
and wisdom of children in Infant Schools.

Listening to little girls between five and six,
1 am often amazed at their social competence
and wonder sometimes whether they will ever
again be so wise and sound in their human
judgments. They often seem to have an
emotional maturity which they may not show
again until they are experienced elderly women.
Little boys of the same age seem, by comparison, much younger and less socially
competent, but they, too, are interested in
adult activities. If the five-year-old girl copies
mother, the five-year-old boy copies father and
often consciously aims to be what father is.
Watching the play activities of children
during their first year at school, you can see a
number of very interesting things happening.
For example, when he first goes to school, a
child tends to play by himself and only
occasionally and momentarily to join in with
another child or a group of children. But as
the months go on, he comes more and more to
play with other children and in a group. At
five he will play very happily by himself. At
six he will be distressed because " there is no
one to play with " or he has been temporarily
shut out of some group activity.

This increasing interest in playing together
should be put to good educational use. Now,
when the child shows a real interest in playing
with other children (as opposed to playing by
himself in the company of other children), is
the time to begin reading. All the experts on
the teaching of reading seem to be agreed that
a child is not ready to learn to read until he
has a mental age of at least six years. He has
to be six, not only intellectually, but emotionally. Reading is fundamentally a means of
communication and a child is not emotionally
ready to learn to read until he shows, by his
behaviour, a spontaneous and urgent desire
to share in the activities of other children, to
play as part of a group. In a healthy wellbalanced child of average ability, this desire
to play in groups usually begins to show itself
at about six years of age, and that is one reason
why children are not nowadays given formal
instruction in reading immediately they go to
school. Better, quicker, happier and more
lasting learning can be got by waiting until
the child is " ready for reading ".

As he goes on into his seventh year a healthy
child tends to play more and more in groups
until, about the time he goes into the Junior
School, the gang spirit may be said to arrive.
When they enter the Infant School children
are individuals, each unique. By the time they
have been six months in the Junior School it
is sometimes rather difficult to notice the
individuals in the compact group, with common
interests and aims, and apparently only a
community life, which the class has become.
The change happens by degrees, but parents
are apt to notice suddenly that John, who used
to have such an interesting way of expressing
himself and a personality all his own, now
behaves and talks exactly like James next door
and Robert over the way. Sometimes the
school is blamed for " killing individuality
Actually the change is one which happens in
the course of normal development.

Somewhere about seven years of age the
child changes over from an interest in individuals (both child and adult) to an interest
in his own age group. The emphasis is put
upon society and it is as a member of a society
that he values himself. He must conform to the
rules of his society. He must in no way differ.
At the same time he changes over from a subjective interest in persons to an objective,
unemotional, interest in things.

From seven to eleven is a scientific age.
The child is concerned with the objective
universe and with the collection and classification of facts about it. It is the great age of
collection, for the Junior School child will ,
collect anything?names of engines, numbers of
cars, facts, useful and useless, about this and
that?with astonishing concentration and
rapidity. Because of this, now is the time for
laying the foundations of all the factual subjects
at school. Taught with imagination, and
making use of the Junior's love of ritual and
repetition, arithmetical tables are not dull.
Many other things which, to the adult, are
uninteresting are full of interest for the child at
this age. If his interest in the factual is not
exploited to the full in the Junior School, it is
sometimes rather difficult to fill in the gaps at a
later age?e.g. adolescence?when interest tends
again to become subjective rather than objective.
Freud has described this stage from 7-11
(roughly) as the latency period. It is true that,
among healthy children, there is less sign of
emotional disturbance, and indeed a generally
less emotional attitude to life, than there is
either in early childhood or adolescence. But
if a child has not surmounted all the difficulties
of early childhood, he may carry over into the
so-called latency period the emotional attitudes
and behaviour characteristics of an earlier
stage of development.

To say that, in general, children in the
Junior School are unemotional, matter of fact
People, with a very scientific outlook on life,
a love of organized games, of repetitive ritual,
?f going about in groups and following an
elected leader, is true. Yet there are always
exceptions and some of the exceptions are
children who, although they are ten, are still
emotionally under five. They need help, and
the earlier the help is given the more likely
they are to grow up into mature well-balanced
individuals.
