After Care or Treatment?
=========================

Editorial

It was not to be expected that the introduction
of the National Health Service on July 5th, 1948,
would occur without some teething troubles;
many of these are now passing but one problem
still remains as a cause for some anxiety, in
particular to the workers of the National
Association for Mental Health; this is the
danger that a patient who requires help may fall
into the gap created by the Act between treatment?the responsibility of the Regional Hospital Boards (aided where they exist by the
Teaching Hospitals)?and after-care?that of
the Local Health Authorities. Another danger
which will, of course, seem the more grave to
those who believe that patients are " best left
alone" is the converse; it is possible that
representatives of two authorities may enter into
a sort of "pull devil, pull baker " tug-of-war for
the possession of the patient's mind. The presence
of social workers of a third class?the voluntary
organizations?further complicates the issue.

Naturally it is theoretically possible to decide
from the interpretation of the Act whether any
particular case is receiving, or is in need of,
after-care or treatment. Unfortunately the
practice is less easy than the theory, and many
workers in the field are in fact in doubt; which
can lead to a multiplication of their work, to
friction between authorities, or to delay in
dealing with the patient.

To meet this difficulty, several proposals can
be suggested; first, that there should be a
clearer definition of the matter, by those
responsible for drafting the Act, in terms which
the ordinary social worker can understand (and
remember)?and perhaps this is already on the
way. Secondly, even then it is still essential
that there must be the closest possible co-operation between all workers in the field; its form
must be worked out by those concerned in each
area and modified to meet the local conditions;
it should certainly not be imposed from any
higher level as a rigid plan. The arrangements
made will obviously vary according to the
number of workers already employed, and the
relative strength of the Regional Board representatives (that is the Hospital Management
Committees of the mental hospitals), of the
local health authorities and of the voluntary
bodies. We publish in this issue excellent
suggestions by Dr Ratcliffe and Miss Jones
of the shape arrangements can take; this will be
read with interest by all.

A problem which frequently arises is that of
deciding which social worker shall visit a
patient after discharge from a mental hospital.
Even had there been no difficulty in understanding the Act on its ruling of the respective
responsibilities here, close contact between all
concerned would still be essential; for it is
obvious that whatever the arrangements, exceptions must often be made on behalf of the
welfare of the patient?for the benefit of whom
it is to be remembered the Act was devised.
Consequently, it may well happen that a social
worker who has got into excellent touch with
a patient in hospital will be required to continue
to visit him after he has ceased to receive
treatment, and when he is therefore theoretically
no longer her responsibility. Conversely, a
social worker who has done much for a patient
before admission may reasonably expect to be
allowed to visit him in hospital, and will take
him over again at once on discharge.

Once the patient's interests have been considered in this way, it must also be asked what
particular skill is demanded of the individual
worker. With the present shortage of fully
trained psychiatric social workers we can afford
no wastage of skill and if any work can be
delegated to less highly trained workers, it
surely must be done. This again indicates the
need for the closest co-operation all round.
It is therefore all the more unfortunate that
in some places the contact between the various
groups of social workers is not as close as it
might be. There are, of course, notable ^nd
honourable exceptions. It would help to have
more joint meetings to discuss clinical and
administrative problems and to find that on the
other side of the fence people are working to the
same end, and not merely for their own aggrandisement. It may be a sign of the times?when
an Empire is changing its shape?that individuals
and authorities are suspicious of any appearance
of Empire building by each other; surely there
is enough building of the Mental Health
Services required for any would-be builder to
add a few bricks, rather than to pull his neighbour's buildings to pieces.
J
