The First Five Years by Cecil Hay-Shaw
=======================================

Maintenance of Mental Health

Psychiatric Social Worker, National Association for Mental Health
. Perhaps it is just as well that we remember so
little of what happened during the early years of
?ur lives, that so many of the conflicts, frustrations and fears which assailed us at that time
have been relegated to the unconscious, repressed
and apparently forgotten. And yet if we are to
understand ourselves and our fellow men, and
^specially our children, it is essential that the
importance of these early years be recognized
as they play such a vital part in character
development. For although much may be
lost to consciousness in later life we are what
ye are, to a great extent, because of the way
in which these conflicts were dealt with at the
time when they occurred. By this I do not
mean to imply that all children are unhappy,
but only that all children in the process of
growing up do have to face, from time to time,
Problems which to them are very real and which
may be accompanied by great distress and anguish.
How often, I wonder, do we stop to think what
it must be like to the young baby to be utterly
dependent, unable to express his needs in an
articulate manner, having always to wait for
someone else to attend to his wants both
Physical and emotional and relying entirely
?n the kindness and understanding of adults ?
The grown-up when he is hungry can get himself
a meal, when he is cold he can put on a coat,
and when he is lonely can seek company if it is
?nly in books or the wireless. Even if he has
to wait he does at least understand about time
and knows he will not have to wait forever.
Experience teaches us that immediate gratification is not always possible and that because
something is withheld it does not necessarily
mean that we are deserted, unloved and unlovable. We learn also that alternatives may be
found for some of our unsatisfied wants. But
the young baby has no understanding of time
and his experience of substitutes is very limited.
It means nothing to him when he is hungry that
his mother is on her way to him. Until he hears
her voice or feels her arm about him he feels,
deserted, forgotten and unloved. His physical
hunger is combined with his need for love and
security and the absence of the one means the
absence of the other. For the young baby is a
primitive creature whose needs are fundamental
and urgent; he demands immediate gratification
and if he is kept waiting too long will become
frightened and angry.

To the infant, food is all important, not only
because it satisfies his physical need but because
it is given to him by his mother who at the same
time gives him love and security. In the act of
sucking the baby obtains real sensual pleasure;
his mouth is extremely sensitive and the breast
is his first contact with the outside world. His
happiness or unhappiness are closely bound up
with the feeding situation. For this reason too
much rigidity and strict adherence to the clock
are not good in the early days. Frustration
should be reduced to a minimum until the baby
has had time to adapt himself to life outside
the mother's body. As he grows older, waiting
will become less frightening and frustration
more bearable.

It is not known at exactly what age the baby
comes to recognize himself as a person and his
mother as a separate being able to come and go
as and when she will, but as this gradually
dawns on him, he is faced with disillusionment
and a realization that he is no longer in complete
control of the situation. There remains throughout life a certain painfulness in the knowledge
that the person we love is a free and independent
being and not part of oneself.

With this realization of the mother as a whole
and separate being comes another shock. The
baby finds that the same mother who is responsible for all his satisfactions is also the person
who at times frustrates him. Not only his love,
therefore, but also his anger and hatred must be
directed towards her and he is placed in the
dangerous position of having to hate the person
he most loves and on whom he is utterly dependent. Anger and hatred arouse aggression and
destructive tendencies, and when these are
directed towards the loved person anxiety and
fear result. The need to destroy the frustrating
object will be followed not only by fear of losing
the mother with all that that means but also by a
fear of retaliation. The baby in this way
projects on to the outside world his own
destructive fantasy, interpreting the world in the
terms of his own primitive impulses, and
imagines all sorts of dreadful things happening
to him. Thus we see in young children quite
irrational terrors such as being bitten up,
devoured and utterly destroyed. In spite of
having really good and kind parents the child
will at times be absurdly frightened of them and
of other people. Only through his experience of
real people in his daily contact with them will his
fears be modified and his confidence assured.
He will come to realize that to be frustrated
does not mean to be unloved and that his own
anger is not as dangerous as it seemed at first
to be.

With weaning comes a new phase in the baby's
life. Up to now he has been obtaining all his
emotional pleasure from the breast and the close
contact with his mother, and he has yet to learn
that this happy state of affairs must end. If he
is to accept the change without too much shock
and without feeling once again that his mother
does not love him, the weaning process must be
gradual and must coincide with the baby's
widening interests and pleasures. By the time
he is fully weaned he should be enjoying people,
not only his mother but his father and his
brothers and sisters. He should be able to
handle his toys and to amuse himself by watching
the world round about him. But still he will
tend to look towards his own body for comfort
and to compensate for the loss of the breast by
finding other sensitive areas. He will take
pleasure in his excretions and in handling his
genitals. For his world is still very limited
and there is little he can do to relieve his tension
and anxiety and to satisfy his emotional needs.
In the second year of life the baby learns many
new skills. He begins to walk and talk, to feed
himself and to play with toys. There is more to
interest him and amuse him and he will enjoy
experimenting and finding out about things.
There is, however, one very difficult thing he has (
to learn and that is to be clean in his habits. !
The wise mother will not have tried to train her
baby until he has reached an age when he is able
to control his muscles and to understand what is
expected of him. By the time he is eleven
or twelve months old he should be able to
co-operate with his mother, and his relationship
with her should be such that he wants to please
her. Provided she does not expect him to
conform too quickly he will learn to give up" his
more primitive way of excreting and accept a
more civilized standard of behaviour. But he
will not do this without a struggle. The young
child has no feeling of disgust. His bodily
products will represent to him a part of himself,
something precious to be given up only to his
beloved mother, or sometimes withheld when he
is angry with her. They may also appear as
weapons with which to punish and destroy.
In his imagination they are of great importance,
the only thing in fact which belongs to him
and which he comes to recognize as being valued ^
by the adult world. For this reason habit
training is not a simple matter of teaching the
child to do what is considered right but an
important factor in character formation. Just
as the feeding situation provided the child with
his first contact with the outside world and tended
to colour his attitude to people, so with habit
training the all important thing is the relationship between the mother and child. If the baby feels loved and secure he will want to please his
mother and thereby maintain his happy state.
He will soon realize that there are certain
things which he must do to keep this love and
he will try to do them. But there will be times
when he is stubborn and contrary, when he does
not seem to wish to please, for he is at this time >
discovering himself as a person with the power
to give or withhold as he wishes. If the mother
is over-anxious or over-strict about cleanliness
at the beginning, the child may fail to conform,
or may break down later on and revert to dirty
habits, and?what is even more important?
foundations may be laid for character defects in j
later life. There should be no attitude of disgust
on the part of the adult until the child has been
trained and is able to control his behaviour ,*
then he can be taught that people do not like
messes, although the occasional accident on the
part of a young child should never be treated by
scolding or punishing. Children vary in the
age at which they are clean; some learn very
quickly, others are still wetting the bed at four
or even five. A lot will depend on the temperawent and intelligence of the child and on the
attitude of the grown-ups.

If children are to learn without too much
distress to give up the bodily pleasure in excretion,
they must be provided with other and more
constructive outlets for their love of " messing
Playing with sand, water and mud, and later,
Plasticine and paint, are all helpful. Young
children should, wherever possible, have opportunities to dig in the garden, to make mud pies
and to dabble in water. In our modern society
in which people tend to live in rather cramped
conditions the nursery school is the place where
this kind of activity is most easily provided for
children of two to five years of age. This is in
fact another sort of weaning in which the child
learns to accept substitutes for the original
satisfaction. The child who is kept too clean
will be emotionally deprived and may in later
life be unable to enjoy, without guilt, any of the
wore messy activities such as painting, modeling, gardening, cooking and so on. The
standard in the home must not be so high that the
child either refuses to conform or does so at the
expense of his emotional life.

By the time the child reaches the age of about
two and a half he has begun to be aware of other
individuals in the family. It may be that a new
baby has arrived who is taking up a great deal
?f the mother's attention, but in any case the
father and possibly older brothers and sisters
will have to be considered. The child is himself
still very dependent upon his mother and, having
enjoyed what to him seemed a total possession
?f her during his infancy, will not want to give
her up. Once again he is faced with an
emotional problem. In his attempt to keep
his mother for himself his father will appear as
a rival and he may want to push him out.
Jealousy, hatred and fears are common at this
time and the frustrations of the situation tend to
he met by rages and tantrums on the part of
the child. At the same time, he is becoming
aware of his own sexuality for which the only
outlet is in masturbation. Sexual curiosity is
active and the child becomes anxious about
sexual differences. He somehow relates the fact
that his father is a man with the fact that the
mother loves him and that with his father
he cannot compete. He finally gives up the
unequal struggle and adopts an attitude of
chivalry and protectiveness towards his mother,
becoming as much like his father as he can in the
hope that some day he too will have a wife like
his mother.

For the little girl the problem is even more
complicated, for her rival is her mother, on
whom she is still so very dependent. Because
she is a girl she will become jealous of her
father's affection for her mother and will want
to supplant her mother in his affections. She
will become coy and flirtatious in her manner
to her father, trying to win him over, but she too
feels somehow that in this relationship she
cannot compete on an equal footing. In her
jealousy she will want to get rid of the mother
and possess the father, but this will arouse the
fear that she might lose the mother without
whom she could not survive. In the end she too
finds a compromise. She identifies herself with
her mother, becoming as like her as she can and
for the time being relinquishes possession of her
father and incidentally of her mother as well.
These conflicts axe not fought out consciously.
The child may only be aware of powerful urges
and feelings and at times of frustration,
disappointment and fear. But sooner or later
he comes to realize that the relatively happy
situation in which his mother seemed to belong
to him alone, has come to an end. He finds
that he must take his place in the family and
share his mother with others. Once he has
accepted the reality of the situation the conflict
tends to become repressed and forgotten, his
sexual urges become less dominant and he
turns his attention outwards towards his playmates and all the new found activities and
interests of the five year old. For the next
few years his emotional life should be less
turbulent, only to be aroused and relived in
adolescence.

And so we see that in a society such as ours,
growing up is not an easy matter. The young
child has to give up one by one his instinctual
pleasures and accept the standard of behaviour
set by the adult world. There is no way in
which the child's relationship with his mother
could remain entirely happy as he would only
be satisfied with complete possession of her. He
must grow up and learn to stand on his own feet.
Within the sheltered circle of the family he
learns to accept frustration, to cope with his
feelings of rivalry and jealousy and to share the
person he loves with others. In this way he is
prepared for life outside the home. He becomes
a social being able to form new relationships.
His world enlarges when he goes to school and
in the identification with his contemporaries he
gradually becomes emancipated and freed from
the ties of early childhood.

This period of emotional development,
although fraught with difficulties, can be made
bearable to the child only if his home provides
the love and security he needs. He must be
allowed time to grow up and his parents must be
willing and able to help him. They must realize
that although he will eventually become independent of them this does not mean that he will
cease to love them. The better equipped he is to
take his place in the world the more he will \
appreciate his home and all it has given him.
