News and Notes
================

MENTAL HEALTH 47

Juvenile Delinquency
A few months ago, the N.A.M.H., represented
by the Medical Director in the Chair, formed a
Joint Convening Committee with representatives
from the following organizations:
British Psychological Society
Howard League for Penal Reform
Institute of Sociology
Institute for the Scientific Treatment of
Delinquency
Royal Medico-Psychological Association.
The purpose of the Committee was to convene a
conference , on The Scientific Study of Juvenile
Delinquency. This was a direct result of paragraph
^ of a Memorandum issued jointly by the Home
Office and Ministry of Education which indicated
the need for organized scientific research as a
Possible means of reducing the problem of juvenile
crime.
The Conference, which was opened by Lord
Feversham, took place on Saturday, October 1st,
1^49, at the Royal Institution, Albermarle Street,
W.l, and was well attended by a widely repre-
sentative audience. Mr. J. C. Maude, K.C., M.P.,
Presided over the morning session, and the after-
noon session was under the chairmanship of Miss
Margery Fry, M.A., J.P. The main speakers in
jhe morning, whose papers dealt with "The
Limits of Present Knowledge were Mr. Alec
Rodger, M.A., of the British Psychological Society,
Pr- Hermann Mannheim, Reader in Criminology,
London School of Economics, and Dr. J. D. W.
^earce, Medical Co-Director of the Portman
Clinic, London. The discussion which followed
was opened by Professor Barbara Wootton. In the
afternoon, the subject of the papers was " The
Field for Future Research ", and the speakers
Were Dr. John Bowlby (Director, Child Guidance
department, Tavistock Clinic), Professor T. S.
oimey, M.A. (Department .of Social Science,
University of Liverpool), and Dr. Denis Carroll
fMedical Co-Director of the Portman Clinic).
rhe discussion was opened by Dr. P. D. Scott.
At the conclusion of the proceedings, the following
resolution, proposed by Mrs. Madeleine Robinson,
LP-, and seconded by Mr. Frank Dawtry (General
Secretary of the National Association of Probation
Officers) was passed:
" That this Conference, having discussed the
Problem of juvenile delinquency, is convinced that
effective preventive measures cannot be applied to
the best advantage without more precise knowledge.
To this end, the Conference recommends that large
scale research be initiated in consultation with all
the professions concerned. It welcomes Section 77
?f the Criminal Justice Act and trusts that the
provisions of the Act will be fully implemented.''''
A report on the conference proceedings is being
printed and will be available on sale at 2s. 6d. per
copy. Application should be made to: The
Secretary, Convening Committee on Juvenile
Delinquency, N.A.M.H., 39 Queen Anne Street,
London, W.l.
Essay Competition for Mental Nurses
Night Charge Nurse Albert F. Day, of St. James'
Hospital,' Portsmouth, was the winner of the
First Prize (?3 3s. and a medal) in this year's
" Lord " Memorial Essay Competition for mental
nurses (founded by the Society of the Crown of
Our Lord in memory of the late Dr. J. R. Lord,
C.B.E., and administered by the National Association
for Mental Health). The subject set for competitors
was:
" The ways and means by which the Nurse can
help the Patient to achieve the fullest possible practical
and social re-adiustment"
and in the opinion of the Judges, Nurse Day's
essay was of outstanding merit. It is published in
full on page 40 of this issue.
The second prize (?1 Is.) was awarded to Staff
Nurse Marjorie Povey, R.M.P.A.(R.M.N.D.) of
Darenth Park Colony, Dartford.
For the first time the competition was open to
nurses employed in mental deficiency institutions,
and candidates were able to deal with the subject
either from the mental disorder or the mental
deficiency aspect. The Judges reported that while
in some cases competitors showed a. tendency to
give an all-round description of the work of a nurse,
without sufficient emphasis on the aspect of practical
and social adjustment, on the whole the ideas
presented, and the method of their expression,
reached a high average level. They were also
impressed by the well-informed, thoughtful and
original ideas contained in certain of the essays.
We offer our congratulations to the winners, and
especially to Nurse Day who has competed on
several occasions in the past and was awarded
second prize in 1942.
" Milk in Schools "
In July, 1947, the " Milk in Schools " Scheme,
hitherto only applicable to children actually
attending a school or an Occupation Centre, was
extended to children " unable by reason of
disability of mind or body " to attend any school
and not in attendance at a Centre.
This provision meant that all mentally defective
children were covered by the scheme except those
in Institutions and for these, extra milk could only
be obtained on an individual medical certificate
in each case.
48 MENTAL HEALTH
On discovering this anomaly, the National
Association for Mental Health made representations
to the Ministry of Health, and we are glad to be
able to report that the matter has now been adjusted.
Mentally defective children of school age resident
in an Institution may receive milk at the rate
of one-third of a pint every day for a seven-day
week, irrespective of whether they attend an
Occupation Centre or receive any other form of
instruction.
Provision of Occupation Centres
A Memorandum was issued in September by the
Ministry of Health containing suggestions for the
planning, construction and staffing of Occupation
Centres for the information of local health
authorities in implementing their Schemes under
Sections 28 and 51 of the National Health Service
Act. Full guidance is given in the Memorandum
on such matters as the planning of new Centre
buildings and adaptation of existing premises, and
reference is made as to qualifications of staff, and
as to the proportion of staff to children.
It is, however, made clear that the " final decision
and responsibility for design " is left to the local
authority concerned, and that the extent to which
the suggestions are adopted must be " conditioned
by local, circumstances, including resources available
and the financial considerations involved in each
case
Therapeutic Art and Social Clubs
We have received an interesting account from
Miss Swann, N.A.M.H. Regional Representative
(N.E. Region) concerning two clubs recently set
up in her area.
In April of last year, Miss Hogg, the Social
Worker in charge of the Association's sub-office
in Middlesbrough, organized a meeting among
after-care clients with a view to discussing with
them the possibility of starting an art class. A
small and enthusiastic group was formed which
has met weekly ever since. The main organization
has devolved upon Miss Hogg, and some teaching
has been given by Mr. Dowdswell, late Warden of
the Middlesbrough Settlement. Numbers have
been well maintained, and there is a steady group
which attends each week and which is sufficiently
integrated to welcome with great ease any new
members who come along.
The development of the art work has been most
interesting to watch. None of the members in
the club had ever done any art work before, and
most of them passed easily from the stage of
" doodling" to imaginative productions. One
member found that he did not like painting, but
he learnt to do lettering and has become very
expert in all the different forms of this art. Members
now discuss their paintings quite freely and are
prepared to give an explanation of their work.
On two occasions during the past summer,
sketching groups have gone out of doors, and
these seemed to be of special help to the rather shy
and hesitant member.
In Newcastle, a Social Club was started in
February, 1948, under the joint auspices of St.
Nicholas Hospital and the National Association
for Mental Health. This has proved to be quite
a success, and since July of last year the Club has
been sponsored by St. Nicholas Hospital. It is
attended by ex in-patients and out-patients, as well
as by after-care clients known to the N.A.M. H.
The Club meets weekly, and there is a steady
nucleus of regular attenders who are an exceedingly
happy group and make newcomers very welcome.
Activities take the form of table tennis, card games,
chess, paper and pencil games, and singing?the
latter activity is extremely popular, and it was
possible to arrange a Christmas carol evening last
winter.
This club means a great deal to those who are
shy and anxious, and it has been noticeable too
how those who are somewhat withdrawn have been
able to make a reasonably good social adjustment
within the framework of the meeting.
Mental Treatment and Mental Hospitals
In the Annual Report of the Board of Control
to the Lord Chancellor for the year 1948 (published
by H.M. Stationery Office, price 4d. post free),
mention is made of some of the effects on the Mental
Health Services in England and Wales of the intro-
duction of the National Health Service, particularly
in regard to the question of disclaimer and
designation of hospitals.
The Report explains that the designation of
mental hospitals proceeded smoothly in spite of
complications due to some public assistance
institutions continuing to accommodate mental
patients. There was still much sorting out to be
done, and the Regional Hospitals Boards were
working out their short term and long term policy.
With regard to disclaimer, the main problem centred
around the registered hospitals and, after consulta-
tion with the Regional Hospital Board concerned,
the Minister of Health decided to disclaim the
following: Manchester Royal Hospital, Cheadle,
Cheshire; Barnwood House, Gloucester, St.
Andrew's Hospital, Northampton, and The Retreat,
York. Bethlem Royal Hospital and the Maudsley
now form a single combined unit which is designated
as a teaching hospital. Its medical school forms
the Institute of Psychiatry, a post-graduate institute
in the British post-graduate Medical Federation
of the University.
There was little change during 1948 in the number
of persons under care under the Lunacy and Mental
Treatment Acts compared with the previous year,
i.e. 144,725, and 144,736 respectively, but one of the
most serious problems continues to be overcrowding
in mental hospitals due on the one hand to lack of
accommodation, and, on the other, to shortage of
nurses which caused no less than 2,689 beds to be
MENTAL HEALTH 49
out of use. While new building produced 105
beds during the year, shortages of materials and
labour and financial considerations caused the
postponement of further schemes designed to
produce 2,600 additional beds.
The Report notes the increasing number of
hospitals which are taking advantage of the concerts
arranged by the Council for Music in hospitals
(to which reference has been made in previous
issues of this journal) and which are much appreci-
ated by the patients. In this connection, a small
sub-committee has been formed for experimental
Work in music therapy in mental illness. Art
classes for patients have also been started in some
hospitals and are proving valuable.
The Criminal Justice Act, 1948
In the current Report of the Prison Com-
missioners, a useful summary is given of the principal
changes affecting the prison and Borstal system
to be brought about by the new Act (at once or
as a long-term policy). These include:
Restrictions on the imprisonment of young
Persons under 21.
The establishment of Detention Centres to be
Used as one of the alternatives to imprisonment
for offenders between the ages of 14 and 2Q
(inclusive), which the Secretary of State has decided
shall be the responsibility of the Commissioners
*n consultation and co-operation with the Children's
department of the Home Office.
The establishment of Attendance Centres for
young offenders between the ages of 12 and 20
(inclusive), for which the Children's Department
?f the Home Office will be responsible.
The provision permitting young persons under 21,
^ho are sentenced to imprisonment for 3 months
?r more, to be released on a conditional licence,
thus ensuring adequate after-care and supervision.
The new or extended powers given to the Courts
lor dealing with persistent offenders by means of:
(?) "Corrective training " to last from 2to4years.
(?) Preventive Detention (for persons not less
than 30 years of age) for terms of not less
than 5 or more than 14 years.
January 1st, 1948, 5,743 would, on their next
c?nviction, become eligible for the first, and 2,551
*?r the second?a substantial proportion of the
convict population.
The Board of Control
It is announced that on the retirement of Miss
Ruth Darwin, C.B.E., from the public service,
the King has been pleased, on the recommendation
?f the Minister of Health, to approve the appoint-
ment of Miss Isabel Wilson, M.D., F.R.C.P.,
^?P.M., to be a Senior Commissioner and member
of the Board of Control. Dr. Wilson has for
niany years been a member of the National
Association for Mental Health and previously of
Jts constituent bodies.
We feel we cannot let this announcement go by
without some words of appreciation of the dis-
tinguished service rendered by Miss Darwin for the
welfare of mental defectives and mental patients,
during her long term of office as a member of the
Board of Control. She was first appointed as a
Commissioner of the Board in 1921, and, when
following the Mental Treatment Act, 1930, the post
of unpaid Commissioner was abolished, she became
part-time Commissioner until 1932 when she suc-
ceeded the late Mrs. Pinsent as Senior Commissioner.
Miss Darwin's early years were spent in Cambridge,
and it was there that her career of social service
started when in a voluntary capacity she studied
the problems of the mental defectives in the
community and worked on their behalf. As
many members will recall, Miss Darwin (now
Mrs. Rees-Thomas) was for long actively associated
with the Central Association for Mental Welfare,
and has also given most valuable help as a member
of the National Association for Mental Health.
Although retiring from official life, it gives us
great satisfaction to state that we may confidently
expect to have her continued help and the benefit
of her long experience.
" The Fountain "
We welcome a new contemporary in the shape
of this lively monthly bulletin produced by the
Fountain Group Hospital Management Committee.
Already two issues have appeared. It is obvious
that the enterprise will enrich the life of the Group
and will, moreover, stimulate wider interest in
the institutional care of mental defectives?too
often looked upon as a dull, routine job, offering
no inducements to the enterprising and the
imaginative. In the Bulletin is incorporated news
of the " Friends of the Fountain so that co-
operation between them and the hospital staff
may be still more complete.
We understand that a few specimen copies of the
Bulletin are available, and any reader who is
interested is invited to communicate with the
Secretary of the Editorial Committee, Fountain
Hospital, Tooting Grove, London, S.W.I7.
National Insurance Local Advisory Committees
Questions connected with the National Insurance
Act, in its application to mental defectives and
other groups of handicapped persons, inevitably
confront the mental health worker from time to
time and the subject is one which is under discussion
by the Mental Deficiency Sub-Committee of the
N.A.M.H.
It has recently been announced that the Minister
of National Insurance is setting up 230 National
Insurance Local Advisory Committees, each to
consist of about twenty members of whom six will
represent employers and six employees. In
addition there will be two or three representatives
of local authorities and one or two of friendly
societies. The Committees will then be asked
to select four or five other persons " with suitabl
50 MENTAL HEALTH
local knowledge" to complete their number,
and local associations have been invited to put
forward nominations. With this announcement is
given a list of the twelve Regional Controllers
appointed by the Ministry.
Patients in Mental Institutions
A Circular (No. 95/49) issued by the Ministry
of Health on October 15th is designed to meet
the needs of insurable patients in mental hospitals
and mental deficiency institutions and to institute
a procedure which will involve a minimum amount
of work for those in charge.
Readers interested in this matter should enquire
at their local National Insurance Office for a copy
of Form C.F.75, which sets out clearly the position
with regard to contributions and benefits as applicable
to the patients concerned.
Scottish Association for Mental Health
At the Annual General Meeting of this
Association, which took place in Edinburgh on
October 10th, a new constitution was adopted and
it was decided to substitute the word " Health "
for " Hygiene " in the title of the Association.
All communications should be addressed to the
Interim Secretary, Scottish Association for Mental
Health, 41 Charlotte Square, Edinburgh, 2.
