The Criminal Law and Sexual Offenders
======================================

:Author: Sir Norwood East, M.D., F.R.C.P.
Lecturer on Forensic Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry, Maudsley Hospital, London University;
formerly H.M. Commissioner of Prisons
The Report on " The Criminal Law and
Sexual Offenders prepared by the Joint
Committee on Psychiatry and the Law appointed
by the British Medical Association and the
Magistrates Association, focuses attention upon
a part, and perhaps not the most important, of
the larger problem of the medical treatment of
crime. It will be generally accepted that unless
the matter is viewed in perspective, and by the
aid of scientific discipline, conclusions may be
influenced by personal bias and limited experience. At the same time, it must be admitted
that we lack any reliable large scale figures to
show the sizes of the clinical groups of offenders
who may be suitable for psychiatric investigation
and treatment?using the latter term in the wide
sense adopted by the Committee?or the
proportion of successes and failures which may
be expected.

The Committee appears to accept the undoubted fact that normality is consistent with
the commission of a sexual offence. But it
states that those charged with sexual offences
should be dealt with in the courts by a procedure
that in some respects differs from that which is
used for the generality of accused persons. It
also states that the principal reason for this is
medical. It is difficult to understand why the
sexual offender who is not mentally affected,
and there are many, should be subjected to a
special procedure designed for mentally abnormal offenders. Moreover, it seems likely,
if the suggestion of the Committee is accepted,
that the medical significance of some other
forms of criminal behaviour due to mental
abnormalities may be overshadowed, and the
larger problem of the psychiatric treatment of
crime suffer in consequence. This should not
be allowed. The statement suggests that all
sexual offences necessarily have special medical
significance, whereas experience shows that, for
example, incestuous relations between consenting adults may no more require medical
treatment than the healthy youth who indulges
in sexual intercourse with a willing girl of
fifteen years of age, whose mature appearance
leads him to believe that she has attained the
legal age of consent.

It is suggested that a further justification for
dealing specially with sexual offenders from a
medical point of view arises from the fact that,
unlike other crimes, the effect upon the victims
may not be apparent immediately, or even for
some years, so that the gravity of the offence
may not be fully assessed at the time of the
trial. But the force of this statement becomes
a matter for conjecture when it is remembered
that the same may be said of other offences.
The devastating effects upon the mental peace
and material welfare of widows, orphans and
other victims of the fraudulent company
promotor, or the dependants of a man who has
been murdered, cannot always be assessed at
once, and it may be confusing to make this
delay a reason for adopting a special procedure
in sexual offences.

A classification of sex offenders is presented
which many may consider adequate for practical
purposes. It does not attempt to contribute
to the difficult problem which constantly confronts us, and which is perhaps the crux of the
situation; namely, the essential difference
between a mental abnormality which can be
treated by medical methods, and a personal
deviation of character which may be at the
worst unalterable and at the best only capable
of some modification. Nevertheless, there will
be general agreement with the view of the
Committee that to make the wisest decision a
court should know to which, if any, of the
classes named the offender belongs.
Attention is directed to the number of sexual
offenders who are acquitted, and the Committee
finds it difficult to believe that in all these cases
the defendants were innocent. It is suggested
that with improved methods of trial there would
be probably more findings of guilt, and it is said
that it would be advantageous for the offender
as well as for the community if such findings
were followed by treatment. Many will believe
that although this may be a matter for consideration by the police and legal authorities,
it is beyond the purview of the psychiatrist who
may be impeded in his scientific approach and
treatment of the mentally abnormal offender, as
well as disturbed in retaining his professional
impartiality, if he joins in the quest to obtain
more frequent convictions, however specious
the reason may appear.

In a brief discussion on homosexuality, the
Committee makes no reference to the important
clinical fact mentioned many years ago by
Havelock Ellis, and more recently recalled by
Eliot Slater and others, that so-called perversions of all kinds are shown to a minor
degree by a considerable proportion of healthy
and socially valuable members of the public.
It may be remembered also that J. J. Putnam
in 1921 stated: " It is true, however those who
have not looked into the matter may think
otherwise, that, in the eye of science, perverted
instincts such, for example, as an excessive
passion for a person of the same sex carried
from the realm of thought into act, finds its
analogue in many overdone or even quasinormal relationships of daily life. It is a
question of degree that is at stake, and although
for purposes of punishment, prevention, public
self-protection and social standards, we must
draw sharp lines, yet knowledge should make
us prudent in passing scientific judgments."
It is to be regretted that the Committee fails
sufficiently to emphasize the outstanding fact
that the indication for psychiatric treatment in
criminal cases is not the objective act, but the
subjective anxiety of the offender to be relieved
of his desire to commit it. It must also be
noted that although reference is made to the
delinquent psychopath, the term is generally
used so loosely that it has no scientific value
unless a specific and recognized type of psychopathic personality is described. No mention
is made by the Committee of the more precise
and no less important groups of psychoneurotic
offenders.

It is stated that in all charges arising out of
homosexual conduct, it is essential that no
sentence should be passed on an offender
without examination and report by a duly
qualified doctor after a verdict of guilty. It
may, perhaps, be assumed that by this is meant
a doctor who is experienced in psychological
medicine and in the investigation of criminal
behaviour. For it is a fact that offenders
sometimes intentionally deceive the examiner,
and simulate anxiety to amend their ways in
order to receive clemency, having no intention
to give up their perverse acts without being
assured that they can and will be replaced by an
equally pleasurable substitute. It is also essential to remember that no psychiatrist is
omniscient. All have much to learn about the
diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders
when associated with criminal behaviour.
Some interesting observations are made regarding the present situation when children are
called upon to give evidence in sexual cases.
The Committee considers that the granting of
legal aid to the defendant, if he cannot afford
a solicitor, should be compulsory whenever
possible in sexual cases, as it is most undesirable
that defendants should themselves crossexamine child victims or child witnesses, for
such children often show real terror when
spoken to by the alleged offender. Among
other suggestions, the Committee proposes that
a simpler form of oath should be provided for
children, few of whom know what the word
evidence means, and some have been brought
up without any knowledge of God. At present,
affirmation is only available to those who
object to taking the oath, but the Committee
believes that children should be permitted
to make an affirmation without objecting to
taking the oath. Attention is directed to
Section 38 of the Children and Young Persons
Act, 1933, whereby the evidence of a child who
has not taken the oath can only be received if
" corroborated by some other material evidence ", and it is proposed that the law should
be altered so that such unsworn evidence may
be accepted if corroborated by one or more
other children who have not been sworn.

Reference is made to the Rules laid down by
the Judges in 1912 regarding the caution that
has to be given by the police when persons
suspected of a crime begin to explain their
conduct. The Committee thinks that there
should be an expert inquiry, in which both
legal and psychiatric experts would take part,
into the question whether those suspected of
criminal sexual acts should be permitted, when
approached by the police, to make an uninterrupted explanation if they wish to do so.
The Committee realizes that its considerations
regarding the Rules may be held to apply to all
suspected criminals, and it claims that sexual
offenders can reasonably be regarded as a
special class. However this may be, as already
stated, many sexual offenders are not mentally
abnormal. Moreover, no figures are presented
to show that the sexual offender who is mentally
abnormal is more effectively dealt with by
medical treatment than other offenders whose
offences are due to abnormal mental states.
It is not unlikely that a large scale enquiry
would show that of selected sexual and nonsexual offenders, the latter were more amenable
to medical treatment than the former.
Discussing the East-Hubert proposal?that a
special institution within the Prison Service
be established, where some of those needing
residential psychiatric treatment would be
required to remain for a period?the Committee
considers that courts sending cases to such an
institution should be empowered to impose
within limits longer sentences than those
hitherto provided by law. The courts, however,
have no authority to send cases to such
institutions. Further, it cannot be denied that
the suggestion would defeat its own purpose
in cases where the offender disguises his mental
abnormality in order to avoid prolonged
detention.

It is stated that until such institutions are
established the Committee would not oppose
longer sentences in prison, provided that psychiatric treatment is being given. It is necessary,
however, to take into account the fact that the
proposal would antagonize the relations of
some offenders with the psychiatrist at a time
when their goodwill is essential. Moreover,
we can only guess the effect upon the offender
of a sentence prolonged on medical grounds
when the treatment fails.

Some useful comments are made on shortterm imprisonment and after-care. The Committee endeavours to disarm criticism by
acknowledging the fact that many readers of
the report may feel that too sanguine a view is
taken of the effectiveness in practice of the
medical and social measures favoured.
The Report introduces some highly controversial issues, but it is interesting to have the
views of the signatories set out in pamphlet
form.
