The Second World Mental Health Assembly
=========================================

The second Assembly of the World Federation
for Mental Health took place in Geneva, August
22nd-27th, 1949, and was attended by some 200
delegates from 24 countries. The Assembly was
preceded and followed by meetings of the Executive
Board.
In accordance with its constitution, the Presidency
of the Federation automatically passed this year
from Dr. J. R. Rees, C.B.E., to Dr. Andre Repond,
of Switzerland. The President-Elect for 1950-51
is Dr. William Line, Professor of Psychology at the
University of Toronto, Canada. Dr. Rees has
been appointed Director of the Federation, and
Dr. Kenneth Soddy (formerly Medical Director
of the National Association for Mental Health),
Assistant Director.
In pursuance of the Federation's policy of giving
special attention to mental health work in the
country in which its meetings are being held, a
plenary session was devoted to Switzerland, and
delegates also paid a visit to the Maison de Sante
de Malevoz, at Monthey, Valais.
The Assembly, in addition to administrative
matters, considered by means of group discussions
a number of important aspects of mental health.
Points which emerged were: the need for con-
sidering the establishment of a Mental Health
Institute in every country for research in the field
of mental health, and for providing training in
mental health work for all those engaged in the
professions in the field of human relationships;
the establishment of Film Bureaux charged with
the collection and distribution of information
about films on mental health subjects, and also
with promoting the production of such films;
the planning of rural mental health activities, and
the need for increased participation in the work of
the World Federation by educationists, and
especially practising teachers. The discussion
group on mental health aspects of religion found
that too little attention had been given to the
relationship between religion and mental health,
and recommended the formation of a small Standing
Committee to make further studies in this field,
in order to ascertain the attitude of various religious
groups to psychiatry. The mental health aspects
of international relations and the psychological
problems of displaced persons were also considered*
and it was urged that international commissions
should endeavour to facilitate the absorption of
displaced persons into society in a manner most
constructive to the individuals concerned and to
world society. The group especially urged that
such phrases as " displaced persons " be dropped
in favour of the term " homeless
It was suggested that the Inter-Professional
Advisory Committee of the Federation (I.P.A.C.)
should study how the Federation might make " the
greatest possible impact upon the world at large
in matters pertaining to mental health in the widest
sense, since the World Federation draws its vigour
and inspiration from the study groups working in
different parts of the world Among its several
recommendations, this group proposed the develop-
ment of International Institutes of Mental Health
and Human Relations. It also recommended
two projects for study groups with a view
to the Annual Assembly in France next year
and the next International Congress on Mental
Health to be held in 1952, namely: (a) The study
of leadership and authority in local committees;*
(b) the study of concentration camps, their causes,
phenomena and consequences. To these' subjects,
the Executive Board subsequently added: Industrial
relations, and the mental health aspects of education.
Considerable attention was given by the Assembly
to the question of closer co-operation with the
World Health Organization, Unesco and other
specialized agencies of the United Nations. The
Federation undertook to assist W.H.O. in making a
comprehensive survey of mental health needs and
existing facilities in different countries as an essential
preliminary to the improvement of such facilities.
It was also decided to co-operate with W.H.O. in
setting up inter-professional teams which would
be available to advise governments on how mental
health facilities could best be improved in their
respective countries.
The current issue of The Bulletin (the official
journal of the World Federation) is devoted to a
full account of the proceedings of the Mental
Health Assembly, and applications for copies
should be addressed to the Secretary of the
Federation, 19 Manchester Street, London, W.l.
