Marriage Counselling
=====================

The first full account of
Remedial Work of the Marriage Guidance
Councils. 
:Author: David R. Mace, M.A., B.Sc.,
Ph.D. With a foreword by The Rt. Hon.
Henry Willink, M.C., K.C. J. & A. Churchill
Ltd.: London. 8s.

Whether psychiatrists like it or not, those who
are in distress will seek counsel from all and sundry
who are in a position of father or mother confessors,
even if they do not call themselves by that name.
This book, which is very readably written, gives a
description of the evolution of the marriage
guidance movement and describes the functions,
scope, working and techniques of marriage guidance
centres. It discusses, very wisely, the qualifications
required for counselling, and describes statistically
the results of the workings of the largest centre,
that in London, based on 1,000 cases?the first
1,000 who sought advice. The research was the
result of reports from 17 different counsellors
who, no doubt, varied in ability.

The point is made, wisely, that many of the cases
came when the condition reached the chronic phase
and was not so readily amenable to benefit. The
best results were achieved from those who came in
" under their own steam This emphasizes the
need for a knowledge by the lay public of the
principles of mental health and the facilities for
mental health needs. It demands a fuller use of
education facilities for health, and there is still
little evidence that the National Health Service is
doing anything under the section of the Act that
provides for this.

One or two interesting facts come out of this
service. Elderly bachelors marrying late have a
particularly poor adjustment record, while elderly
spinsters were average in this respect. That
statement opens a whole field of speculation,
especially when coupled with the fact that divorced
women achieve average happiness in second
marriages, but the record of divorced men was
apparently very poor indeed. Almost half the cases
were childless couples, and few couples with larger
familes than the present low average required help.
Over half the cases had sexual maladjustments,
but the author does not seem to realize the im-
portance of this being a symptom of a deeper
emotional disharmony which requires patient and
skilled investigation. That is one of the dangers
of the marriage guidance movement, which requires
a team approach to the problem so that those who
are skilled in investigating the deeper causes of
sexual maladjustment should be available for case
conferences at least before the course of action is
decided upon. In fact, the child guidance team
method is advocated by the reviewer.

It is interesting that housing problems affected
only an eighth of the cases, which indicates that
those who advocate purely material and economic
measures for the solution of the problem, are only
going to help a few.

The author states that only one third of the group
showed signs of defective mental or physical health.
That depends upon the scope that he gives to the
definition of " mental healthIt is interesting
that pre-marital sex relations showed a definite
correlation with later marital troubles in the case
of women. No psychiatrist would dispute this.

More than half profess to religion, which is
higher than would be obtained in a normal
population. 1 do not suggest that the conclusion
should be drawn that marital disharmony is com-
moner in religious people, but the matter requires
further investigation. Of the 1,000 cases, only
21% needed psychological help. This is certainly
surprising as the emotional difficulties of marriage
are generally symptoms of deeper psychological
disorders. 70% benefited from counselling, and
this is about the same percentage as one finds in
the follow-up of cases from clinics for the treatment
of those suffering from emotional ill-health.
This book is well worth buying and studying for
those who have care and concern for, and an
objective interest in, the subject of the unity of
family life.
A.T.
