The End of an Experiment in Community Care
==========================================

MENTAL HEALTH 107

April 30th, 1949, was an important date in the
history of the National Association for Mental
Health. It marked the end of a period of five years
during which the Association acted as agent for the
Ministry of Health for the after-care of ex-Service
psychiatric casualties, and, 'latterly, for civilian
cases in increasing numbers.
This important aspect of social medicine and
Preventive psychiatry was incorporated in the new
National Health Service Act under Section 28.
The After-Care scheme, as it has been known, has
led very often to the prevention of relapses and the
saving of much hospital bed space and medical
and nursing time. It was hoped to continue the
scheme for a year or two on the same lines, until
local authorities had gathered together mental
health teams with the right training and qualifi-
cations, but this was not to be. Under Circular
146/48, local authorities could either undertake
this work themselves or ask the National Association
for Mental Health to act as their agents until they
had adequate resources available. The bulk of
local authorities decided to make their own plans,
so that on April 30th, 1949, seven of the
Association's eleven regional offices were closed
down.
The work has been conducted on the team
method of the child guidance movement; that is to
say, the team consists of a senior psychiatric social
worker, assistant social workers, and a consultant
psychiatrist for case conferences. Regular meetings
of senior psychiatric social workers, who acted also
as Regional Representatives of the National
Association for Mental Health, were held at Head-
quarters, and regular residential conferences of all
the workers were a feature of the scheme. There
was ample opportunity for the pooling of experiences
and the discussion of developments.
The Association's regional workers were very
reluctant to leave its service, and it was felt that
they had done such a first-class piece of work that
they were written to on their departure in the
following terms:
" The Executive Committee wish to express their
whole-hearted appreciation of the excellent services
you have given the Association, both in promoting
and supervising the Community Care work of your
Region, and in the performance of your own case-
work. We are particularly grateful for your loyal
support during these last months, as it is only too
well realized how heartbreaking this state of un-
certainity has been for the Regional Representatives."
Even more important was the regret of the patients
under this scheme of community care. They had
developed a trust and faith in our workers, and one
of the Regional Representatives has written to us
as follows:
"Many do not realize the intricacies of the patient's
environment and the difficulties which are due to
the friction between the personalities in his back-
ground. This has been our particular field and if,
as I hope, the Association produces a memorandum
from our work, I hope that this will be stressed.
There is really no one else working in this field.
It has been a gruelling experience trying to hand
over our cases. We have all been haunted by the
feeling that we are deserting our cases, and some
of our patients have actually said this to us.
Knowing that we can do nothing else and that it
was a Government decision has not removed any
of the bitterness from the experience."
We have had many expressions of appreciation,
among which is one from the Ministry of Labour
and National Service who write:
" After five years of happy association during which
your officers have given very valuable service, not
only to our Disablement Resettlement Officers, but
to the disabled men and women in need of assistance,
whether ex-Service or civilian, I wish to express
to your Association the thanks of my Minister for
this fine piece of work so ably carried out in spite
of many difficulties and often at great personal
self-sacrifice."
Voluntary agencies and others who have referred
cases to us during the period of the full scheme
have been circularized. In case any agencies may
have missed seeing the circular, a copy of this is
printed below.
Regional After-Care Scheme
As you know, this scheme has been run by this
Association for the last five years at the request
of the Ministry of Health. It was started originally
for psychiatric war casualties, men and women,
and has been extended to civilians recovering from
psychiatric illness and for those in need of social
therapy as a preventive measure.
With the inception of the new Health Service,
Local Authorities were asked (under the provisions
of Section 28 of the National Health Service Act,
1946) to continue this scheme on similar lines.
Authorities could either undertake the work them-
selves, or use our services until they had an adequate
scheme of their own.
The majority of Authorities have decided to
make their own arrangements. Certain others
asked the Association to do the work for them,
but we have not been able to accept in all cases
owing to the difficulty of re-planning our regional
work geographically.
As from May 1st of this year our teams of workers
therefore will be available only from the regional
offices based on:
London 39 Queen Anne Street, W.l.
Birmingham 29a Frederick Road, Edgbaston.
Newcastle 129 Clayton Street West,
Newcastle upon Tyne.
108 MENTAL HEALTH
Tunbridge Wells 31 Upper Grosvenor Road,
Tunbridge Wells.
In all other areas, cases referred by local branches
of your Department or Organization must be dealt
with by the Mental Health Services of the Local
Authority. The central advisory services and
other activities of the Association are, of course,
continuing as before.
A. Torrie,
Medical Director.
National Association for Mental Health.
April, 1949.
