News and Notes
===============

Mental Health Conference, 1949
The Duchess of Kent as Patron, honoured the
National Association for Mental Health with her
presence at the Annual Conference held at Seymour
Hall, W.l, on March 17th and 18th, 1949. Her
Royal Highness formally opened the Conference
on March 17th and addressed the large audience
which had assembled for the inaugural session,
at which first experiences of recent social legislation
and implications for mental health were discussed.
Addresses of welcome to Her Royal Highness were
given by Mr. R. A. Butler (President) and Lord
Feversham, Chairman of Council.

An introductory address was given by Sir Wilson
Jameson, G.B.E., K.C.B., M.D., F.R.C.P., Chief
Medical Officer of the Ministries of Health and
Education, who, in the course of his remarks,
expressed the hope that the Association would be
able to continue and extend its pioneer work, since
at no time in our history had it been more important
to have active voluntary organizations able and
willing to experiment and to indicate ways in which
the more official services could profitably develop.
On the first day, Professor A. N. Shimmin, M.A.
(Professor of Social Science, University of Leeds)
presided throughout, and Dr G. B. Jeffery (Director
of the University of London, Institute of Education)
took the Chair at the second day's sessions, when
the subject of the need for understanding the
individual as part of the training and function of
doctors, nurses, teachers, and social workers, was
discussed. The experiment of devoting one whole
day to each subject, thus allowing a longer period
for discussion, appeared to be generally welcomed
as was evidenced by the large number of delegates
and others present who took part.

Approximately 1,100 persons attended the Conference, of whom over 600 were representatives of
local authorities and voluntary organizations, and
many students in training were also present.
A printed Report on the proceedings is now
available, and copies (5s. 3d. each, post free) may
be obtained from the Association.

" Friendship Groups of the Mentally Deficient"
Under this title, the March News Letter of the
American Association on Mental Deficiency has
an interesting article by Dr Edward J. Humphreys
drawing attention to the two types of groups now
concerned with members of the community whose
intelligence is below the average, viz., the professional organization with interests centering on the
subject in its administrative, psychological, social
and educational aspects, and the less familiar
and much newer type of group?units of which are
now beginning to emerge?whose members consist
of parents, relatives and personal friends of the
defectives themselves. Of this new development,
Dr Humphreys writes:

" It is now obvious that each of these major
groups vitally concerned with the mentally
deficient, is facing new opportunities for growth
and development. It is also clear that the
professional group is desperately in need of
the assistance of the group becoming known as the
parents and friends group. Likewise the parents
and friends group needs the assistance such as
can be rendered by the professional organization.
No other field is focusing upon this relationship
more clearl> or with greater emphasis than is the
field of mental deficiency. It is time for the
scientific or the professional group to recognize
that it now has a friend itself with unlimited
potentialities than can be mobilized in helping
the professional group to achieve its goals in the
care, training, treatment and study of the mentally
deficient."

This question was among those discussed at the
recent Pan-American Congress on Mental Deficiency
held at New Orleans, and we shall await further
developments with interest.

In this country, so far as we are aware, there has
been until recently, only one " Friendship Group "
coming within Dr Humphrey's second category
?" The Association of Parents of Backward
Children " founded by Mrs. Fryd (8 Westfield
Avenue, Harpenden, Herts.)?and we are glad to
be able to draw attention to the inauguration of a
second group of the kind, just formed. This
consists of parents and friends of mentally
defective children in the Fountain Hospital, London.
Its objects are:

(1) To promote the material, mental and spiritual
welfare of the patients of the Fountain Hospital.
(2) To foster mutual help and support among the
parents, relatives and friends of patients.
(3) To promote closer co-operation and understanding between the parents, relatives and
friends of patients and the staff of the hospital.
Already members of the Group have raised the
sum of ?100 to be spent for the benefit of the
children; they have started a Ladies' Mending
Party, and are in process of forming a Men's Toy
Repairing and Odd Jobs Team. Other projects
include the organization of outings for the children,
and the provision of play material and of flowers
for the wards, and particularly the Group seeks to
provide opportunities for its members to meet
together in order that the sense of isolation which
so many of them feel may be dispelled.

The Chairman of the Group is Mr. J. C. Davies,
9 Wilton Crescent, Wimbledon, S.W.I9. Any reader
who is interested in this work, and might be able
to emulate the Group's example in another area,
is invited to apply to him for further particulars.
A new professional group has also been formed
recently?viz., a Mental Deficiency Society for
Medical Officers, Psychologists and Social Workers
in the North-West Metropolitan Region who are
engaged in work for defectives. The Hon.
Secretary is Dr B. W. Richards, Middlesex Colony,
Shenley, St. Albans, Herts, and Professor L.
Penrose is President. Monthly meetings are
planned for discussions and ^the reading of papers,
and every three months it is proposed that a review
of recent literature bearing on mental defect shall
be given.

We welcome both these new ventures and hope
that they will be the forerunner of many others
on similar lines.

N.A.M.H. Homes and Hostels
The National Association for Mental Health will
open its twelfth Agricultural Hostel at Goole,
Yorkshire, this summer for 22 men, to be increased
to 38 later by the building of an additional wing.
Men will be employed by the West Riding Agricultural Committee at whose request the Association
is administering the hostel.

Negotiations are in progress for the leasing
by the Association of a house at Walmer, near
Deal, Kent, to serve as a holiday home in the
summer months, and for the rest of the year as
a short-term home for defectives needing convalescence, or whose mothers need a short rest.
The Association has frequently been asked to
provide such a home for emergencies, and it is
felt that the house will meet a real need. Fees for
holiday patients will be ?2 12s. 6d. per week; for
convalescents and short term patients who may need
nursing, ?4 4s. per week.

As from April 1st, 1949, Sherborne House,
Basingstoke (for low-grade defective children),
came under the management of the Botleys Park
Group of Hospitals Management Committee.
We understand that the children are to be moved
and that the house is to be transformed into a
hostel for older girls.

Care of Former Delinquents
--------------------------
The Home Secretary has approved under the
provisions of the Criminal Justice Act, 1949, the
establishment of a Central After-Care Association
for England and Wales which will be responsible
for the supervision of persons released from Borstal
training, corrective training, and preventive detention, and young prisoners released on licence. It
will also undertake the after-care of certain other
classes of prisoner for whom central rather than
local after-care arrangements are indicated.
The Borstal Association, the Aylesbury AfterCare Association and the Central Association for
the Aid of Discharged Convicts are to be merged
in this new Association, the governing body of
which will consist of about 20 members representative of these merged organizations, and also of the
National Association of Discharged Prisoners'
Aid Societies, the Prison Commissioners, and of
various Government departments and unofficial
bodies and persons serving in an individual capacity.
The first chairman of the Council is Mr. L. W. Fox,
chairman of the Prison Commission.

World Federation for Mental Health
The second Mental Health Assembly of the
World Federation will be held at Geneva, August
22nd-27th, 1949, and will be preceded by a meeting
of the Executive Board, 18th-20th.

The convening organization in each country has
been asked to arrange for the appointment of a
national delegation. The convening body in this
country is the National Association for Mental
Health, and a British Standing Committee, under
the chairmanship of Dr Doris Odium, has been
formed by the member organizations and is
assembling a delegation. Organizations in this
country so far admitted to membership of the
World Federation are: The Scottish Association
for Mental Hygiene, Royal Medico-Psychological
Association, British Psychological Society, and the
Northern Regional Hospital Board (Scotland).
The duties of the British Standing Committee will
include: {a) acting as a link between the World
Federation and interested organizations in this
country; (b) nominating member bodies of the
national organization; (c) approving applications
for observers to the Assembly; (d) collecting
suggestions for the Assembly, covering both the
agenda and resolutions; (e) co-ordinating and
furthering research in the mental health field.
The Committee also hopes to maintain contact
and to assist the various Preparatory Commissions
set up in this country in connection with the 1948
International Congress.

In order that the interests of mental health
throughout the world shall be served to the fullest
extent by the Assembly, member organizations
and others interested have been asked to send in
suggestions on topics for discussion, proposals
for activities and draft resolutions.

In addition to official delegates, others interested
may apply to attend as observers. Applications
should be sent to the Medical Director, National
Association for Mental Health, 39 Queen Anne
Street, W.l, as soon as possible, but not later than
June 30th.

Members of the National Association for Mental
Health may like to be reminded that they have
automatically become members of the World
Federation, because the Association is one of the
Founder National Affiliated Bodies, and, therefore,
pays an overall subscription.

Bulletin
--------
The World Federation now issues a bi-monthly
Bulletin which is the successor to the series of 12
Bulletins distributed by the International Congress
on Mental Health held in London in August, 1948.
It is intended to serve as a link between the Federation and member organizations throughout the
world, and also to provide a forum for the exchange
of ideas and information covering mental health
subjects generally. It is proposed to publish at
least one original article in each issue on some
topic relevant to the work of the Federation.
The first issue?an easily read and attractively
prepared document of 28 pages?contains editorial
comment on the hopes and aspirations of the
World Federation, news of activities of member
organizations in various countries, and also information about the membership and constitution
of the Federation.

Suggestions are invited for a name for the Bulletin
which, it is felt, should, if possible, bear relation
to its international scope and character.
Orders for the Bulletin (5s. per annum) should
be sent to the Editor, World Federation for Mental
Health, 19 Manchester Street, London, W.l.

Psychiatric Advisory Bureaux
----------------------------
In co-operation with the South-West Metropolitan
Regional Hospital Board, Hampshire County
Council has set up advisory bureaux at a number
of centres in the country at which a social worker,
with experience of mental health, will be in
attendance on certain days of the week.
It is hoped that this scheme will in some measure
reduce the incidence of mental illness by preventing
the development into serious mental illness of
minor emotional and psychological difficulties,
whether these affect mainly home life or mainly
employment. People can attend the centre without
appointment or introduction, but it is hoped that
the Ministry of Labour employment offices, factory
and other welfare officers, managers and shop
stewards, health visitors, teachers, probation officers,
almoners, and also voluntary organizations will
assist in making the bureaux known to persons
with whom they come into contact and who may
stand in need of their services.

The social worker will be required to help with
advice and, where this is indicated, to assist in
effecting adjustments in the home life or employment of the person concerned. Should specialist
advice be necessary, the social worker will suggest
that the person visits one of the psychiatric outpatient clinics in the area and, if required, will
effect the introduction. In certain circumstances,
if a person is unable to attend an advisory bureau,
the social worker may visit him or her at home.
The high proportion of industrial workers who,
as surveys have indicated, are found to suffer from
minor mental disability sufficient to impair their
occupational efficiency, has abundantly made clear
the need for facilities of this kind. The County
Medical Officer of Health states that several years
of experience of the pioneer scheme on similar
lines operated by the National Association for
Mental Health (and to which reference is made
elsewhere in this issue), has proved that many
successful adjustments have been made by, and with
the help of trained social workers, with great
improvement in the comfort and efficiency of the
persons concerned.

This experiment will be followed with interest,
but its success is naturally dependent upon the
staffing of the bureaux by trained and experienced
mental health workers, of whom, unfortunately
at the present time, there is an acute shortage.
National Association for the Paralysed
This is a new department of the British Council
for Rehabilitation set up to deal with the care,
treatment and rehabilitation of the paralysed.
The first project of the Association is to compile
a register of paralysed persons, and anyone knowing
such a person is asked to urge him (or her) to send
his name and address, with a note stating the type
of paralysis from which he suffers, to the Registrar.
The Chairman of the Association is the Hon. J.
Holland-Hibbert, and the Standing Sub-Committee,
to whom powers have been delegated by the parent
body, consists of the following members: Miss
E. L. Beckett (Occupational Therapist, St. George's
Hospital), Miss I. H. Charley (Nursing Consultant, Crusader Insurance Co. Ltd.), Dr Colin
Edwards (West End Hospital for Nervous Diseases),
Miss E. W. N. Johnston (Committee on Welfare
of Disabled, Scottish Council of Social Service),
Mr. F. Morena (Infantile Paralysis Fellowship),
Miss C. Morris (Almoner, National Hospital for
Diseases of the Nervous System), Miss H. Squire
'(Almoner, Maida Vale Hospital for Nervous
Diseases) and Mr. Henry P. Weston (British Council
for Welfare of Spastics).

Further information may be obtained from the
British Council for Rehabilitation, 32 Shaftesbury
Avenue, London, W.l.

Handicapped Person's Welfare
-----------------------------
Under the chairmanship of Mr. Edward Evans,
M.P., an Advisory Council on the Welfare of
Handicapped Persons has recently been appointed
by the Minister of Health under the National
Assistance Act to advise the Minister on the
development of welfare services for the blind, the
deaf and dumb, and cripples. The members of
the Committee include representatives of the
National Institute for the Blind, the National
Institute for the Deaf, Central Council for the
Care of Cripples, British Deaf and Dumb Association, British Association of the Hard of Hearing
and also a number of persons serving on local
authority committees. It is noteworthy, however,
that the mental health aspect of this important
subject is unrepresented.

Education in Mental Hospitals
------------------------------
Recent amending legislation to the Education
Act, 1944, empowers hospital management committees of mental hospitals to arrange educational
classes for voluntary patients, and in this connection
to seek the assistance of the Director of Education
of the area. Classes would normally be held at
the hospital, but if it is felt that it might be of
therapeutic value, patients would be allowed to
attend classes in local schools or other outside
centres.

Library of Child Psychiatry
---------------------------
Professor Georges Heuyer, le Avenue EmileDeschanel, Paris Vile, who is Professor of Child
Psychiatry at the University of Paris and a very
old friend of many in this country, has written to
Dr J. R. Rees that he is trying to get together an
adequate library of Child Psychiatry in his hospital
department. He would be most grateful for any
copies of suitable books which readers might feel
inclined to present to him.

Wage-Earning Patients in M.D. Institutions
Some difficulty has been experienced, since the
coming into operation of the National Health
Service Act, in connection with patients in Mental
Deficiency Institutions allowed out on daily licence
for the purpose of paid employment. As under
Section 1 of the Act all treatment in hospitals
(including treatment for mental defect) must be
free, it has not been possible for any part of the
wages earned by such defectives to be deducted
for maintenance as in the past.

This anomaly has now been adjusted by Clause
19 of the National Health Service (Amendment
Bill) which makes it lawful to require that any
person for whom hospital and specialist services
are being provided, but who is absent during the
day for the purpose of engaging in employment,
shall pay part of the cost of his maintenance.

Broadmoor Institution
---------------------
Broadmoor Criminal Lunatic Asylum, which was
first opened in 1863, will in future be known as
Broadmoor Institution, Crowthorne, Berks. In
April, 1949, the Institution was transferred from the
Home Secretary to the Minister of Health and is
now managed by the Board of Control, although
decisions relating to the admission and discharge
of patients will continue to rest with the Home
Secretary. The Institution will become part of
the mental health services incorporated in the
National Health Service.

Progress Book for Occupation Centres
------------------------------------
Attention is drawn to the recent issue of a revised
" Progress Book " for the use of Occupation Centres
and School Departments of Mental Deficiency
Institutions, published by the National Association
for Mental Health.

The book provides for a Summarized Record on
the admission of the child, an Admission Report,
a Supervisor's First Report, and for twelve subsequent Periodical Reports, and the questions are
designed to ensure the keeping of full and adequate
records.

A specimen copy of the book may be obtained
from the Publications Department, N.A.M.H.,
39 Queen Anne Street, W.l, price 9d.

The Nurses Bill
----------------
The Nurses Bill, the text of which was recently
published, seeks to promote improvement in the
training of nurses, and the proposed reconstitution
of the General Nursing Council provides for a
stronger educational element and also representation
of nurses throughout the country. The Bill is the
outcome of recommendations on training made by a
working party which issued a report in 1947.
The Bill provides also for the establishment of a
standing mental nurses committee consisting of
12 persons, of whom six shall be members of the
Council, 2 registered mental nurses, and 4 appointed
by the Minister of Health, these to include a matron
of a mental hospital, a registered mental nurse
engaged in the teaching of the nursing and care of
persons suffering from mental disease, a registered
medical practitioner engaged in the teaching of
psychiatry, and a chief male nurse. It is proposed
that regional nurse-training committees for regional
hospital areas shall be set up, with a view to promoting improvements in training, and of advising
and assisting the training institutions and the
General Nursing Council in all matters relating to
the training of nurses.

The British Hospitals Association
---------------------------------
By Resolution, passed by its members in Extraordinary General Meeting, the British Hospitals
Association, which includes the Central Bureau of
Hospital Information, was voluntarily wound up
as from April 1st, 1949. No further editions of
the Association's Hospitals Year Book will be
published, but a certain number of copies of the
current (1948) edition are still obtainable (price
22s., including postage) from the Liquidator,
Mr. E. F. G. Whinney, of Messrs. Whinney, Smith
and Whinney, 4b, Frederick's Place, Old Jewry,
London, E.C.2.

Hospitals disclaimed from, or not transferable to,
the National Health Service have now formed their
own Association of Independent Hospitals and
Kindred Organizations, the Hon. Secretary of which
is Mr. A. J. Wood, National Sanatorium, Benenden,
Cranbrook, Kent, to whom all communications
should be addressed.

Leeds Regional Psychiatric Association
A Regional Psychiatric Association has recently
been set up in Leeds with Professor D. R.
MacCalman as its first Chairman. The objects of
the Association are the promotion and improvement
of the mental health of the individual and of the
community through the study of clinical, social,
educational and administrative problems of psychiatric practice, and the presentation of the views
of the Association to the appropriate authorities,
to the medical and other professions, and to the
general public.

Ordinary membership is open to all psychiatrists
in the Leeds region and bona fide trainees whose
applications are approved by the Executive Committee. There is also an associate membership
which, at present, is restricted to psychologists,
psychiatric social workers and lay therapists
engaged in actual psychiatric practice.
Regular clinical meetings will be a feature of the
Association's activities, and distinguished visitors
will be invited from time to time. Propaganda
will also form part of the Association's work.
Sub-Committees dealing with clinical matters and
research, education and public relations, and
organization and planning have been set up.
Further particulars of the Association may be
obtained from the Hon. Secretary, Dr J. W.
Affleck, City of Leeds Mental Health Services, 25
Blenheim Terrace, Woodhouse Lane, Leeds 2.

Film Discussion Meeting
-----------------------
An interesting experiment was initiated recently
by the Bournemouth Association for Mental
Health and the Bournemouth Film Society at a
joint meeting held at the Municipal College, at
which there were some three hundred persons
present.

The meeting started with a presentation of the
film, Blind Alley, which deals with an episode in the
life of a gangster whose emotional conflicts, dating
from his childhood, had led to his adopting a life
of crime. While escaping from the police, he spends
the night in the house of a Professor of Psychiatry
with whom he discusses his problem.

After the film, the audience took an active part
in the ensuing discussion, and asked many questions
which were dealt with by four psychiatrists who
were present. This pioneer venture proved to be
highly successful, and it is hoped to arrange further
meetings of the kind in the future.
