The Mental Health Programme of the United States
================================================

{Contributed by Federal Security Agency, U.S.A.)
When the National Mental Health Act was
passed by the United States Congress in 1946,
a programme to improve the mental health of
the nation became a public responsibility. It is
traditional in the United States for the majority
of severe cases of mental illness to be cared for
in public mental hospitals, but the passage of the
Mental Health Act was a significant step
forward. It provided Federal support for
(1) developing preventive and out-patient services in States and communities; (2) for mental
health research; and (3) for the training of
professional personnel in psychiatry and related
fields.

Although no Federal funds were appropriated
at the time the Mental Health Act was passed,
the legislation stimulated States, communities,
and interested organizations and individuals to
begin at once to survey needs and to plan for
the effective use of whatever funds might
subsequently be appropriated. This activity
received leadership and co-ordination from the
National Advisory Mental Health Council,
a group of well-qualified citizens who, by the
terms of the Act, were made advisers to the
Surgeon General of the Public Health Service,
Federal Security Agency?the Federal body
responsible for administering the Act.
By 1947, when the first Federal funds were
appropriated, the organizational pattern which
the programme would follow was well established. It covers three major areas:

1. Research. To foster study of the nature,
causes, treatment and prevention of mental
illness, research grants-in-aid are made to
universities, hospitals, laboratories and other
non-Federal institutions and to qualified individuals. In addition, research fellowships are
awarded to promising young investigators.
Applications for research grants and fellowships
are reviewed by a Research Study Section
comprised of specialists who serve as consultants
to the Mental Hygiene Division. Their reports
are given to the National Advisory Mental
Health Council members who make the final
recommendations on what applications should
be approved for support.

2. Training. To encourage the training of
more psychiatrists, psychologists, psychiatric
social workers and mental health nurses,
training grants-in-aid are made to schools of
medicine, nursing, social work and other training
centres for developing and improving their
facilities. Training stipends are given to graduate students. As with the research grants,
applications for training grants and stipends
are reviewed by outstanding authorities. They
are members of the Committee of Consultants
on Training and their reports form the working
basis for the training grant recommendations
made to the Surgeon General by the National
Advisory Mental Health Council.

3. Community Services. To assist States
and Territories in developing community mental
health services which will be available to all
citizens, grants-in-aid are made to States and
Territories as soon as they submit a plan which
is approved by the Surgeon General of the
Public Health Service. These grants, as well as
matching funds raised from State and local
sources, are administered by a State Mental
Health Authority which, in over half of the
States, is the State Health Department. Each
State's share of the Federal fund is determined
by its financial need, population, and the extent
of its mental health problem. To receive its
share, however, the State must raise one dollar
for each two dollars provided by the Federal
fund. Assistance is also given to State and local
communities through the consultant services
of civic leaders who, as members of the
Community Services Committee, serve the
National Advisory Mental Health Council in
much the same capacity as do members of
the Research Study Section and the Training
Committee.

Activities in all three of the major areas of
operation have been expanding rapidly. At the
close of the first year of the programme, July 1st,
1948, funds had been awarded for 38 research
projects and 24 research fellowships; training
grants had been made to 59 institutions and
training stipends were helping to support
227 students' Mental health programmes had
been started in 22 States and two Territories,
and previously existing programmes had been
expanded and strengthened in 22 States.

The mental health programmes planned by
the various States differ widely, depending upon
the degree of development of mental health
services by a State prior to the passage of the
Mental Health Act, the availability of personnel,
the accessibility of teaching centres and many
other factors. However, most State programmes include all or some of the following
activities : central administrative services ;
clinics; professional services; training programmes for State and local personnel; and
preventive and educational programmes.
In the mental health programme, as with
other public health programmes in the United
States, the Federal Government provides stimulation and support through grants and through
professional and consultation services. However, the ultimate development of the mental
health programme depends on the local men
and women who are closely in touch with the
resources of their community.
