Psychological Medicine
========================

:Author: Desmond Curran,
M.B., F.R.C.P., D.P.M., and the late Eric
Guttmann, M.D., M.R.C.P. Third Edition.
E. & S. Livingstone Ltd, Edinburgh. 12s. 6d.

The third edition of this textbook for students
and newly qualified Practitioners is the first to be
published since the untimely death of Dr Eric
Guttmann, one of its original authors. Largely
as a result of this apparently, there are few major
alterations in this edition, though the sections on
Mental Deficiency, Hysteria and Schizophrenia
have all been added to and brought more in line
with recent advances. At the same time, there are
certain obvious omissions which are striking and
which could well have been modified in the present
new edition. In particular it is surprising to find
that, in the chapter on the legal aspects of insanity,
there is no mention of the modifications to the law
made by the National Health Service Act of 1946.
In a book published seven months after the coming
into force of this Act, it is strange to read references
to Relieving Officers and to rate-aided patients.
The appendix on psychiatry associated with War
conditions is still retained, and whilst few would
disagree with Dr Curran's suggestion that the
present state of world affairs justifies its retention,
this section still suffers from its former shortcomings. Much of it is made up of repetitions of
material already contained, and fully described, in
the earlier parts of the book. This section is still
largely devoted to the special aspects of naval
psychiatry, and it fails to stress many of the valuable
lessons and experiences which psychiatry gained
from war conditions. Its emphasis is particularly
on clinical material and there is insufficient discussion of those important aspects of social psychiatry which were the principal psychiatric advances
of the war period.

For the most part, this book gives a clear and very
readable description of the major psychiatric
illnesses, but its balance is not always good and the
emphasis at all stages is more on the psychoses than
on the psychoneuroses. The illustrations are
extremely well reproduced, but they are not always
wisely selected, whilst one of them at least might
have appeared without comment in a text book
published 50 years ago.

This book is essentially meant for the student or
practitioner who has little or no previous experience
of psychiatry and, whilst it is by no means the ideal
textbook for this purpose, it can justifiably be
included amongst the better books in this field.
Its bibliography is an excellent one and since it
is a book which may well stimulate further reading,
this is a most valuable point in its favour.
T.A.R.
