Regional Community Care1
============================

By T. A. RATCLIFFE, M.A., M.B., D.P.M., D.C.H., and E. V. JONES (Psychiatric Social Worker)
Now that the Regional Psychiatric After-Care
Service for ex-service personnel, first organized
py the National Association for Mental Health
m 1944, is shortly to come to an end, at least
m its present form, we feel it may be of interest
to detail the results and experiences of this work
jn one region. This is felt more strongly,
because many of the problems presented to the
regional organization, as well as some of its
solutions of these problems, are entirely different
from those encountered in other forms of
Psychiatric social work.
The service in this region was first organized
from a Nottingham office in 1946, but the
present survey covers the years 1947 and 1948
?nly, since that period represents best the
gradual build-up of the regional organization
once the initial teething troubles had been
overcome. The region itself is a large one
geographically, and includes most of the
economic and social community problems
commonly found in England. .There are three
large industrial cities, mainly prosperous, in
the region, as well as a number of smaller
industrial and country towns, whilst there is a
large, relatively densely populated mining area
in the north-west. Almost the whole of the
eastern and southern part of the region is
agricultural, and characterized by small, widely-
scattered villages with poor intercommunica-
tions. The area includes also a small port and
a number of seaside towns. As a result of this
varied distribution of population, the availability
of existing psychiatric services, both hospital
and clinic, was patchy throughout the region.
Thus, whilst the industrial areas had usually
a well-organized treatment service, in many of
the rural areas communication and other
difficulties meant that only a very limited
diagnostic clinic service was available for
out-patients, and that often only at some
distance.
68 MENTAL HEALTH
During the two years ending December 31st,
1948, the case load in the region was as follows:
Total number of cases handled 659
New cases received:
(a) From Service Hospitals 149
(b) From other sources 247
396
Cases closed during the period .. 269
Types of case referred?
Psychoneurosis .. .. 332
Psychosis .. .. .. 168
Psychopathic personality .. 51
Borderline M.D. .. .. 25
Organic disabilities .. .. 53
Undiagnosed .. .. 30
The After-Care Team
Although the After-Care team could be held,
in its widest sense, to include all those individuals
and agencies who are drawn in to help in the
community care of the individual case, the
essential basis of the team is the psychiatrist,
psychiatric social worker and assistant social
workers acting together. The individual roles
of each will be considered separately, but it
cannot be too much emphasized that the
approach to the patient must always be by
the whole team, the functions of each member
complementing those of the others.
In this region, the team consisted of the
Consulting Psychiatrist, a senior psychiatric
social worker and two or three assistant
social workers. In addition the cases in one
large industrial city were covered by the psychia-
tric social workers of the city Mental Hospital
and the Local Authority. Each case worker
had her own portion of the region to cover and,
so far as possible, each case worker had full
and continued responsibility for the patient
(under the supervision of the senior P.S.W.)
for the whole period of after-care. The
psychiatrist and all the case workers met at
weekly case conferences, whilst the psychiatrist
was available at other times also for discussion
of special individual problems with a case
worker.
At approximately monthly intervals a larger
case conference was held to which were invited
psychiatrists, psychiatric social workers, and
other social workers from the neighbouring
Psychiatric Hospitals, Child Guidance Clinics
and University. Started originally to discuss
the problems of individual cases of special
difficulty, these larger case conferences were
becoming an interesting and valuable group
situation for the discussion of general problems
of community care.
It became clear at an early stage that, if he
was to participate fully in the team, the psychia-
trist must have clinical access to the case
material. In a widely scattered region such as
this, with numerous widely separated clinics
under different authorities, actual clinical con-
tact with every patient had obvious difficulties.
The problem solved itself in two ways. The
Consulting Psychiatrist was also Regional
Psychiatrist to the Ministry of Pensions and to
the Army and R.A.F. Thus much of the
clinical material passed automatically through
his hands, whilst the Ministry of Pensions were
at all times most co-operative in arranging for
men to be called in for interviews and treatment
assessment by the psychiatrist. This practice,
which was in conformity with the general
supervision policy of the Ministry, had the
added advantage that many patients who were
at first unwilling to consider treatment would
readily attend at a Ministry interview and could
there be persuaded by the psychiatrist to agree
to clinic treatment of which they stood in need.
It also laid .open to the psychiatrist, certain
in-patient treatment facilities which, at least
before July 5th, 1948, were difficult or impossible
of access through other channels. There
remained still three groups of patients for whom
special and individual arrangements were made.
Where specific employment recommendations
were requested by the Ministry of Labour,
where a patient, clearly in need of treatment,
was unwilling to consider any other approach
and where a "domestic situation warranted a
single active therapeutic interview, the Con-
sulting Psychiatrist arranged, within the frame-
work of the team service, to see the patient
and/or his relatives himself. In the unhurried
atmosphere of an hour's interview, it was often
possible to do a great deal to resolve the specific
difficulty or to prepare the way for further
acceptance of treatment. Such special inter-
views might at first seem to cut across the
functions of the orthodox psychiatric treatment
services, but this was not in fact the case.
Although of undoubted therapeutic value, their
main function was not active therapy, but
rather the orientation of the patient's attitude
towards a better rapport v/ith future psychiatric
treatment. Many patients who had previously
strongly resisted the treatment of which they
were in need, were by this means persuaded to
accept it. No attempt was made to continue
treatment in further private interviews, but the
patient was put in touch with the appropriate
in- or out-patient treatment clinics which he
-J
MENTAL HEALTH 69
now viewed in a much more realistic and satis-
factory light. In all cases, with the patient's
consent, details of his past social and psychiatric
history were passed to the clinic psychiatrist.
It was also invariably the practice to obtain
the consent and approval of the man's own
general practitioner before such a special
interview was arranged. In no case was this
refused, and usually the suggestion was wel-
comed. A copy of the psychiatrist's report was
sent in each case to the doctor so that he
remained fully in the treatment picture and
could be guided in his handling of the patient.
The Role of the Psychiatric Social Worker
The main source of patients to the organiza-
tion was from the Service Hospitals, though, as
will be shown later, an increasing number of
cases were being referred from other sources
towards the end of the period under survey.
By far the greatest portion of. the patients
referred were at all times personnel invalided on
psychiatric grounds from the Army, Royal Navy
or R.A.F. In most cases from the Service
Hospitals there had been a preliminary interview
at the hospital by a P.S.W., in which the general
policy of after-care had been described to the
patient, and his agreement obtained on post-
discharge of after-care. A report from this
interviewing P.S.W., and a hospital report,
Were normally available to the regional organiza-
tion, but usually there was no preliminary
personal contact between the regional P.S.W.
and the patient before his return home. This
represents the first, and perhaps the most
formidable, difficulty which the after-care team
had to surmount, and is the largest single
difference from the more common type of
psychiatric social work centred on an existing
clinic or hospital. In the latter type of organi-
zation the patient, and to a lesser extent his
relatives and environment, are already centred
to some degree on the case worker before actual
after-care begins. This may be the result of an
interview between worker and patient, whilst
he is still in the clinic or hospital milieu, which
renders comparatively easy the identification in
the patient's mind of the worker as part of the
psychiatric treatment he is having. Or, at least,
there remained the strong factor that contacts
had already been made between the clinic and
the patient, as well as with his relatives, his
doctor and perhaps his employer; the case
worker, as part of the clinic team, was thus
already accepted by, and orientated towards,
the patient's environment and background.
In the type of after-care here described the
situation was very different. A contact had
been made with the patient in hospital and the
ground had usually been very well prepared,
but the contact had not been an individual one
by the case worker who was to conduct after-
care. The home background to which he was
to return had seldom been prepared and, since
the relatives had normally taken no part in his
original referral to the Service Hospital, their
attitude was not orientated to continued
after-care or help. Then, too, the very fact of
invaliding from the Service and the return to
civilian life was a profound environmental
change for the individual concerned. Not only
did he have to make the difficult adjustment
from hospital to home, but, at the same time,
he had to accustom himself to a total change of
environment, with its loss of old possibilities
and difficulties, the gain of new responsibilities
and opportunities and the profound emotional
reaction of pleasure or guilt or both resulting
from his invaliding. The psychological read-
justment problems of the post-release period
of the ex-service man are considerable in
themselves, and they tend to conflict with, as
well as augment, the difficulties of translation
from hospital to home environment.
In the community care service it was therefore
necessary for the case worker to build up her
contact with patient, relatives, doctor and
employer on foundations which she had to lay
herself, and to overcome in the process a good
deal of preliminary suspicion or even antagon-
ism. But, if this was the difficulty, it represented
also the need for such a type of contact, whilst
the strength and value of it, once well estab-
lished, was very great. Very frequently patients
were referred who were hostile to even the
suggestion of doctors, clinics or hospitals, but
who were equally clearly in urgent need of
further psychiatric treatment. Whether the
motivation is the often unrecognized identifica-
tion of future treatment facilities with the
authoritarian Service atmosphere from which he
has just escaped or whether it is that he is
" referred " rather than attending of his own
choice, it is certainly the experience of one of us
(T.A.R.) with similar ex-service cases seen
elsewhere that the ex-service man is, in general,
much less willing to accept treatment offers
than his wholly civilian counterpart. In such
cases the Psychiatric Social Worker can often,
even at her first interview with a recalcitrant
patient, achieve the sort of personal relationship
which the patient has never before experienced.
70 MENTAL HEALTH
Because of this relationship, the patient can
often be persuaded to accept treatment, or at
least take the next step towards it, even though
he may rationalize his acceptance of it by the
thought that he is doing it solely to please the
person with whom he has developed this new
and satisfying relationship. Similarly, once this
relationship is established, the worker will be in
a position to make suggestions on the handling
of the environmental, personal or work problems
without the patient's feeling that he is accepting
an authoritarian order or being given " charit-
able " or " good " advice. This technically
acquired ability to build up a mature relationship
in which the worker can both " give " and
" not give " as the total situation demands, is-
the essential criterion of psychiatric social work,
as a part of complete mental health service to
the community, and distinguishes it from most
other forms of social work.
If the first duty of the case worker is to
establish this contact and relationship with the
patient himself, her second and equally impor-
tant task is with the patient's immediate
environment.
It is equally important to the patient to help
in the adjustment of the home environment as
it is to help in his own adjustment. Indeed,
in some cases the case worker/relatives' relation-
ship assumes greater importance than that with
the patient, and the worker finds herself more
and more directing her after-care technique
towards the relatives in close contact with the
patient. In almost all cases, however, the
relatives will require help and the opportunity
of discussing their worries, anxieties and
difficulties about the patient. Here, too, the
role of the case worker is an important one.
Even if the patient is already receiving treat-
ment, the need will still remain for an unhurried,
free discussion of these problems. The relief
to the relatives, and the benefit to the patient,
of this type of discussion, is very great. It is
perhaps unfortunate that so many clinics, and
even psychiatric clinics, fail to realize the
importance of this aspect of their work, a failure
which in part must be attributed to their
present overworked state. Many of these
ex-service men have* emotional readjustment
difficulties, marital or interpersonal, quite apart
from their psychiatric disabilities, and the
relationship built up by the case worker with
both patient and relatives gives her a powerful
therapeutic weapon in handling such prob-
lems.
The ex-service man, especially if he has had
long service, is often greatly out of touch with
the changing employment and social milieu in
which he finds himself, a lack of touch which
the Service authorities have often done too little
to reduce before his invaliding. Often he is
not anxious or able to explore the possibilities
and responsibilities of these new situations for
himself. The admirable opportunities offered
by the Disablement and Rehabilitation Services
of the Ministry of Labour, for example, are
often little understood by the patient, and
consequently neglected by him. The value of
the case worker's negotiating the first interview
with the D.R.O. and giving both him and the
patient the benefit of her knowledge and
experience of any special employment problems
involved is one of the largest single benefits of
the after-care service.
The active therapeutic role of the case worker
is more difficult to define or delimit. Techni-
cally the relationship which she builds up with
the patient is similar to that which appears
between psychiatrist and patient during the
more superficial and " active" forms of
psychotherapy, but her relationship remains
more on patient's " own level a fact which
limits her active therapeutic role, but aids her
" counsellor " role greatly.
{To be concluded)
Psychiatry has been referred to as the Cinderella of medicine but I question sometimes whether that
branch of psychiatry which deals with the more privileged in intelligence?with intensive psychotherapy
and careful training of personnel?isn't the Cinderella of the last page of the story where dreams come
true, while the psychiatry concerned with mental deficiency is the earlier Cinderella still sitting by the
fire in scientific tatters.
George S. Stevenson
J
