The Search
============

Film Reviews
 (.Featuring Montgomery Clift and
Ivan Jandl.)
It may be felt that the subject of the orphaned,
stateless children of Europe needs no underlining
or highlights, but the devastation left after war is a
tragedy upon which we should necessarily dwell.
As portrayed in The Search, the story of the little
Czech boy who like many other children is separated
from his mother while in a concentration camp,
then branded by the Nazis and later taken to an
U.N.R.R.A. centre, is tremendously moving. The
ensuing scenes of the terrified child running away
from what he thinks is a death van, the mother's
search for her lost child, the boy's growing con-
fidence in the American soldier, are all unforgettable.
Unfortunately, there is never any beauty on which
the eye can rest. We have two scenes by the river,
but each time it is only the background for sad
action or theme. Some shots of the children are
beautiful, but it is a thin beauty. Their strained
anxious faces peer out on ruins.
The acting of the amateurs and professionals
is good. The latter are well represented by
Montgomery Clift and Aline MacMahan. But
sometimes I felt they were showing us a little too
expertly how to be kind to children, and within
these limits they could both have improved their
performance by pitching their voices on a gentler
note.
The skilful simplicity of Fred Zinneman's
direction seems to stamp the whole film as sincere
and humane. But it is well to keep in mind the
criticism which asked if this subject would have
been better treated as a documentary ? As it is,
The Search throws out many emotional threads
which interweave closely with our own infantile
associations and frustrations. Hence we wonder
if a straightforward statement of facts would be
more helpful towards an adult assessment of things
as they were.
H.U.B.
Obsession. {Featuring Robert Newton, Naunton
Wayne and Sally Gray.) 98 min.
In the-recent Bulletin of the World Federation
for Mental Health, Professor John M. Murray
has written of " the acceptance of psychiatry as a
rightful member at the family table of medicine
But the family must be an exclusive one or one, at
any rate, that does not welcome visitors from the
cinema world. For on the screen the psychiatrist
is not yet a rightful member of any family table.
In the film Obsession, this un-family man is a
husband who is bitterly jealous and resentful of his
wife's frequent flirtations. So he decides to seize
the next man, keep him in an underground cellar
until the hue and cry raised by his disappearance
has died down and then kill him, dissolving the
MENTAL HEALTH 55
body in a bath of acid. This he fills by bringing
one hot water bottle full of acid from his laboratory
every .night and regularly pouring it into the bath.
This sounds, perhaps, an ordinary thriller, rather
more unpleasant than many of its kind. But, in
fact, it somehow escapes being unpleasant. The
Prolonged filling of the bath in the underground
cellar is certainly gruesome, but all the time that the
bath is being filled, the audience knows that
detectives are on the scent of the prisoner and
excitement smothers every other feeling.
Is " psychology " important in this film ? Well,
hardly. The villain is indeed a psychiatrist, but
there is hardly any reference to his state of mind.
Apart from the broad motive of jealousy, there
ls no further concern with motive and feeling.
Only occasionally does the plot require that the
doctor should be a psychiatrist and that is when he
refers to his wife. But his sententious comments
ahout her mind to the nice, bewildered young
American whose evening's flirtation is costing such
a heavy price, hardly reflect much credit on
Psychiatry. Any husband, with moderate insight,
might have said as much, though possibly less
Pontifically, and, in any case, the psychiatrist's
basic belief that fear for her reputation will prevent
her going to the police, turns out to be false. But
l\ doesn't matter, except to those who are a little
tired of seeing the psychiatrist forever dupe or
villain?and they may well feel that the film would
have been just as good if the villain had been a
chemist or research worker or, indeed, anyone
who could easily get access to the essential acid.
P.E.W.
Educational Films
In response to requests, we publish below brief com-
ments on some educational films of psychological interest
^hich are available for hire. We hope to include notes
?" others in future issues of the Journal.
Reeling of Rejection. 16mm., 35mm. Sound.
23 mirts. Central Film Library, Imperial
Institute, London, S.W.7.
This film would seem to have been badly named
as it really demonstrates the fear of loss of love,
father than a feeling of rejection. It is a somewhat
amateurish production, and the adult part of the
hhn is not particularly well presented. One is
Jeft with the impression that the treatment indicated
Js far too simple, but the childhood part of the film
!s well constructed and effective.
The story is that of a young girl who, as a result
of difficulties in her early life in which she felt
herself pushed out by the younger child and was
made to be good and to keep quiet all the time,
Srew up in such a way that she had a need to
Placate others and had repressed her own aggression.
She was unable to stand up for her own rights,
and this resulted in periodic migraine headaches
which incapacitated her.
The film should prove useful to the general public,
and particularly to parents, but it is probably too
superficial to be of much value to students or
specialists.
C.H-S.
Over-Dependency. 16mm., 35mm. Sound.
27 mins. National Film Board of Canada,
Sackville House, 40 Piccadilly, W.l.
This film is fairly well produced. It gives the
story of a young man who had been grossly over-
protected by his mother and sister as a child, and
encouraged to retreat into illness. In his adult
life he tended to behave in a childish manner,
and married a woman who had to carry the burden
of protecting him as a child. He finally goes to a
general practitioner who traces the root of his
trouble to psychological causes. The general
practitioner seems to have been somewhat idealized
in that he had a profound knowledge of psycho-
logical medicine and apparently carried out the
treatment himself.
While the treatment is made to appear too
simple, there is a clever demonstration of the bodily
effects of anxiety and emotional stress.
The film should be useful for the general public
and for parents, and possibly also for medical
students and general practitioners.
C.H-S.
Life with Baby. 16mm., 35mm. Sound. 20 mins.
16mm.: Associated British Pathe, Film House,
War dour Street, W.l. 35 mm.: Contract
Manager, 20th Century Fox, 31 Soho Square,
W.l.
This is a March of Time film on the Institute of
Child Development at Yale, U.S.A., run by Dr.
Gesell. It gives a straightforward and coherent
account of Dr. Gesell's methods, investigations
and research, showing the babies at different ages
In a closed dome, where the children are unaware of
the audience, although the audience is watching
every move.
The film explains the value of Dr. Gesell's
researches in establishing the normal average
behaviour of any child, in any age group. By so
doing, the Institute has been able to run a research
centre, an advice clinic and lectures about children's
problems. In many cases the fears and anxieties
of parents over their children, which were due
more to ignorance of how their children should
behave than to any real difficulty, have been allayed.
As a film depicting the work of this research
centre it is valuable, but if it is shown to non-
experts it should be used in conjunction with a
commentary or as a basis for discussion.
EH.R.
