Art and the Child
===================

By Marion Richardson. Intro-
auction by Sir Kenneth Clark. University of
London Press. 18s.
This book will be welcomed by all who knew
Marion Richardson or whose work is based on her
educational reforms. Written with simplicity and
great understanding, attractively produced, with an
admirable selection of illustrations, it may well
be a means of introducing her achievements to a ,
wider public.
As a student in Birmingham, working under Mr.
Catterson-Smith, she learnt to rely on her visual
powers rather than on technical skill. Later, as
a teacher, she saw that children worked best when
painting from their own mental images. She was
painfully aware of the inadequacy of the traditional
method, which imposed an adult standard on the
child, with deadening results. There followed the
discovery of another way of approach :
" One day I decided to try giving the children
a word picture. From that moment the work
had a new quality. Whereas before it had
been little more than the reproduction of some-
thing photographed by the physical eye, it now
had an original and inner quality. ... I began
to see that this thing was art, not drawing.
I was myself a natural visualizer and found that
the children were interested in descriptions of
my own imagery, that as I talked something
passed between us. ... I must not give the
impression that the children's subjects were
never self-chosen or seen at first hand. What I
hoped for, and I know in part achieved, was to
give the children complete confidence in their
inner vision as the seeing eye, so that it would
come to colour and control their whole habit of
looking. They would then see pictures every-
where, in poor, plain places as well as lovely
ones.''''
Within the next few years, the results of this
revolutionary teaching were seen in exhibitions,
in teachers' classes, in the Writing Patterns which
were a parallel activity, and above all in the happiness
and fulfilment of countless children.
" The studio now offered opportunities to
all, not just a gifted few. Even more welcome
and significant was the fact that rebellious and
frustrated children found peace when they
painted.''''
Those who know the value of art as a means of
healing owe a deep debt of gratitude to Marion
Richardson. As Sir Kenneth Clark points out
114 MENTAL HEALTH
in his Introduction, there had been other workers
in the field, but it was she alone who recognized
that the power of imaginative expression could be
developed in almost every child as part of his education.
How sensibly she deals with all sorts of practical
matters and individual problems ! Take the
instance of the older child with leanings towards
the " pretty-pretty" The wise teacher will
never seem superior. She will be content to let
these things spend themselves and meanwhile
have their time and day."
There is a misconception of the new art teaching
which imposes a formalism not far removed from
the tyranny of earlier days, by insisting on large
sheets of paper and brushes, a meaningless, slap-
dash technique, and the rejection of any ideas or
help from outside. Marion Richardson had no
sympathy with such a point of view. The freeing
of the inner vision demands complete sincerity
and the highest standard of work. It will require
experiment with different materials, and will be
strengthened by the teacher's guidance.
She had her own and highly successful way of
working, but this was not a " method " to be
copied. Once the implications of her teaching
are accepted, the means of expression will be an
individual matter. Neither is a particular training
essential. Indeed, the non-specialist may possess
the fundamentals?those qualities of love and
understanding which were the foundation of
Marion Richardson's teaching.
M.F.H.
