Mental Readjustment
=====================

By Sidonie Reiss. With
a prefatory note by Alexandra Adler, M.D.
Translated by Bernard Miall. London:
George Allen & Unwin, Ltd. 167 pp. 10s. 6d.
net.
The interpretation of a prophet to a succeeding
generation presents problems which are not entirely
solved in this brief attempt to convey to parents
ar>d teachers of small children, to social workers
and related professions, the essence of the School
?f Individual Psychology founded by Alfred Adler.
Faced with the choice of either explaining at the
beginning that the book is a presentation of Adler's
work, and then allowing the text to speak for itself,
0r else continuing throughout to give credit to the
Master as each point is made, Miss Reiss chooses the
latter, perhaps unwisely. The result is not only a
Wnt of adulation, but also that Adler is credited
with a great many " discoveries many of which
are mere commonplaces and some are part of
traditional wisdom. It is correspondingly difficult
to find out from this book exactly what Adler's
eontribution has been to psychological thought.
Miss Reiss is clearly happier when presenting
ease material than explaining theory ; and the
obscurities of the first part?perhaps the translator
was uncomfortable too?are not met with later.
The case histories are interesting, but it is a com-
paratively simple world which is described. The
bark of childhood, sturdy though it is, sails perilously
between the Scylla of parental " cossetting " and
the Charybdis of parental severity, laden with organ
inferiority and steering, not by right and wrong
which have been abolished, but by correct behaviour
and error. Or perhaps the reviewer in search of a
striking metaphor is guilty of over-simplification
too.
The recent spate of books explaining psychology
to parents, teachers and social workers has left
its mark in a certain degree of sophistication,
and perhaps Miss Reiss would have been better
advised to take her readers more into her confidence.
Many of these readers will wish to know in greater
detail the relationship between cause and effect in
children's psychological problems, and will not be
content any longer with a description of effect
and a bare statement of cause. They will want to
know in greater detail how these mechanisms work,
what governs the final path of a neurotic ^reaction
and what is the evidence of this alleged organ
" sensitivity " to trouble.
Perhaps the most surprising feature of the book
is a remark in a prefatory note by Dr. Alexandra
Adler that " the author avoids sweeping generaliza-
tions On the contrary, the theoretical section
of this book is no deeper than the level of
generalizations, and the author should consider
attempting to satisfy the hunger of this section of
the reading public for a more serious exposition
of her subject.
K.S.
