Conquer Fear
==============

MENTAL HEALTH 85

By John Langdon-Davies. Feature
Books Ltd., London, 1948. pp. 173. 5s.
This little book, by an experienced popular
writer on science and on contemporary problems,
will contribute something to mental hygiene. It
has been read by the reviewer in as naive a frame
of mind as possible to try and find the places that
might jar. There are not many, despite my prejudice
against the slightly self-conscious baby-language
which is now so general with popular educators,
editors of news-letters to the staffs of large enter-
prises and so on. Mr. Langdon-Davies " gets
across " with his sincerity and his skill in stating
psycho-analytic doctrine in a frank and warmly
human way.
Personality development and social climate are
well integrated into his doctrine of causation of
" fear-sickness Instead of case-notes he uses
a mass of letters from nervously distressed people
as his text upon which to preach. He quickly
attacks the fallacy of attributing our ills solely to
the economic system, and takes the reader a con-
siderable distance into the field of inter-personal
and group relations. He points to the dangers of
using mere superficial knowledge about " unhappy
childhood experiences " as an alibi for failure and
defeatism in anxiety states.
The commentary on these poignant human
documents, which the author intersperses, is of
variable quality. At times one becomes rather
acutely aware of his lack of psychiatric training,
and moreover of a certain ambivalence about
doctors and psychiatrists. Thus, in commenting
on a letter written most probably by a woman with
a severe reactive depression with depersonalization
and hallucinatory experiences, he confidently
diagnoses schizophrenia but advises " three months'
complete rest " and " probably treatment " in his
reply to her (p. 30).
Mr. Langdon-Davies knows psycho-dynamic
theory well and simplifies it to good purpose. Its
integration with medicine is less well done, and the
popular reader will almost certainly be left with the
impression that the two are practically unrelated,
especially as he uses the word " doctor " to describe
persons who are on the whole only capable of
excluding organic disease. Even though he may
be often right, it is doubtful policy to undermine
further the confidence of patients in their practi-
tioners, the younger generation of whom are fast
learning something about psychiatry and will be
better taught.
Mr. Langdon-Davies advocates a kind of Dejerine
method of persuasion technique for self-help in the
chapter on " The Cure of Fear-sickness ". This
may work in the upper intelligence levels but
presupposes probably more capacity for insightful
detachment than the person at or below the median
is capable of.
A last query concerns p. 166. Here the author
stresses the need for parents to refrain from stimulat-
ing their children's sex feelings by excessive physical
affection. In so doing he runs the risk of throwing
out the baby with the bath-water. There is probably
more danger from taboos on tenderness than from
smothering affection, and the puritan, anti-sensual
tendencies of our culture may be given unintentional
aid and comfort through a perfectly correct piece
of observation wrongly emphasized.
These points of critique notwithstanding, this is
a sound, humane and enlightening book, perhaps
the best the reviewer has met, to recommend to
interested persons. The last chapter, on mental
hygiene of family life, is especially good. One
wishes that Mr. Langdon-Davies had enlarged it
to include the discussion of the needs of older
children. H.V.D.
