Occupational and Physio-Therapy as Adjuncts to Child Guidance
=============================================================

A SUGGESTION FOR DESIGNERS OF CHILD GUIDANCE CLINICS
By E. WELLISCH, M.D., D.P.M., Consultant Phys. Med. (Austria)
Medical Director, Cray ford Child Guidance Clinic, Kent
Children usually cannot sustain long psycho-
therapeutic conversations as adults do, and,
therefore, they often need a special psycho-
therapeutic approach which is best provided by
indirect and practical methods. The most
]rnportant and widely used of these methods is
Play therapy. There are also other, though
generally less essential, methods which can
often be very helpful. They are, however, so
far used only very little in child guidance work
and therefore deserve greater attention than they
nave received in the past. One of these methods
Is occupational therapy, which in many respects
ls closely related to play therapy. Another
method, which again has a close relation with
occupational therapy, is physiotherapy, a form
of treatment which can in many cases be
usefully combined with psychotherapy.
Occupational Therapy in Child Guidance
Occupational therapy is already widely
applied in mental hospitals and other places of
treatment of mental disorders, but so far has
only been little used in child guidance clinics.
An exception, however, is, for instance, the
Davidson Clinic, Edinburgh, which in so
many respects is doing pioneer work.
9ccupational therapy, which is " any
activity, mental or physical, definitely pre-
scribed and guided, for the distinct purpose of
contributing to and hastening recovery from
disease or injury", assists psychotherapy
through creative activity. Its value for child
guidance work is manifold. It promotes
accessibility to psychotherapy in children with
a practical bias who are otherwise difficult to
approach. Certain children who lack practical
ability can be taught to enjoy handiwork, an
experience which has great beneficial psycho-
logical effect. There are also children who
find " play " with toys " too childish " and
resent any form of play therapy. They have,
however, no objection against "real work"
and can be successfully influenced by occu-
pational therapy. The value of occupational
therapy to children who need vocational
guidance is considerable. An occupational
therapy department also is from an economical
point of view valuable for a child guidance
clinic. Toys and play material are frequently
damaged but often difficult to repair or replace,
and there is also a constant need for new play
material. An occupational therapy department
can be very useful in covering these needs and
thus provide the clinic with important materials
on which to a certain degree the result of the
treatment depends.
The occupations and crafts used in child
guidance have to be adjusted to the special
purpose. They can be divided into four main
groups.
The first group consists in toy-making and
repairing. A very important play technique
is the method of building miniature play-
worlds with little houses, trees, figures, animals,
etc., a method which was designed by Dr.
Margaret Lowenfeld. The little toys needed
for this purpose can be made of various materials
such as papier mache, wood, or metal. To
make these toys at the clinic is not only fascin-
ating work for the children, but it can be of
great practical value for the psychotherapist if
he can order what he needs for special purposes.
The making of puppets, either flat figures,
marionettes or glove puppets, and of stage
material would be a great asset. The same
34 MENTAL HEALTH
applies to the making of dolls' houses and soft
and other toys.
Another group includes various simple crafts,
such as needlecraft, weaving, basketry, raffia
and cane work, wood and metal work, and
also the use of waste material. The arrange-
ment of country dances and other physical
exercises is also important. These are forms
of treatment which equally belong to the
spheres of occupational and physio-therapy.
Of greatest therapeutic value can be the use
of music in child guidance work, both in the
form of singing and instrumental music. There
is no other means which can influence the child's
emotions as well chosen and performed music
can, and there is no doubt that musical treat-
ment, if directed by an expert, has a great
future.
The occupational therapy department of a
child guidance clinic requires a special room
and a trained occupational therapist. The
other staff of the clinic will usually neither have
the expert knowledge nor the time necessary
for this branch of the work.
Physiotherapy in Child Guidance
Physiotherapy, or the use of mechanical
force, heat, water, light and electricity, is a
subject which is still neglected in the syllabus
of many medical schools. This is the reason
why its great importance for medicine in general
and psychological medicine in particular is so
little recognized. There are, however, signs
that physiotherapy will play an increasing role
in psychiatry.
Physiotherapeutic procedures are a valuable
part of the treatment in some mental hospitals.
In child psychiatry, physiotherapy has until
now been used only by few clinics, as, for
instance, by the Institute of Child Psychology,
London, but there are a number of reasons
why this form of treatment is especially suitable
to assist the work in child guidance clinics.
In psychological disturbances, particularly of
children, psychotherapy can often be made
easier by an additional bodily approach. There
are, of course, patients for whom such an
approach is contra-indicated and their careful
selection is very important, but the number,
especially of maladjusted children, who can
benefit from a simultaneous somatic treatment
is considerable. Maladjusted children fre-
quently suffer from psychosomatic disorders,
and, although the organic disturbance is not
always conspicuous, it is often an important
and sometimes even causative factor of the
disorder. Improvement of the somatic state
often has a favourable result on the maladjust-
ment. Physiotherapy is particularly suitable
as a bodily approach for several reasons. The
somatic disturbances of maladjusted children
are frequently disorders of the muscular and
vascular systems which are especially well
influenced by physical agents. These agents
are often successful when drugs or injections are
not, and they also have the advantage of being
non-poisonous. Physical agents, such as
warmth, and its carrier water, light and
electricity, also have a strong suggestive in-
fluence on the child. They are the forces of
nature which play an enormous role in the
unconscious mind. Physical procedures often
require systematic physical training and a
certain discipline which can have an excellent
educational influence on the child. Many
forms of physiotherapy are followed by a period
of rest during which the patient has a feeling
of increased, well-being and is pleasantly
relaxed. This period often gives a unique
opportunity for psychotherapy.
The main indications for physiotherapy of
maladjusted children can be divided into two
groups, bodily and psychological. In either
group the symptoms must be considered to
determine the type of treatment.
In the first group the most important indica-
tions for physical treatment are faulty posture
and incorrect bodily mechanics. Faulty posture
is frequently the somatic expression of de-
pression, anxiety, dejection, lack of self-respect
or poor general mental health. Drooping
shoulders, scoliosis and other faulty bodily
mechanics are often found in hypotonic,
asthenic children. The children also often
have a vascular instability with poor peripheral
circulation, are pale, anaemic, and are liable to
acidosis and over-excitement.
Another indication for physiotherapy is
infantile bronchial asthma. Remedial exercises
for asthma give such an excellent opportunity
for simultaneous psychotherapy that they should
be given by the staff of child guidance clinics.
The same applies to other physiotherapeutic
procedures which assist in relieving this
distressing disease.
Another indication for a simultaneous physio-
and psycho-therapy is the presence of mild, and
especially glandular forms of infantile tuber-
culoses. Further indications are neurological
symptoms such as paresis, paralysis, neuralgia,
migraine or other forms of headache, and also
habit spasms.
MENTAL HEALTH 35
In the second group, the outstanding
symptoms which determine the choice of
treatment are lack of energy and interest,
Hstlessness and slothfulness. They are frequently
characteristics of the asthenic child. A not
uncommon indication also is infantile
depression. Of considerable importance is
self-consciousness, especially of adolescent
children and particularly if they happen to be
obese or afflicted with some bodily defect.
Another indication is given by children who are
not interested in or suitable for play therapy, or
occupations which appeal to the imagination, but
who love movement games and bodily exercises.
The physiotherapeutic methods used in child
guidance have to be adapted to this special
Purpose. Only few and simple methods can
and need be applied. They should comprise
some procedures of medical gymnastics and
mechanotherapy, hydro and thermo-therapy
and of light-therapy. Electrotherapeutic pro-
cedures are not essential for the ordinary
routine work. For the medical gymnastics a
suitable room is necessary. There the courses
training in general postural exercises and
breathing exercises for asthma should take
Place. The room should be equipped with
stall-bars for the manipulation of postural
deformities, such as scoliosis, etc. The hydro-
therapeutic equipment should comprise one
or several bath-tubs where full-baths, half-
baths, sprays, douches, and ablutions can be
?iven, as well as couches for wet packs and rest.
Wet packs, followed by cold half-baths and
gymnastic exercises, can be an excellent pro-
cedure in the treatment of muscular weakness,
'istlessness and lack of energy. Cold showers
are refreshing and stimulating; warm tub-baths,
especially in combination with ultraviolet
radiations, are useful in glandular tuberculosis
of children. The admixture of extracts of pine
needles or other aromatic and coloured sub-
stances can, apart from their other effect, exert
a favourable suggestive influence.
Artificial light treatment is indicated in many
disorders of childhood. The growing child
needs light almost as much as food and is
extraordinarily sensitive to it. Ultraviolet
radiation is a prophylactic procedure of the
first order to combat rickets in which a " late
or adolescent form " is sometimes known to
occur. Ultraviolet light is effective in tetany
and certain forms of tuberculosis. In some
cases of anaemia and anorexia it is also valuable.
Bronchial asthma is another indication for
ultraviolet treatment, especially if a certain
grade of ultraviolet erythema is given at the
skin of the thorax and the treatment is combined
with local applications of heat.
Of excellent value for a child guidance clinic
would be the installation of a " solarium ".
This is a room with a battery of ultraviolet
and heat lamps. If the radiation is arranged
so that it simulates natural sunlight and the
floor is covered with sand, the room resembles
a beach and can be used for play and psycho-
therapy at the same time. Even if only one
room should be available for physiotherapy,
many of the most useful procedures could
be performed there. A more complete physio-
therapy unit, however, should have two or
three rooms for mechano and hydro-therapy
and ultraviolet treatment. A trained physio-
therapist should be in charge of the department
and the senior psychiatrist should have a certain
knowledge of physiotherapy.
As child guidance clinics are relatively recent
institutions, they were frequently established
in rooms of hospital outpatient clinics, school
clinics, and similar buildings, as good as
circumstances permitted. This, however, is
only a provisional measure and in future
child guidance clinics will have to be properly
designed for their special tasks. May I suggest
that the future designers and architects of
child guidance clinics should, at least for some
of the larger clinics, make provisions also for
departments of occupational and physio-therapy.
This would increase the scope and improve
the results of child guidance treatment.
PUBLICATIONS
Eighth Annual Report of the Davidson Clinic
Edinburgh, 1948.
Haworth, N. A., and E. M. MacDonald (1940).
theory of Occupational Therapy. London: Bailltere,
Tindall & Cox.
*-?Warschik, J. (1941). Phvsikalische Therapie. Wien:
Springer-Verlag.
usen, F. H. (1941). Physical Medicine. Philadelphia
and London: W. B. Saunders Company.
Welusch, E. (1932). Die Quarzlampe. Wien und
Berlin: J. Springer.
(1933). Die physikalische Therapie der Nerven-
krankheiten. Medizinische Klinik, No. 26.
(1934). Die physikalische Therapie der Neurosen.
Mitteilungen des Volksgesundheitsamtes, H.ll.
?  (1944). Physical Therapy in its Relation to
Psychological Medicine. The Medical Press and
Circular. Vol. ccxii, No. 5512.
