The Family and Democratic Society
===================================

By Joseph
Kirk Folsom, Professor of Sociology, Vassar
College, U.S.A., with chapters in collaboration
with Marion Bassett. Routledge & Kegan
Paul. 30s.
The quality of this book is very variable.
Professor Folsom has sought to write a compre-
hensive summary of the family, a source book
covering all its aspects, and has drawn his data
from a wide number of fields?psychology,
economics, religion, anthropology and sociology.
It follows that many of the sections are but brief
summaries of the work of others, a compression
of the subject matter of books into a few lines, as
in the 30-page section on a world survey of family
patterns. This gives to the book an air of super-
ficiality, a breathless feeling and often a tabloid
quality.
But I know of no other book which seeks to cover
all the varied subjects mentioned in this one. There
are sections on primitive family life and on the
theory of its origin, the influence of modern social
change, the measurement and prediction of marital
happiness, causes and treatment of marital frustra-
tions, the comparative legal status and demography
of marriage, mate selection, housing, trends in
" home making" and education for family life,
to mention but a few of the main ones. The
bringing together of all this information, often a
work of collation, is very useful and many a
116 ' MENTAL HEALTH
university student will find his burden of reading
lightened by a perusal of this book. Professor
Folsom in his psychological approach to these
problems uses mainly the behaviouristic one and is
non-psycho-analytical. Thus, the source of mental
ill-health is to be found in the conditioning of the
patient to annoyances and irritations of particular
situations and places. Relief depends on a " re-
conditioning " of the disliked objects by placing
them in other more pleasurable contexts, thus
creating new habits. Hence the importance
Professor Folsom places on frustration in the
development of personality. In sociological and
anthropological matters, the book is written under
the influence of the Linton-Kardiner school. The
theory is that each culture, through its primary
institutions, attitudes, and patterns of behaviour,
gives to the individual a basic personality structure
which is characteristic of that culture. The
personality is built " round the pattern of reaction
to the frustration of purposes arising from several
causes in the culture ". The essential problem of
such culture, as Folsom notes, lies in the plurality
of their ethical systems which often gives rise to a
conflict between these different values.
In his discussion of the stage reached by society
in its development today, the Muller-Lyer analysis
is accepted which finds that the values centre
round the person. The essence of this analysis
is that a person centred society is dualistic in nature,
" it has a structure of places, which must be filled,
of jobs and duties which must be carried out.
Alongside of this is a network of free developing
persons and personal relations which shift about with
considerable independence from the formal
structure Institutional structures and the living
individual are " kept distinct and the needs of the
person have a chance to influence the institutional
structure ". It is with this in mind that the word
" democracy " is included in the title.
At this point, however, Professor Folsom leaves
the scientific field to become political and thus
blunts the sharpness of his scientific acumen.
It would appear that much of this section of the
book was written in the days of Stalingrad, and the
author is torn between his admiration for Russia
fighting fascism and his fear of communism. There
is, however, no such conflict in his abounding
admiration of the American way of life seen through
the tinted spectacles of a laissez-faire liberal of the
nineteen hundreds.
The book was clearly written for an American
audience and, judging by its many picturesque,
sentimental and romantic metaphors (the Oedipus
situation being described as a " family romance "),
for an audience of blushing school girls, whose
delicate sensibilities need protecting. A graver
fault for the non-American reader is the paucity
of references to the European family or to the
present trends in family structure in England or on
the Continent. Russia is mentioned in terms of
what Soviet policy set out to do, and there is no
scientific analysis of the family there. The family
in Sweden is more adequately dealt with, perhaps
because Mydral has written such an excellent book
about it. On other matters in Europe the book
lags behind the times; thus, Veblen's statement
that on the Continent rank depends on occupation
rather than upon scale of living is fully accepted.
This was certainly true of 1906 Germany but it is
doubtful if it holds true to-day. Or again, the
French family is seen as dominated by the father
which is only true at a very superficial and external
level. Likewise it is inaccurate to say that the
French woman does not vote.
For students of American life and for all who are
curious, the information contained in these 700
pages will have many items of interest. The array
of facts is considerable, the range of topics dis-
cussed wide, and both facts and topics deal with
problems of vital importance to us all to-day.
P.M.T.
