The Effect of Rhythm and Functional Music on Mental Defectives
===============================================================

By P. PICHOT, M.D.
Medecin Assistant des Hopitaux de Paris
The term functional music is used to describe
all music capable of modifying in a given
direction the behaviour of those who hear it.
In the treatment of mental defectives, the
modifications in behaviour which are expected
are improvements either in general behaviour
or in certain of its specific aspects. Though
the term functional music is new, the art itself
has a long history. It was excellently described
as far back as 1846 by the great French precursor
Seguin in his classic : Moral Treatment,
Hygiene and Training of Idiots, thus?
" I have not yet seen idiots who did not
express the greatest pleasure on hearing a
piece of music. . . : Furthermore, idiots
respond more readily to gay, rousing
rhythmns than to slow or sad measures.
. . . Certain idiots in a state of agitation
have been calmed down by hearing sad
songs, while strident and jerky sounds
made by brass instruments and drums
have produced movements in idiots hitherto
inert, and to a certain extent, seemed to
give a certain regularity to these movements.
I even made use of military marches as a
means of speeding up their jumping,
climbing and running."
The problem has been treated by many writers
since Seguin, but few of their studies do more
than paraphrase the sentences just quoted,
although they often then attempted to solve
several very different problems at one and the
same time.
The first of these concerns the interest taken
by mental defectives in music, and especially
in music with a strongly marked rhythm.
Certain writers have tried to push the analysis
further and discover, on the one hand, the kind
of music that interests the subjects most, and,
on the other, the type of mental defective most
interested in music.
Many writers have asserted, for instance, that 1
among mental defectives, mongols have a
special interest in music. In point of fact,
this assertion has never, to our knowledge, been
subjected to any serious comparative study
and should be treated with reserve.
The second problem is that of the musical
aptitude of mental defectives ; for music can
only modify the behaviour of a subject in so far'
as the latter is capable of perceiving its structure.
The third problem is that of the effect of
music with a marked rhythm on the behaviour
of mental defectives?in short, the problem of
functional music properly speaking. On this
point it seems that modern writers have, on the
whole, followed up Seguin's indications. Some
more special studies, however, have defined
certain effects of music. In 1947, H. S. Whiting
showed, for example, that the accident rate in a
psychiatric hospital could be diminished if the
patients had suitable music played to them at
fixed hours.
In our service at the Vallee Foundation in
Paris, we have been using gramophone records
in an empirical fashion for several years.
From this We thought we should be able to draw
definite conclusions, but we very soon realized
that an experimental study of the basis on which
the use of such a therapeutic method rests,
would have to be undertaken beforehand. It
* Paper {translated from the French) read at a meeting arranged by Association of Mental Health Workers in connection
with the International Congress on Mental Health, August 20th, 1948.
V
MENTAL HEALTH
seemed to us that the two fundamental elements
were as follows : firstly, the perceptive aptitudes
of mental defectives regarding music and more
especially regarding musical rhythm, and
secondly, the affective and emotional effect of
the rhythms on these subjects. Starting from
these studies we should be able to build up a
sound therapeutic method the value of which has
already been demonstrated by previous empirical
experiments.
The Perception of Rhythm
What has come to be generally, though in-
correctly, known as the "sense of rhythm" has
never been systematically studied in mental
defectives. In most cases writers seemed rather
to be on the look-out for freaks. Seguin's
observations of " idiot musicians " are classical,
like Trelat's study of a woman whose musical
talents brought Liszt and Meyerbeer to visit her
ln the Salpetriere. Pezzalla and Heller have
even reported cases of genuine " performing
idiots and talked of a hypertrophy of musical
aptitude in certain defectives. The result of
these scanty observations shows the possibility
?f the existence, in some mental defectives, of
rhythmical aptitudes fairly similar to those of
pOrmal subjects. With the help of our friend
Fraisse, of the Institute of Psychology of the
r'Orbonne, we have tried to determine the general
level and distribution of rhythmic sense in
defectives?a very complex problem.
Tor this 'study we have devised a series of
tests which (a) are simple enough to be applied
to defectives, and (b) are diverse enough not
to miss out any of the essential aspects of
the aptitudes studied. In the description of the
tests used, technical details of the actual
exPeriments which will be described elsewhere,
are omitted. These tests are as follows :
1- Spontaneous tempo. This is studied by
recording the free tapping with a metal pencil.
?n a tapping board.
| 2. Perception of rhythmic forms. In three
Parts, (a) reproduction by the subject of series of
A3,4, etc., taps struck at regular intervals by the
experimenter ; (b) reproduction of a series of
identical groups separated by a short interval :
2, 2-2-2, etc., then 3-3, 3-3-3, etc. ; (c) re-
production of complex rhythmic patterns of
increasing difficulty : 2-1, 3-1, 4-1, 5-1, 2-2,
3-2, 4-2, 5-2, 2-2-1, 3-2-1, 4-2-1, etc.
. 3. Simple rhythmic induction studied by the
simultaneous recording of the beats of a metro-
nome ticking at 58, 100 and 138, and the taps
of the subject who is trying to follow the rhythm
i
^
on a tapping board. Marks are awarded from
1 to 4 according to the exactness of the
synchronization.
4. Complex rhythmic induction. The subject
is asked to beat time on the tapping board to
music played on the gramophone. Four pieces
of unequal difficulty are then played one after
the other : a military march, a waltz, a jazz
piano piece and a fragment of a ballet. The
results are judged by two independent observers
and marked from 1 to 4.
The subjects we studied were split into three
groups :
A. Group of defectives whose I.Q. varied
from 29 to 48 (seven in age group 6-9 ; six,
10-13 ; twelve, 14-17 ; five, over 18).
B. Group of normal children having the same
mental age as the defectives (their chronological
ages being between 3 and 6).
C. Group of subjects of same chronological
age-groups as the defectives.
The results were as follows :
1. Spontaneous tempo. Mental defectives and
children of the same mental age have a rapid
spontaneous tempo. The averages and dis-
tributions are practically identical. Subjects in
Group C, however, have a much slower
spontaneous tempo (Table I). We noted that
there was a strong correlation between the
spontaneous tempo and the chronological age
(r = -f ? 53 without correction for attenuation).
Interpretation of this result is difficult. We may
provisionally consider it as due to the increased
control of the higher integrating centres that
comes with age. On the other hand, the study
of the individual regularity of spontaneous
tempo, studied by the standard deviation, shows
us that mental defectives have as regular a
tempo as subjects of the same chronological
age (E.M. 3*8 and 3-4 per cent.) and greatly
superior to the tempo regularity of children of
the same mental age (6 ? 0 per cent.).
2. Perception of rhythmic forms. In practice,
we obtained identical results from groups A and
B, whereas group C was decidedly better ; this
eliminated the possibility that subjects could get
round the difficulty by counting the taps. Thus
the perception of complex forms (Table II)
allows us to deduce that mental development
influences the perception of rhythmic forms.
3. Simple rhythmic induction. A study of
Table III permits us to conclude that (a) the
behaviour of mental defectives is identical
with that of subjects of the same mental age
and distinctly inferior to that of subjects of the
same chronological age. (b) In the case of both
3*
MENTAL HEALTH
mental defectives and young children, the most
difficult measure to follow is the slowest one,
in other words, the one which is farthest removed
from the spontaneous tempo.
4. Complex rhythmic induction. One first
point that we must underline because of its
importance for the problem of functional music
is the extraordinary facility with which defectives
and young children from 3 to 6 years are swayed
by musical rhythm. During this test we only
had to put the tapping board pencil into their,
hands and play the music and quite spon-
taneously they tried to follow the rhythm. Now
it has been noted that this spontaneity disappears
with age. The behaviour of our normal subjects
whose chronological age was over 10 or 12 years,
showed a kind of inhibition especially at the
beginning of the experiment, an obvious
tendency to wish to reconstruct the rhythm
intellectually rather than simply follow it.
The uncorrected results as set forth (on
opposite page) in Table IV show that, on an
average, Groups A and B are equal and
inferior to Group C, except in the case of
the military march when all three groups are
equal. An analysis of the results, however,
reveals that the superiority of Group C is due
less to a general superiority than to the fact that
it includes far fewer totally incapable subjects.
It therefore appears very likely that aptitude for
complex rhythmic induction does not really
increase with age, but that above a certain
mental level it is replaced by an intellectual
construction which can, up to a point, compen-
sate for lack of aptitude.
To sum up the whole of this experimental
study, we may provisionally conclude that,
generally speaking, mental defectives' behaviour
as regards rhythmic aptitudes is that of children
of the same mental age and inferior to that of
subjects of the same chronological age. In
other respects, there are three points worth
noting :
(a) The lower the mental age of
defectives, the faster their spontaneous
tempo, and the induction of simple rhythm
is easier in proportion as this rhythm is
faster, or, in other terms, comes closer to
the spontaneous tempo.
(b) The perception of complex rhythms
is identical in mental defectives and
subjects of the same mental age, and inferior
to that of subjects of the same chrono-.
logical age.
(c) Complex musical rhythms are
induced spontaneously by mental defectives.
This aptitude for the induction of musical
rhythms does not seem to be connected
with intellectual development, the latter
only permitting subjects with little rhythmic
aptitude to compensate for the deficiency
with a superimposed intellectual construc- f
tion.
The Affective Value of Rhythm
There is no doubt that music with a strongly
marked rhythm is of considerable affective
value in the case of mental defectives, and this
affective value is one of the essential causes of the
efficacy of functional music. We possess,
however, only very vague ideas concerning the
nature and intensity of this affective value.
Howard Hanson has attempted to formulate
the affective action of rhythm in the following
principles :
"1. Everything else being equal, the
further the tempo is accelerated from the
pulse rate to the upper limit of practical
tempo, the greater becomes the emotional
. tension.
"2. As long as the subdivisions of the
metric units are regular and the accents
remain strictly in conformity with the
basic pattern, the effect may be exhilarating,
but will not be disturbing.
"3. Rhythmic tension is heightened by
the extent to which the dynamic accent is
misplaced in terms of the metric accent.
" 4. The emotional effect of ' off
balance' accents is greatly heightened
by an increase in dynamic power."
But this study, the original purpose of which
was to show " the harmful effects of boogie-
woogie on the mental state of American youth *
is far from exhausting the subject. It seems to
us that it would have been possible to tackle it
indirectly through a study of the spontaneous
rhythmic manifestations of mental defectives.
These are, in fact, easy to observe, and a
considerable amount of spadework has already
been done. Here we can only give the general
outlines of a problem on which we are already
working at the Vallee Foundation. The spon-
taneous rhythmic manifestations of mental
defectives consist chiefly of a swaying of the head
or trunk, and incidentally in rhythmic sucking
movements with the mouth. There are three
main interpretations of these rhythmic move-
ments.
According to the older writers like Vosin and
Bourneville, they fall into the category of
tics and are of purely neurological origin.
More recently, after Kraepelin, they were
MENTAL HEALTH
TABLE I.
Spontaneous Tempo (Average Tempo)
Tempo
(1/100 sec.)
Mental Def.
Group B*
10 to 19
20 to 29
30 to 39
40 to 49
50 to 59
60 to 69
70 to 79
80 to 89
90 to 99
100 to 109
110 to 119
120 to 129
130 to 139
Total
Means
(1/100 sec.)
30
39
20
37
TABLE II.
Perception of Complex Rhythmic Patterns
Percentage of Success.
Patterns
2-1
2-2
2-2-1
3-1
3-2
3-2-1
4-1
4-2
4-2-1
5-1
5-2
5-2-1
Mental Def. I Group B
66'
60
46'
43'
40
16
30
16
16
26
20
13
80
70
55
70
50
15
40
30
15
30
30
10
TABLE III.
Rhythmic Induction (Metronome Rhythm)
Metronome
Rhythm
138-min.
100-min.
58-min.
Mental Def.
3-03
2-9
2-33
Group B
2-95
3-05
2-65
TABLE IV.
Rhythmic Induction (Musical Rhythm)
Musical
Rhythm
Mental Def. Group B
Group C
Military March
Waltz
Piano Jazz
Ballet
3-2
2-3
2-2
2-6
305
2-4
2-1
2-5
305
2-73
2-8
3-05
Percentage of the scores 1-2
37-5
40-1
9-2
TABLE V.
Frequency of Rocking in Mental Deficiency
Mental age
No. of Subjects % rocking
to 3
3 to 5
6 to 8
9 to 12
69
25
29
10
48
16
10
10
* Mean scores for the seven subjects aged 6 to 9. For the twenty-three subjects aged 10 or more the mean score is 4*0
{maximum score).
considered similar to catatonic stereotypes,
and C. J. C. Earl showed that in some cases
they were in fact manifestations of a catatonic
Psychosis of defectives. This interpretation by
no means excludes the following one.
In 1912, Clarke and Atwood, using Freud's
Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie as a
hypothesis, were the first to show that these
" habit movements " were manifestations of a
primitive auto-eroticism. In 1927, Potter
confirmed this view. It is interesting to note
that the same kind of swaying is seen in normal
young children. R. A. Spitz of New York
has recently made a special study of this mani-
festation from the angle of dynamic psychology,
and has agreed with the obviously auto-erotic
nature of this behaviour. He declared that,
generally speaking, an essential characteristic
of the auto-erotic behaviourisms of sucklings
was that they were rhythmic. It seems, there-
fore, that one may legitimately consider the
swaying of mental defectives as equivalent to
the swaying of sucklings,, and as having an
equivalent affective value, in support of this
point we should remember, on the one hand, that
spontaneous swaying is more frequent in
defectives in proportion as their mental level is
low, and, on the other, that in the isolated cases
where swaying is met with above the mental age
of 5, psycho-analysis of the subject, which we
10 MENTAL HEALTH
cannot go into here, shows the existence of an
affective fixation at an early stage.
If we admit this conclusion, we may foresee
that the younger the subject, or more assimilable
to a young subject, the more marked will be
the pleasure effect. In this way it would be easy
to confirm our hypothesis by showing that
the affective value of rhythm in a civilization is
greater when that civilization is more primitive,
or when the music is intended for a more
primitive affective group or for a group in a state
of retrogression at an affectively primitive stage.
We shall find a further confirmation of our
hypothesis in the fact to which we have already
referred, namely, that after 10 to 12 years,
subjects- show a certain inhibition concerning
rhythm and lose the spontaneity of induction
observed in the youngest subjects.
Conclusion
From this research, the first results of which
we have briefly set forth, we may already draw
certain conclusions concerning the use of
functional music.
1. Functional music with a well-defined
rhythm may be used for its pleasure value. Its
effect will then be most noticeable when the
level of development of the mentally deficient
is lowest. The practical result of the use of this
music with pleasure value will be to fix the
attention of the children and afterwards to
reduce their restlessness, and the effect is shown,
for example, in the accident rate.
2. Functional music will be most effective
from the pleasure point of view when it comes
nearest to the rhythmic possibilities of the
defectives, that is to say, when its rhythm is
simple enough and well enough defined to be
grasped by the subjects, and when its tempo
is fast enough to come near to their own
spontaneous tempo.
3. The value of slow functional music with a
well-defined rhythm is probably quite different.
In proportion as it varies from the spontaneous
tempo of the child, it probably loses its pleasure
value. It is, however, probable that it has an
educative value permitting a progressive develop-
ment of the processes of affective maturation,
which normally lead to a slowing down of the
subject's spontaneous tempo. It is probably
in this light that Seguin's observation on the
calming effect of music should be interpreted.
{From the Clinique des Maladies Mentales, Paris, Prof. J. Delay and the Institut de Psychologie, Paris, Prof. Pieron.)
i
