They Live by Night 
====================

MENTAL HEALTH 25
Film Reviews
(Featuring Farley Granger and
Cathy O'Donnell.) 96 min.
When the hero of this film tells his young wife
"our baby will have to take a chance like us it is
not a mere conventional statement such as one often
hears in American pictures.
We have previously heard about conflict relating
to Junior's jealousies and whether two or three
nurseries are necessary for a newly-poor family
trying to adapt. But the unborn child of a mother
with a sad early history, a father who has been to
Prison for accidental killing and who consequently
becomes delinquent, may not have a hopeful future.
At any rate the acting of Cathy O'Donnell and
Farley Granger make us believe in the sincerity of
the love of these two unhappy people. Though
some of the subtler conversation may be too
Americanized for us to follow, we are presented with
a vivid picture of two people fighting to give their
child the love and security of which they were
starved. This may all sound rather melodramatic
but we cannot quarrel with a book, film or play
that sincerely tries to depict the tragic series of
events that may lead to serious anti-social behaviour.
We know only too well the sad case histories that
are uncovered in child guidance and delinquency
clinics, Remand Homes, Approved Schools, Borstals
and prisons.
All through this film the direction, acting, music
and photography underline in a beautiful yet
frightening way the events that close in like a net
on the young delinquent. He still hopes to be law
abiding, yet he is always having to run away from
the long arm of the law.
The theme of the boy and girl who long for the
right to be happy together after the deprivations of
childhood is extremely moving. There is artistic and
moral merit in their unfulfilment, but having seen
the film, time could be well spent weaving a few
fantasies over satisfactory though inartistic endings
for naughty children both in films and in everyday
life. H.V.B.
The Window. (Featuring Barbara Hale, Bobby
Driscoll, Arthur Kennedy, Paul Stewart.) 73 min.
It seemed as though the craze for schizophrenia
had passed and with it perhaps the psychological
film (for schizophrenia was almost becoming
synonymous with psychology in the cinema world),
but this week " Obsession " apparently continues
the series. But whether films, whose central theme
t?
is an abnormal condition of the mind, continue to
attract audiences or not, it does seem as though
they have had a permanent effect on films in general.
Ten years ago one may guess that The Window
would have been a simpler tale : Tommy would
have seen his neighbours murder a man, have
incurred their suspicions, and after a blood-curdling
chase ending in the neighbours' downfall, the film
would have ended with Tommy carried shoulder-
high, the hero of the tenement building. That is
still essentially the theme to-day, but there is a
difference : it is important for the plot that when
Tommy tells his parents of his horrifying discovery
they shall not believe him, but their incredulity
is more than a requirement of the plot?it is
psychologically inevitable. Tommy is shown as a
child living in a world of fantasy, shooting imaginary
robbers, nearly losing his parents' apartment for
them by his tales of the far-off ranch to which they
will shortly be moving, and regularly greeting his
father on his return from work with an account of
his heroic exploits of the day. All this is excellently
done ; Tommy surpasses himself when he almost
loses the apartment and the parents speak seriously
to him about the result of his " tales ". When this
scene is immediately followed by his account of the
murder he has just seen (this time in fact and not in
fantasy), the audience knows that it is artistically
impossible that Tommy should be believed, and the
more he protests, the greater the incredulity.
But to make a thriller that shall not only thrill, but
shall present characters and motives so convincingly
that each situation shall seem to be inevitable, is to
present script writer and actors with a formidable
task, and it cannot be said that The Window quite
meets the challenge. Would Tommy's excellent
parents really have left him alone at night when he
was so frightened ? Would such a terrified child
have behaved with such remarkable self-possession
when placed by the murderer on railings, high above
the street, in the expectation that he would topple
over ! Would people be able to carry on shady
practices in a tenement building, without arousing
the suspicions of their neighbours ? These improb-
abilities present themselves just because the greater
part of the film is so good.
For the acting, no praise is too high. There is
nothing pretentious, nothing ostentatious about the
film. There are not even any stars, except the child,
Bobby Driscoll. But words, actions, expressions
hold the audience all the time. P.E.W.
