Probation and Re-education
============================

By Elizabeth R.
Glover, M.A., late Deputy Principal Probation
Officer for London. Routledge & Kegan
Paul. 12s. 6d.
" Probation Officersa learned Magistrate
told the 1936 Committee on Social Services in
Summary Courts, " suffer from too much ill-
considered praise and too little well-considered
criticism." Since then, a dozen books by
magistrates and lawyers have lauded the probation
officers . . . and left us ignorant of what they do
and how they do it. Miss Glover's book tells us
what and how. The style of the book, with its
interest directed always to the probationer rather
54 MENTAL HEALTH
than to the author, is itself an object lesson in
social work.
Chapter I should be read by Juvenile Court
magistrates and clerks. The next six chapters
constitute a manual of practice for probation
officers, and the rest of the book discusses the
probationer's personal relationships.
Miss Glover's approach is summed up by her
welcome to psychiatry in the Courts, which leads
us " from the purely legal and moral approach
to the scientific and curative one. It has taught
us that all conduct, good or bad, has a reason;
and one must find the reason before one can hope
to correct it". Yet she retains the moralistic
pre-occupations of the ardent social worker and has
no use for treatment which deters from further
offence without altering character. One can accept
the aspirations implied in the chapter on Probation
as Treatment while admitting what Miss Glover
does no't admit: that most probationers resolve to
keep in future within the law, not because of funda-
mental emotional changes or altered moral standards,
but because they have been brought to intellectual
acceptance of the common belief that petty crime
does not pay. Society pays heavily for the lock-
smith, the ticket collector, the policeman and the
hanging judge; who keep theft, swindling and violence
within tolerable bounds. Probation officers need
not deny that they are part of this machinery of
prevention and deterrence.
The author's ideal probation officer is intensely
thoughtful as well as active, and uses no rule-of-
thumb, routine approaches to situations which are
superficially alike. The standards she sets imply
case loads of forty to fifty (with no extraneous
duties)?the case loads advocated in Appendix I.
Even then, it is shown that in twelve months' pro-
bation the time actually spent with the officer is
about ten hours. It is in her emphasis on personal
relationships and contacts, as opposed to the mere
mechanics of escorting, advising and job-finding,
that Miss Glover's practical exposition differs from
the external observations of other writers. " The
officer's sharing each disappointment may be of
more value than actual success " (p. 120). Some
magistrates expect that a process of " settling
down " will follow their brief and barely under-
stood admonition. The probation officer knows
that people, unlike fermenting liquors, do not
attain maturity through stagnation.
It is a sign of the times that the references to
local authority functions in juvenile courts, and to
their welfare services, are already out of date.
Miss Glover pays tribute to an interesting list of
fifty books, some unexpected.
K.H.B.
