S. E. P. E. G.
===============

MENTAL HEALTH 43

Since my return from Switzerland people ask
me: " Why did you go to Basle ? " When I
reply, " I went to the Third S.E.P.E.G. Conference,"
they naturally ask " what is this S.E.P.E.G. ? "

And on reflection, I have to ask myself: " Is this
organization the shape of things to come, or is it the
survival of a past epoch ? " What place is there
in a world of mammoth organizations such as
U.N.O., U.N.E.S.C.O., World Health Organization,
and all the other similar set-ups, for a small
voluntary association with international interests ?
Perhaps a brief account of the activities of S.E.P.E.G.
(Semaines internationales d'etudes pour l'enfance
victime de la Guerre) will answer the question.

The executive committee of S.E.P.E.G. is a small
committee of Swiss citizens under the presidency of
Dr O. L. Forel, all holding responsible positions in
other voluntary agencies interested in social problems of children and young persons. Its activities
have been financed chiefly by Don Suisse, and its
successor, l'Aide suisse a l'Europe, by private
subscriptions, and by donations from big industrial
firms.

S.E.P.E.G. is affiliated with l'union internationale
de Protection de l'enfance (U.I.P.E.) and is a member
?f the World Federation for Mental Health. There
is also a close collaboration with U.N.I.C.E.F.
(United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund). The first conference was called in
September, 1945, at Zurich, and representatives
?f 18 countries worked out a series of resolutions
embodying the principles that should guide the
administrative action taken on behalf of children
who were victims of the war. These resolutions
were unanimously adopted; in itself a triumph of
negotiation as they were based on child guidance
Principles, which were new to many of the
representatives. Furthermore, these principles were
adopted by most of the governments and authorities
who sent these representatives to Zurich and formed
the basis for subsequent administrative action.
This remarkable result is a testimony to the conviction with which the representatives returned to
their own countries, and is perhaps an indication
of the solidarity of group feeling or team spirit
achieved in twelve days of intense discussion.
The second conference took place at Zurich in
1947 to study the work accomplished in various
Parts of Europe in the two years since the last
conference, and also the results of the application
of the resolutions of the 1945 Congress. *

S.E.P.E.G. has also organized a short three
peeks' course in child guidance methods, and this
has been held at Lausanne under the direction of
^r. Lucien Bovet. Students from twelve countries
attended the courses in 1946, 1947, 1948 and 1949,
and they included doctors, psychologists, social
workers, probation officers, teachers, and heads of
approved schools.

Your reporter attended the 1947 " cours de
perfectionnement " and was very impressed not
only with the high standard of technical information,
but the very great value of the multi-professional
contacts, and the remarkable team spirit developed
in a group of men and women trained under
different disciplines and speaking at least four
different languages. It was an excellent example
of group-therapy in practice. Besides the formal
lectures, there was ample opportunity for free
discussion. All meals were eaten in common in
the University canteen, and on free days (Sundays)
the whole group went on a common expedition
to the mountains or to a picnic in the country.
Moreover, the director entered enthusiastically into
all the activities of the group, and worked and
played with the group.

Further, S.E.P.E.G. has organized visits to regions
of special need. On the invitation of representatives of the country concerned, teams of specialists
have visited Grenoble in France; Rome, Milan,
Rimini, Florence and Naples, in Italy; Odenwaldschule near Heppenheim and Hamburg, in Germany;
Vienna in Austria, and Otwoch in Poland. As a
result, Child Guidance Centres were set up in
Milan, a hostel for maladjusted children in Grenoble,
the organization of a child guidance centre was
begun in Rome, and courses of lectures and study
groups were organized by those who had attended
the S.E.P.E.G.s at Rimini and Odenwaldschule.
Another activity of S.E.P.E.G. has been the
collection of basic libraries of 100 volumes dealing
with educational and child guidance subjects.
These basic libraries have been sent to Milan,
Rome, Naples, Rimini, Florence, Alexandria,
Grenoble, Lyons, Odenwaldschule, Warsaw, Vienna
and Athens.

A beginning has been made in publication, and an
experimental number of the Revue Suisse de
Psychologie was devoted to a series of articles from
specialists of different disciplines dealing with the
type of problems undertaken by the S.E.P.E.G.
organization.

This, then, was the background of work and
tradition in front of which we met at the third
S.E.P.E.G. Conference at Basle this September.
The set subject for discussion this year was the
" Position of European Youth ", and contributions
to the debates were provided from the point of view
of the teacher, the psychologist, the psychiatrist and
the clergy. The speakers reported on a variety of
contrasting conditions, ranging from unemployment
in Italy to full employment in Great Britain?from
stark undernourishment in Greece to prosperous
conditions in Belgium.

But whether the material conditions were go'od
or bad, it was manifest that there was a reluctance,
an inertia on the part of youth to face the stark
realities of a post-war world. Indeed, the spokesman
for youth, president of the World Association of
Youth, a remarkable bearded figure, harangued
us at some length, reproaching us because we were
old and out of sympathy with the aims of youth.
Preoccupied with the tasks facing youth it was not
surprising that emphasis was laid, particularly by
the Germans, on the attitude to work. When a
Belgian headmaster laid down the aphorism that
man did not live to work, he worked to live, there
was an interruption and a protest from the President
himself ! But there seemed to be a danger that
in recommending measures that would facilitate the
adaptation of youth to society, the individual
himself would be lost sight of. The extreme
example came from the representative of Israel
who described the communities of youth where the
young refugees are reconditioned to work on the
land, to forgo their previous culture and to devote
themselves to the common task of cultivating their
native land.

While many speakers, therefore, recommended
the cultivation by every possible means of the team
spirit, the group approach?particularly in the
field of education?there were others who pointed
out the limitations of these techniques?of the
children who were unable to join a group because
of extreme maladjustment, or of the children who
had become so accustomed to group life in a
children's village that they were " lost " once they
were separated from this community, this easy
republic of children.

There was an awareness of the risk of oversocializing the child at the expense of his
individuality. Indeed, some speakers claimed that
no child should spend longer than two years in
a children's community. After this they should
be fostered or boarded out. To live too long in a
children's institution might be as harmful to "la
vie individuelle " as a homeless life lived in the streets.
It seemed to be generally agreed that the natural
family provided the best conditions for a " formation
interieure but there was much doubt in the minds
of many delegates about the possibility of reconstructing the hundreds of thousands of broken
families. There was even doubt in some minds
that the surviving families were successful in
providing the patterns necessary for a good super
ego. And one speaker (a Russian emigre), pointed
out that it was really a crisis of confidence. How
could we expect youth to trust us, when we distrusted ourselves ? If youth was defeatist, it was
because we were ourselves defeatist. In contrast
to this scepticism, the robust eloquence of Padre
Solinas was refreshing. It made no difference to
him whether youth approached the truth from the
Right or from the Left, and, of course, for him
the truth was the truth of the Catholic Church.
Perhaps the general trend of four days' debate
was best summed up by a Dutch delegate who had
spent three years in the Dachau concentration
camp: At present we were better at diagnosis than
treatment.

The last two days of the Conference were spent
in a discussion of the future of S.E.P.E.G., and a
plan which had been discussed by a sub-committee
was placed before the meeting. In brief, this
resolution suggested the setting-up of an international training centre in child guidance methods
in Switzerland. Such a training centre would not
only give theoretical training but practical
experience. It was felt that the S.E.P.E.G. organization had, after five years experience, special
qualifications in advising on the practicability of
such a plan, and that Switzerland, with its tradition
of neutrality, and its multilingual culture, was a
natural meeting place where students from many
countries could usefully meet and together develop
the necessary attitudes of understanding and human
approach.

Frank Bodman, M.D., D.P.M.
