Training and Scope of the Psychiatric Social Worker in Relation to Adults II
============================================================================


The following contributions to a discussion at a meeting of the Royal Medico-PsycholSgical
Assocpsychologicaly 1948, are published by kind permission of the Editor of the " Journal of
Mental Science An address :Author: Dr. B. Lewis, given at the same meeting, was published
in our last issue.?Ed.
by :A ROBINA S. ADDIS 

Regional Representative (Region 12), National Association for Mental Health
It would be logical to begin with the scope of
the psychiatric social worker, as training must
be designed to fit her for her function, but if we
are to discuss what is and what ought to be,
it will be easier to start with a brief outline of
training as it exists, and then to indicate by a
description of the scope of the work, the
principles and aims which should shape that
training.

The concept of psychiatric social work was
accepted from the United States and introduced
into this country in 1929. The Mental Health
Course was then founded at the London School
of Economics, recently similar training has been
started at Edinburgh and Manchester, and over
400 students in all have qualified.

The training is designed to fit a social worker
who has specialized in mental health to function
as a unit in a psychiatric team, either dealing
with children or adults. Her position is usually
clear in Child Guidance Clinics, which from the
start were designed on a team-work pattern,
though this is occasionally threatened by lack
of staff, or because the members have not had a
Child Guidance training. Many adult clinics
have not this same definite pattern and, even
where they employ a psychiatric social worker,
do not fully exploit her role.

The lines on which the training is run indicate
the function for which the psychiatric social
worker is prepared. A candidate for the
Mental Health course is expected to have a
Social Science certificate (usually a two years'
university course of theory and practical work),
or a degree followed by appropriate experience.
Before starting her specialist course, it is prefer-
red that the student should have an additional
period of practical training such as family case
work. At one time it was suggested that a
period of five years' relevant experience was
advisable, and this still seems the ideal, as it
would also mean that the student should be
at least 25 years old when entering the Mental
Health course, an age when a certain maturity
should have been reached. The present mini-
mum age is 22, but the average age on entry
is 29 or 30.

The right personality is obviously all-impor-
tant in this profession, and students are selected
after individual interviews with the Tutor of the
course, a psychiatrist and a psychiatric social
worker, and recommendations are made by
the particular college or university. During
the training the personal development of the
student in relation to her professional work, is
the concern of her tutor and of her supervisor
of case work. Qualifying depends on satis-
factory case work as well as on passing the
written examination. Theoretical courses occupy
two days a week and cover individual develop-
ment from childhood to maturity, adult and
child psychiatry as well as social services and
legislation. The rest of the week is given to
supervised case work at a Child Guidance
Clinic and at a psychiatric hospital.
For most students the training involves
personal adjustment in themselves, and reflec-
tions of every symptom and possibility of
disorder may be found. We have to learn how
to give help, yet economize our resources, how
to tolerate anxiety and frustration in our work.
Apart from anything else this takes time, so
that the training period cannot well be cut
down. The grave shortage of psychiatric
social workers has led some to suggest that
Health Visitors should be given a two weeks'
course to fit them for the work, or that trans-
ferred Relieving Officers could spare for training
a day a week for a month or two to enable
them to take over the function. We regard
this as impossible, however excellent the quality
of the candidate, for reasons which I hope will
be clear by the end of the paper.
The specialized nature of the training had
been emphasized because the psychiatric social
worker has a unique function, complementary
to the psychiatrist's but distinct. Her work is
to help the patient and his family by every means
available; her sphere includes prevention,
adjustments in the individual and in his environ-
ment. Throughout she works in consultation
with the doctor and in particular gives support
to the patient and his family during treatment,
and she also undertakes after-care.

Her material is the patient in his social setting,
so that she is concerned with the effect of his
illness on his environment as well as studying
factors in the environment affecting his illness.
Though mental health problems are her special-
ity, she needs a broad basis of social work
knowledge to enable her to help the patient to
make full use of opportunities for treatment,
recreation and social contacts, suitable openings
in employment, and of the social services
(nowadays a highly complicated matter). Good
co-operation with official bodies and social
agencies is necessary for the smooth working
of psychiatric social services, and any specialist
who neglects this is undermining her own
speciality.

The psychiatrist may claim that he, too, sees
the patient against his background and that his
diagnosis and treatment are based on a know-
ledge of factors in the environment. I would
suggest that in the intricate interplay between
internal and external forces which make up an
individual's experience, the psychiatrist is
primarily concerned with the factors working
from within outwards, though of course he
will want to know all he can about the effect of
exterior factors, and indeed cannot entirely
divorce the internal from the external. The
psychiatric social worker's approach is in the
opposite sense?from the outer factors, though
again her focus is on their effect on the indivi-
dual. Between the two partners in the team a
complete picture should be built up of the
patient.

It is sometimes suggested that if only the
psychiatrist had time and could carry out all
the interviews and home visiting himself, this
would be an ideal state of affairs. Far be it
from me to discourage any psychiatrist from
the illuminating experience of home visiting,
but to suggest that the psychiatric social
worker should merely fetch and carry for him
is to my mind a fundamental misunderstanding
of her function.

Take, for instance, the collecting of a social
history. In most cases the psychiatrist will
require a full history of the illness, an account
of the patient's past experience and personality,
and a description of the family and work
situation. If he collects this himself it will be
seen from his focus of interest which is from
within the patient, radiating outwards. A
young man is being treated for " blackouts "
in which he wanders for several days and
commits irresponsible acts. He tells the doctor
of his sheltered life until war service, his dominat-
ing mother and elder sister, the social restrictions
of the superior suburb where they live and the
disgrace he felt when turned down for a com-
mission in the Air Force. The sister also sees
the doctor, gives details of her brother's career
and reveals the sacrifices which she has willingly
made for the only boy. The doctor gets a
picture of the way the patient has felt, the
restriction and emotional demands made on
him, and realizes that the family setting is
something to which the patient has to adjust
his personality, and treatment will be directed
towards that end.

The psychiatric social worker gets the same
story from the mother and sister but sees it
from another angle. The mother, bored with a
mediocre husband, has set all her frustrated
ambitions on her son. She tries to buy a res-
ponse from him by gifts and sheltering him
from the consequences of his misdeeds. The
patient's sister, twelve years older, has adopted
the same attitude and had willingly resigned her
chance of training for a profession so that he
might have every advantage of education. She
shows a certain satisfaction that he steals from
her as well as from the mother. The psychiatric
social worker's task then lies in trying to
modify their attitude towards the patient, and
in attempting to find constructive outlets for
him in the environment. She has not merely
listened to the family but has entered into the
dynamics of the situation. Adjustments in
their attitudes and in the environment will be
her contribution to treatment.

This is the answer to the suggestion that any
social worker can present the history and give
a complete survey of the facts. The facts may
be significant, but it is what the actors in the
drama feel about them, and the action and
reaction during the telling, which count for the
psychiatric social worker, and this must be
her own affair. Getting a picture of the problem
and its origins, and building up the back-
ground, cannot be separated from her case-work
which begins at her first contact.
The psychiatric social worker, then, works
through her relationship with the patient and
with others in his environment. She is aware
that asking for help involves the patient or his
family in reactions of dependence or resentment
which must be tackled. Some will make
excessive demands for sympathy and advice
and it is part of her skill not to allow them to
infringe on the claims of others and yet give
the sufferer confidence that his real need is
understood. Mere rebuff will only increase his
grievance against the world. This balance of
restrained help is peculiarly the psychiatric
social worker's problem, since her work is not
confined to clinic sessions, but she is free to give
or withhold the favour of visits or to vary the
length of interviews. Her judgment and integ-
rity of purpose must be reinforced by profes-
sional skill.

Another patient who finds himself bound to
ask for assistance will fight like a trapped
animal against the helping hand. He accuses
the psychiatric social worker of inaction,
incapacity or even conspiracy. Provided he is
still accessible to reason, she may have to face
him with his attitude and bring him to see that
he is repeating a situation, perhaps an early
family one, which is connected with his present
difficulties.

The psychiatric social worker knows that the
removal of obstacles to a patient's understanding
himself, i.e. understanding his own powers and
limitations, cannot be achieved on an intellectual
level alone. A woman patient complained of
sleeplessness and worry, makes heavy weather
of her household duties, and bitterly contrasts
her present family drudgery with her successful
business career before marriage. In talking
over possible adjustments of her routine, she
showed resentment not merely at the change of
a well-paid job for the housewife's " twenty-
four-hour day " as she calls it, but a resistance
to the role of wife and mother. On linking up
the present situation with her own life as a child,
she released emotion and began to see things
in proportion. She went through a period of
making excessive demands on the psychiatric
social worker and, when this was tackled,
broke off her visits. Back she came again at
the steadier level of working together with the
psychiatric social worker, and used her gf>?d
intelligence and fund of sense and sensibility
to adjust to her position. Her husband made
an approach to understanding which amazed
and pleased her, and suddenly things began to
fall into place. The striking feature was the
release of energy which enabled her not only to
cope with her household chores, but to carry out
successfully a part-time job. She even started
to write a book, but though this was not
completed (perhaps a loss to psychology), her
improved understanding of herself and increased
use of her abilities, remained.

The patient's knowledge of himself must be
linked through association with emotion so
that he understands for himself, in his own way,
at his own time. The psychiatric social wor-
ker's approach is from the conscious, though
she should be sensitive to the implications of the
unconscious. She is not a psychiatrist, but has
her own function which can be expressed in
many forms.

Where the psychiatrist is dealing directly
with the patient's mental illness or personality
difficulties, the psychiatric social worker works
out the implications in the patient's social life
and wins the co-operation in treatment, of his
family and environment. A soldier invalided
with anxiety state, after working for some time
as an agricultural labourer, has a further
breakdown. The young wife is aggrieved at
having to make some sacrifices for him to obtain
treatment as well as having to put up with his
moroseness and self-absorption. When the
psychiatrist suggests that the patient should
return to the town life to which he was accus-
tomed, she is bitterly resentful. It means
giving up the tied cottage and her comfortable
daily job. It needs all the confidence which has
been established and much patient working out
of her real difficulties, before she can co-operate
in the environmental adjustments which would
assist her husband's recovery. She needs help
in understanding him and learning the impor-
tance of her own part. Treatment would have
been broken off and the plan have failed
without the good relationship which the psychia-
tric social worker had built up with both
patient and wife.

The aim of psychiatric treatment is to promote
mental health so that the patient is able to
develop his full personality as an individual
and as a member of the community. In this
aim the Psychiatric Social Worker feels she has
her share in helping to make the adjustments,
as well as assisting him to accept the claims of
the community and winning acceptance in his
environment of his special needs. This means
that within his limitation he must be helped to
satisfactory achievement. Congenial work is
well known to be of therapeutic value, and in
every case, whatever his disability, the psychia-
tric social worker will try to ensure that the
patient has opportunity for using his powers
to the full. She will consult with the D.R.O.
whenever there is a question of finding suitable
employment, and if necessary she will interview
employers or seek out special jobs. When
ordinary work is debarred she will try to find
occupational therapy and, perhaps through the
Red Cross or some other body, ask for handi-
crafts or other interests to be provided.
Yet the adult's needs will not be fully met,
any more than the child's, even with the ideal
job, unless he also has the satisfaction of human
relationships. However tenuously, in whatever
terms, he must feel that he has a place in the
world of men, that he belongs to someone, and
that another has claims on him. Psychiatric
social workers could testify again and again
not only to the effect of the previous family
life on the history of the illness, but on the
all-important part these intimate relationships?
or their lack?will play in his recovery. When
a new case is referred with the statement that
the patient is living alone in lodgings, our hearts
sink at the impossibility of making good to him
the background he requires.

It is a limitless task to help the patient to
satisfactory achievement and good relationships,
especially remembering that these must be
effected within the limits of the patient's powers.
The whole efforts of the psychiatric team may
be needed so that all curative resources may be
used towards restoring a difficult balance, or
creating self-confidence and independence in
the patient. The P.S.W. therefore has her role
in furthering this aim.

While confident in her own function she still
relies on the psychiatrist for guidance. He
gives the diagnosis, treatment and prognosis
which will shape the course she follows. She
has a creative part to play which makes constant
demands on her own inner resources. Her work
will be barren unless she gives emotional res-
ponse, but she must maintain her professional
role and avoid excessive identification with the
patient or anyone else in his environment.
Understanding of her own impulses and those
of others will be necessary, but in itself is not
sufficient. She must have worked out some
code of values, some philosophy of life which
will stand the tests of experience, as a back-
ground to the crises and problems with which
she will be faced. Only an inner security of
this kind can sustain her through the frustration
of effort, and the need for patience and tolerance,
and allow her to endure the strain of dealing
with human material.

If she can feel associated in her work with a
psychiatrist who is readily accessible with advice
and encouragement and can help to clarify the
issues and give due weight to the values involved,
she will find immediate help in winning through
to this philosophy?a philosophy most of us
would find hard to put into words, but would
have little hesitation in affirming to be essential
to a psychiatric social worker.

If this paper achieves its aim it will give a
description of the functions of the psychiatric
social worker which indicates her need for
knowledge of individual development and
variety, for understanding of the family pattern
and community forces, and for familiarity with
all aspects of the social services. Knowledge
of mental illness and defect, neurosis and malad-
justment, possibilities of treatment and special
care, has not been specifically mentioned, as it
can be assumed as necessary.

All the psychiatric social worker's work is on
a case-work basis, i.e. she studies the individual
reacting to his environment and matches his
needs with the available resources. The widest
variety of demands is made on her through the
whole gamut of disturbance of mental health
and mental disabilities, in rural cottages and
town houses, amongst young and old, by the
single who wish they were married, and the
couples who wish they weren't, calls coming in
working hours and out of them. It follows that
she needs technical knowledge, a clear concept
of her aim and function, discrimination as to
her material and methods, and above all a
certain maturity of personality. If I be thought
to describe a paragon I can only add that
the nature of psychiatric work demands that
the psychiatrist also should be a model of
perfection.

Age alone and case-work experience will not
necessarily bring the qualities required; much
will depend on specific training. The highest
standards in training by tutors, case-work
supervision and lecturers are necessary. And
in our work we have always looked for inspira-
tion and guidance to the psychiatrist. We
respectfully state that if full use is made of her,
the psychiatric social worker can add to
the effectiveness of psychiatric work for
adults.

By W. J. T. KIMBER, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.M.
Medical Superintendent, Hill End Hospital, St. Albans
Dr.rKimber, referring to the shortage of
psychiatric social workers for hospital work,
said that this was due in part to the fact that
they were being recruited now in many other
fields. That was, he thought, a pity, because
they were trained essentially to work with
psychiatrists in a team.

The value of the psychiatric social worker to
the psychiatrist, in helping him to carry out his
work adequately, was very great indeed. She
had to act as an interpreter in both directions.
She must interpret to the relatives the psychiatric
procedure of the doctor, the nurse and the other
workers with whom she was brought into
contact in dealing with the patient, so that the
relatives could help instead of hindering the
recovery of the patient, and she also had to
interpret to the psychiatrist the relationships
which the patient had with his relatives. The
interpretation to the relatives was a matter
requiring considerable discrimination, and the
psychiatric social worker had to work in close
agreement with the psychiatrist when she was
functioning in this way.

The psychiatrist should realize the damage
that he might do to the psychiatric social
worker's relationship with the patient's family
by being reticent about his procedure with the
patient and, consciously or unconsciously,
making himself appear too important as
compared with the social worker, thus disturb-
ing and belittling her position and influence
with the patient's relatives. The psychiatrist
demanded complete loyalty from the psychiatric
social worker and in his turn, if the work for
the patient was to be fruitful, he must give fully
and frankly all that the psychiatric social
worker needed to maintain her relationship
with the family.

If there was complete trust and loyalty
between the psychiatrist and the psychiatric
social worker, the result was a fruitful
partnership of immense therapeutic power.
He was sure that, given direction and
support and granted freedom and scope for
initiative, the social worker would realize herself
as a valuable member of the/psychiatric team
and would give that team a widened
competence far beyond tha|' of the individual
psychiatrist.
