The Secret Behind the Door 
===========================

Film Review
(Featuring Joan
Bennett and Michael Redgrave. 8,865 ft.
99 mins.)
Psychiatrists, presumably, are used to strange
tales from their patients. Sometimes they may be
inclined to think that nothing about human beings
will surprise them. There, however, they under-
estimate the film-writer's imagination, for in The
Secret Behind the Door there is portrayed a hero
whose particular pathological foible might well
startle the most impassive doctor. His hatred of
his mother, murder of his wife and abnormal
interest in all historical wife-murders are routine
in the cinema to-day, but this hero achieves origina-
lity in his hackneyed role by building on to his
house rooms that are in every detail the replica of
ones in which in the past a wife has been murdered
by her husband. So there are rooms from the
palaces of Roman Emperors, rooms from the
French Court as well as rooms from England (and
the hero's own house in the middle of all these),
His second marriage and the discovery by his
wife of the room which is ready to commemorate
her death, make a fantastic and unreal tale, though
one not without excitement. Many have a fancy
for the macabre and that would be sufficient quali-
fication for the film. But since this is a film of 1948,
there must be a psychological explanation as well.
If this part of the film were a caricature of psychology
it would be amusing (I thought it was a skit at first
and laughed heartily, but that was a mistake).
Briefly, it all goes back to one unfortunate incident
at the age of 10, when the hero went to bed and his
mother promised to come and kiss him good-night
before going out. But his sister locked the door,
so his mother did not come in. There was lilac
about at the time, so although the incident became
buried in his subconscious, lilac was apt to bring
on those feelings of wife-murder which the incident
naturally caused. In the end when the second wife
filled a large vase with lilac, he realized the connec-
tion and they lived happily together ever after.
It is not only psychological themes that are a
matter of routine in the cinema to-day, but the
treatment of these themes is beginning to follow a
set pattern: certain action and certain expressions
are now certain accompaniments of morbid behav-
iour on the screen. The look that comes over
Michael Redgrave's face when his wife's unfortunate
choice of lilac for a buttonhole makes him want
to kill her is the same expression as Eric Portman
had in Wanted for Murder when he, too, was driven
to murder unwillingly. The unseeing walk, distant
expression, twitch of the hands, together with that
unmistakable look, make up the psychological
killer on the screen. The Secret Behind the Door
runs true to type in all these ways. It is so typical, in
fact, that it is difficult to recall it clearly, apart from
the many other films of the same kind.
P.E.W.
