The Snake Pit
=============

Films

(.Featuring Olivia de Havilland and Leo Genii)
The backwardness of the Mental Hospitals in the
U.S.A. has been noted by Dr. Dallas Pratt, whose
survey is quoted in our issue of February, 1949, on
page 80. Up to three-quarters of the State Hospitals
in America he rates as backward, but, as far as the
hospitals in England are concerned, he rates only
a quarter in this category. He points out that in
England 50% greater expenditure on maintenance
is the rule. The care of patients in the wards in
America is " largely in the hands of untrained
and often ignorant attendants, the proportion of
graduate nurses* to patients in 1946 being only
1 to 143, whereas it has apparently not occurred
to the British that the nursing care of the mentally
ill could conceivably be entrusted to anyone
except a nurse
Dr. Pratt, in this article, refers to the general
impression of observers that English hospital
patients are less disturbed, which is sometimes
attributed to the phlegmatic British temperament.
He suggests, however, that:
" the less disturbed character of English
refractory wards is owing rather to a combination
of: intelligent and humane nursing care; the
frequent use of occupation and recreation
{particularly out of doors activity), the absence
of mechanical restraint and other violent
methods: and finally, active physical treatment,
including shock therapy and, in some hospitals,
prolonged narcosis.''''
Mary Ward, an American writer, after spending
some time in a State Hospital in America, wrote
her experiences down in the form of a novel?The
Snake Pit. This title was given because it was a
legend that in the middle ages insane persons at
the height of their illness were put in a snake pit,
after which they might begin to recover. This
novel dramatizes the deficiencies of American
State Hospitals and is a raw piece of literature
designed, one would imagine, to arouse the
American public's conscience. The American
psychiatry authorities themselves are conducting
campaigns to remedy the backwardness of their
own mental hospitals.
20th Century Fox Film Company produced a
film of the novel and it was shown for the first
time in the United States in November last. The
Producer and Director, Anatole Litvak, sought
specialist advice during the making of the film and
showed it, prior to release, to the American
Psychiatric Association and to the Group for the
Advancement of Psychiatry. Although there was
MENTAL HEALTH 119
a good deal of argument, the majority of the
specialists decided it would be in the interests of
mental health to have it shown. M. Litvak brought
the film to this country and made some approaches
to mental health bodies, including the National
Association for Mental Health. It was shown to
representatives of the Association, and an opinion
survey revealed that the majority thought it would
not be in the interests of the relatives of mental
patients, nor of potentially disturbed persons,
for it to be released to the public. These views
were communicated to the Chief Censor, and the
film was referred back for cutting of the scenes
which would have a horror effect on an audience.
These scenes, of course, may have been true of the
American mental hospitals, in view of the fact that
Dr. Pratt and others felt the patients were more
disturbed there.
The cut version was again seen by the Censors
who agreed to pass the film for " A " audiences,
and a decision was communicated to the Association
m the following terms:
" After giving the most careful consideration to
the representations which we have received from
every quarter, both for and against the exhibition
of the film entitled " The Snake Pit ", we have
decided to pass a cut version of the film for
exhibition to adult audiences only. I wish to
assure you that the most careful attention has
been paid to the views expressed in your letter,
and that it is our sincere belief that all those
incidents have now been removed from the film
which could give offence to general members of
the audience, or cause embarrassment either to
the relatives of patients or to those who are
responsible for the administration of mental
institutions.''''
The release of this film is bound to cause much
argument. Advance notices in the press of the
American showing of the film have already brought
protests from those concerned with the mentally
sick. The film itself is a magnificent piece of film
art, and has already been awarded prizes for its
excellence. It is most sensitively acted by Olivia
de Havilland, the patient, and Leo Genn, the
psychiatrist. Leo Genn is an English barrister
whose understanding of his role of the healer of the
mind was most accurately portrayed. For the first
time a film indicating the real role of a psychiatrist
has been made. Up to now, this specialist has been
shown as a miracle worker or some sort of
necromancer.
The film is restrained in its claims for success in
treatment, but yet indicates a new approach to the
mentally afflicted, an approach which offers hope
for advance in the future. It will be very severely
criticized by those psychiatrists who rely mainly
on mechanical methods of treatment. The story
shows evidences of emotional bias in the author's
mind against certain roles. Very few of the nurses
are shown as sympathetic and kind, and this would
appear to be, perhaps, the result of the patient's
own attitude to mother figures. Nevertheless, the
second part of the film does show an increasing
atmosphere of understanding and sympathy, and
the impression at the end is one of an upsurging
of hope and belief that these illnesses may in some
cases be relieved. There is no over-statement in
this respect, and no wild claims of cure. The
origins of mental ill-health are traced backwards
through the years of the patient's life to the family
situation in childhood, and thus point the way to
the preventive aspects of psychiatry and to the value
of early treatment and early diagnosis.
This note is inserted in order that we might
explain to our members and readers the possibility
of the disturbing effect which the film may have on
relatives of patients and of future patients, and on
the staffs of psychiatric units in this country who
would resent, of course, the implication that our
mental hospitals are as bad as the film indicates.
There is an introduction to the cut version
emphasizing that the hospital shown is not situated
in this country.
A.T.
