The Place Of the Family
=========================

Editorial

Few people fail to realize how much their
own family has influenced them; few public
speakers fail to emphasize the family's importance in a number of social situations. There
is some understanding of how the various
family influences do affect the individual. It
is, therefore, all the more remarkable that there
is so little study into conditions which in their
turn affect the family itself.

On the other hand, it is commonly said that
family ties are weaker than they were, and a
good deal of evidence is brought forward
in support of this; such as the increase in
the number of divorces, and the increase of
juvenile delinquency, and its relation to lack of
parental control. Even this causes little public
demand for rebuilding family life, nor any
wide interest to discover how best this can be
done.

It is not without interest that the only national
attempt to re-establish the family was made
by the Petain government in France, and it is
possible that their attempt to substitute the
slogan, Family, Home and Country, for
Liberty, Equality and Fraternity, did the family
no good, and indeed that their ill-famed venture
has discouraged other, less defeatist, major
campaigns.

Here and there, however, suggestions are
being made to give a lead. Lord Samuel, in
the Lords debate in June, said he regarded two
influences as of supreme importance in intervening between the State and the individual?
the family and the voluntary organizations.
Obviously these two often exert an influence
together; and obviously they affect each other'sinfluence. Voluntary workers frequently have
to cope with the reactions of a family to an
individual case, as well as to the individual
case itself. It is to be questioned whether, even
social workers' training includes enough on
this subject.

It is, therefore, most helpful to find very clear
views expressed on these problems in a contemporary, by Dr. A. T. M. Wilson (Reflections
and Suggestions on the Prevention and Treatment of Marital Problems, Human Relations
(1949), Vol. II, p. 233). He emphasizes the relevance in marital problems of community factors,
and particularly the atomization of Society. He
uses atomization in the sense used by Curie and
Trist (Human Relations (1947), Vol. I, p. 258),
namely the lack of positive relationships
between the individual and members of his
family outside his immediate family circle, so
that the functional family is reduced in size.
It is, therefore, obviously less capable of filling
the role outlined by Lord Samuel; and there
is all the greater need for the voluntary organi- ;
zations to restore the balance. Before this can
be done, it is essential that their workers should
understand the factors involved; the first step
in this is a widening of their own fields, which
again is outlined in some detail by Dr. Wilson.
The next need he considers is a training course,
which includes a wider general approach, and
finally he recommends pilot experiments. All
this is excellent; and his work should be read by
all who are anxious to accept their own
responsibilities in this field.
