The Handicap of High Intelligence
====================================

:Author: E. M. BAR I LETT, Ph.D.

Psychologist, Essex Education Committee
The form of my title may seem to some of my
readers perverse, but I think that no one will
dispute the importance of the subject. As
A. N. Whitehead put it, " The race which does
not value trained intelligence is doomed ", and
one of the first things we ought to ask of an
educational system is that it enables its best
minds to achieve the fulness of their powers.
This is especially vital in times like the present,
when every profession seems to be demanding
more and more first-class entrants. We must
have more teachers, more nurses, more scien-
tists, and so on, and they must all be of the first
rank. One is sometimes tempted to wonder
whether there really are enough highly intelligent
people to go round. We certainly cannot afford
to waste any of them, and we ought perhaps to
spend rather more time considering them and
their needs than we do. They are surely as
important as the corresponding group at the
other end of the intelligence scale: the educa-
tionally , sub-normal for whom we provide
" special educational treatment ". In a sense,
of course, they do have their " special educa-
tional treatment ", if their parents will agree
to it, as the dull do; but they do not all profit
from it as they should, and we ought, I feel, to
enquire much more thoroughly than we have
as yet, into the reasons for this failure.
In what sense, then, is the possession of high
intelligence likely to be a handicap ? It would
normally be considered an asset rather than a
handicap in the educational process. If one
means by this the learning process, this is
obviously true. Clever children on the whole
learn quickly and retain efficiently, are easy to
teach, and make steady, swift progress. But if
the aim of education is the full development of
individual personality, the progressive actualiza-
tion of potentialities of every kind, the integra-
tion and maturing of the emotional and physical
as well as the intellectual aspects of a person,
! think it is as true to say that the exceptionally
intelligent child enters on this task with a
handicap, as that his dull brother does. I was
recently discussing with a group of His Majesty's
Inspectors the problems of educationally sub-
normal children, particularly their personality
problems, involving their adjustment to life
and to other people, and their attitude to school
and to learning. One of the group suddenly
said, "You know, as you have been talking,
1 have been thinking, all that is just as true of the
very clever child if you turn it all upside down,
as it were." I think this is so. If we think of
very retarded and very bright children as the
two end sections of the curve of normal distribu-
tion, both are " eccentric " off the centre ",
abnormal, and this eccentricity makes person-
ality progress difficult for both. Not equally
difficult, of course. Intelligence is itself an
integrative mechanism, helping its possessor to
" look before and after ", size up the effects
of what he says and does, and naturally prompts
him to plan, reflect, interpose a stage of inhibi-
tion between impulse and action, so that he is
on the whole predisposed to integrate his life
on the emotional as well as on the intellectual
side. It is also true that he can do more for
himself and needs our help less. Indeed, if
his teachers, as must sometimes happen, are
less intelligent than he is, what he may most
need and profit from is perhaps neglect ! I have
among my acquaintances at present some half
dozen of these exceptional children, all with
intelligence quotients well above 150. They
have vocabularies of the most superior adult
level on the Terman Merrill scale; can reason
swiftly and efficiently, have an uncanny know-
ledge of modern art, electrical engineering,
music and what not. One of them, in explana-
tion of her poor performance in mechanical
arithmetic, said, " Well, you see, I get so bored
with it. Now I don't mind doing the problems,
where you can wriggle your way through to the
answer (her methods of solving problems are
unorthodox but usually efficient!), but I can't
be bothered with ordinary sums. You know,
2 and 2 make 4, and / know it, and it always
does make 4, so why should I keep on making it
make it ? " (I sometimes wonder what children
of this kind do make of their teachers and of
the ordinary type of school lesson.) We may
perhaps usefully take this youngster as our first
example. Here was a child, a girl of ten,
intelligence quotient on the Binet Scale 151,
brilliant at art, excellent at oral and written
composition, except that she could not spell,
but so backward at mechanical arithmetic that
her headmistress was doubtful of her chances.
of passing the qualifying examination to a
grammar school. On the surface she appeared
cheerful, well-adjusted and with charming
manners, but there was a real danger that she
would develop a permanent false attitude to
education, that, even more seriously, she would
become an " oddity ", a crank. That seems
to me one of the gravest dangers likely to beset
these very clever children. They are, as we
have seen, eccentric, " off the centre " in the
literal meaning of the word, but we do not,
above all things, want them to be eccentric in
the more usual sense of the term; we want
them to be normal, not cranks: inside the group,
not outside. They need the wisest handling,
right from early infancy, and one of the greatest
problems, in dealing with them, is to know
when they are merely being, as they often seem,
perverse and obstinate, and when they do really,
out of their greater intelligence, know what is
best for them. They are "exceptional", but
in an ordinary school it is extremely difficult
to make exceptions for them. If they are
young enough, we can force them to conform,
because we really do know more than they do;
but we ought at least sometimes, I think, to have
doubts of the value of our victory even when we
do win, and sometimes more may be gained by
apparently losing the battle.

I turn now to a consideration of what it is
that makes normal development, and the
achievement of sound mental health, difficult
for these very clever children. I would suggest
that their worst enemy is their teachability,
their precocity which enables them to overtake
experience at a much faster rate than does the
ordinary child. This precocity does not always,
perhaps does not normally, manifest itself at
birth or soon after. In the early weeks of life
the child of superior intelligence seems rather,
to show his superiority by the intensity and
concentration with which he does even the
simplest things. Blanton observed that children
of mentally defective mothers suck flabbily,
and this characteristic of flabbiness seems to
remain with the dull all through their develop-
ment. In trying to cope with them in school
I have often wished it were possible to go over
all their nuts with a spanner, as it were, tighten-
ing them up. The very intelligent on the other
hand show early a " put-togetherness " and
one is sometimes almost frightened by their
intense concentratedness. I remember once
testing the intelligence of a four-year-old, whose
I.Q. proved finally to be 160 + . ' She scarcely
moved during an hour, scarcely took her eyes
off me and devoted the whole of her concen-
trated personality to the job on hand. I
remember, too, seeing another of these excep-
tional youngsters when he was only a few days
old. He managed to jerk one eye open and
gave me a look as much as to say, " I feel at
home here. Prepare to reckon with me." I
think it was this particular child's salvation that
he did not learn to talk abnormally early, and
always determinedly refused any attempt to
coerce or teach him, going his own way and
taking his own time about things. By contrast
one may refer to John Middleton Murray who
in his autobiographical study Between Two
Worlds gives a vivid picture of the difficulties
of being "too clever". According to his
account he could read at the age of 2 years,
at 2b went to school already knowing all his
tables up to twelve times, at 7 was in the Ex-
Seventh Standard of a " Higher Tops " London
Elementary School, had mastered algebra up
to quadratics and written an essay on Gothic
architecture. But he could not sleep without a
knotted towel for company, and when he woke
from one of his frequent nightmares could not
face getting out of bed and crossing the landing
to his parents' bedroom. He was too early a
verbalist and far, far too teachable. Probably
the wisest thing we can do for these exceptional
children when they are very young is to leave
them alone, and above all to resist the temptation
to exploit their ready response to teaching.
Like all children, they need to achieve steady,
harmonious, all-round development, and if one
aspect is fostered to the neglect of others they
are liable to become maladjusted and to suffer
the more acutely because they are usually
exceptionally sensitive, exceptionally aware of
themselves in relation to other people. Perhaps
they cannot avoid some degree of maladjust-
ment, of unevenness in development, for
although at seven a boy may have the mind of
an eleven-year-old, his body is only that of a
seven-year-old, and sometimes of a rather
weedy, small seven-year-old at that, and so he
is a misfit. Intellectually these children may
despise the occupations and conversations of
their " ordinary" classmates, but they are
themselves despised by their mental equals of
three or four years their senior because of their
physical puniness. So that they belong no-
where, and we know that not " belonging " is
often the first step to mental ill-health. Emo-
tionally, also, they are often their physical
rather than their mental age, and this in its turn
produces lop-sidedness and may even lead to
persecution from their fellows. Some psycho-
logists hold that the exceptionally clever child
is always persecuted, either by his fellows or
by his teachers, but I think myself that this is an
exaggeration. There is always, however, the
danger of persecution, and as educators we
should be aware of the danger and be prepared
unobtrusively to guard the persecuted. These
very clever children do sometimes seem to bring
it on themselves, perhaps from a nervous realiza-
tion of their " difference," perhaps from a kind
of emotional blindness to the effect on their
hearers of what they are saying. Their superior
vocabulary is sometimes the trouble. Middle-
ton Murray, on his first day at Christ's Hospital,
was asked by an older boy waiting with him in
the queue for the W.C.s if he had got any
" bodge " (the school slang for toilet paper).
His reply was, "I'm sorry, I'm a new boy;
I do not yet understand the vocabulary ". One
need not enlarge on the result of this remark.
A similar fate was met by a youngster of nine,
transferred by his father's change of work from
a big town school to a small village one. He
spoke what almost amounted to a foreign
language and in the innocence of his heart was
so anxious to share his vast field of knowledge
with, the village boys that he became the butt
of them all, especially when they discovered
that he could readily be reduced to tears of
rage. Coming home from school one day he
flung himself into a chair, saying, " It's intoler-
able. Absolutely intolerable, I tell you." In
his case, moving him to a large primary school
in a very good neighbourhood where he met
many intellectual equals solved his problems,
particularly as he was also exceptionally neat-
fingered and won a place for himself by swapping
his exquisite little models and " inventions
This reference to manual skill brings us to
another great need of these exceptional children:
good physical and manual education. Again,
left to themselves and given the opportunity
I think a great many of them would develop this
spontaneously. It has been said that the true,
primary mental defective is always clumsy, and
it may be that the true genius, if rightly nurtured,
should be physically capable. He certainly
suffers tremendously if he is forced too early
along intellectual lines at the expense of his
early manual and general physical development.
I remember one of these young geniuses, a girl
of seven?I.Q. 172. The late Marion Richard-
son, inspecting the art teaching in a London
Infants' School, went straight up to this child's
work, saying, " That's the work of a genius ".
But it was very badly executed and the child
herself was extraordinarily clumsy, a big
awkward creature who could not walk from her
seat to the front of the class without knocking
something over, and painfully aware of her
physical inadequacy. We must remember that
these children will experience even their defi-
ciencies with heightened self-awareness. One
of them, at five, came home from some difficulty
at her village school and complained bitterly to
her mother: " Oh, why do I have to be a
person all the time ? I wish I could be a stone
or something ", and one is reminded of John
Stuart Mill, experiencing the upheavals of
adolescence at the age of seven but with the
body and lack of experience of a seven-year-old.
The next aspect of my theme I enter on with
some trepidation. This is an age when slogans
such as " equal opportunities for all" are
popular, and to suggest that to give the fullest
educational opportunities to a child of excep-
tional intelligence may in certain circumstances
be a mistake, will at first sight lay me open to a
charge of the grossest snobbery. I hope that
what follows will quickly dispel any such
misconception. What I have in mind is this.
We know from such investigations as the
McClelland one, that even with the most careful
selection of pupils, at eleven years, for grammar
school education, yielding a correlation with
later success as high as -8, we must expect
some 20 to 25 per cent, misfits in the grammar
school. What this means from one point of
view is that the intellectual factors are not the
only things making for success at school. We
are familiar with this as it affects our educa-
tionally subnormal pupils. The dull child from
a poor home lacking in culture, gets educated
only while at school and is doubly handicapped.
The dull child from a good home often does far
better at school than his intellectual capabilities
really warrant. I have known such children
even with I.Q.s in the fifties, read quite well
and apparently understand something of what
they read. What is the application of this to
the brilliant child ? Not, of course, that we
should not educate him, but that we should
realize some of his handicaps and help him to
overcome them. What we should be striving
to achieve through education is not simply
trained intelligences but cultivated persons.
The danger that may beset the brilliant child
from a poor home is that on the one hand he
may lack " ballast " and on the other may fail
to develop " tasteIf he has had good
emotional nurturing in early infancy, even if
he has not had a great deal of intellectual
stimulus at home, he can usually get what he
wants at school during the infant school and
early junior school period. He begins to
become an educational problem towards the
end of the junior school stage, particularly if
he is in a smallish school where " streaming "
is not possible. I have known both teachers
and parents at the end of their tether, beg for
these children to be sent on early to the Grammar
School, but I am sure that is not the answer to
their difficulties. As Rousseau put it, " Every
stage in development has its own proper
perfection, a sort of maturity all its own and
these clever ten-year-olds are ten years old, not
fifteen-year-olds. We know that what they
need is not " forcing up " but " broadening
out ". If they are born into families where
there is a good level of general culture they get
this, but if not, it is very difficult to give them it
at school, and as they enter on their adolescence
the problem, like all others, becomes intensified.
In the course of my work I am from time to time
asked to interview Grammar School children
who are failing to make good and who them-
selves wish to be transferred to a Secondary
Modern School. Quite often there is nothing
wrong with their intelligence but, as they
themselves put it, they "just don't seem able
to cope with the work " and have, moreover,
rejected what one may perhaps call " Grammar
School values Behind such children there
are quite frequently homes where these, values
are rejected, or, even if this is not so, homes
where the parents cannot give the children the
sort of cultural support they need. It seems as
if very high intelligence, if it is to develop
rightly, must do so in a matrix of general
culture and, to some extent, of social confidence.
A very stable child can be " educated out of his
class ", and not lose contact with it or be
ashamed of his origins, but the very clever ones
are not always the very stable, and I think we
have not yet found the answer to this particular
educational problem. It may be that it arises
because we are going through a social revolution
and that these things will right themselves in
time, but at present I know from experience that
some of these children do suffer and that others
fail to develop the contribution to the good of
the community which they ought to be making.

This is perhaps particularly true of the
brilliant child with literary gifts. While he is
young he gets on fairly well, since " Vision "
and " Design " keep pretty even pace. If he
is in a progressive Junior School where a good
deal of freedom for individual creative work is
given, we usually find him writing plays, stories,
keeping journals, working out elaborate descrip-
tions of imaginary islands or continents with
detailed accounts of their laws, customs,
geography and so on. But in adolescence these
childish themes no longer satisfy. Technical
skill and reasoning ability have outstripped
experience so that the young adolescent feels
he " can't write " or " has nothing to write
about His teachers may be disappointed.
Their promising pupil seems to have gone stale
or run dry. He needs especially skilful handling
at this stage, to ensure that the desire to write
and the skill with words is kept alive while
experience catches up on execution. This is
the time to develop taste, store up knowledge,
increase sensitiveness to literature and above all
to foster the general growth of personality, so
that later on there will again be " something to
write about Otherwise the desire may never
return. Probably similar problems occur in the
other arts and the adolescent historian or
scientist may equally have his barren period.
If so, all must be helped to survive it or some-
thing of the utmost value may be lost.
Finally, what is the upshot of all this ? As I
see it, it is, as I suggested earlier, that the
promotion of sound mental health, of full,
harmonious personality development, is the
prime aim of education; that these exceptional
children, being complex and unusual personali-
ties, often need more understanding, subtler
handling, a greater exercise of wisdom, on the
part of their teachers. We ought to know and
appreciate the total complex of their circum-
stances and be prepared to spend time and energy,
on helping them over their difficulties. Two
things in particular are perhaps of outstanding
importance. One is the development of steady
tastes and interests, since these do more than
most things to integrate and give shape and
ballast to the personality, particularly in early
adolescence. The other is sound moral educa-
tion. These exceptional children should become
the leaders of the next generation and we should
do all we can to help them to develop right
values and a sound attitude both to their own
abilities and to the responsibilities to the
community which these gifts entail. We must
also, I think, be aware of the fact that uncon-
sciously, even if not consciously, we may resent
their intelligence, be jealous of their superiority,
and should also beware of the untold harm which
such an attitude on our part may cause to those
who are undoubtedly " the salt of the earth
