Regional Community Care. II
===========================

:Author: T. A. RATCLIFFE, M.A., M.B., D.P.M., D.C.H., and E. Y. JONES (Psychiatric Social Worker)
(concluded)

The Role of the Psychiatrist

Something of what has been said of the
social worker applies also to the psychiatrist,
but he has, in addition, a special and more
actively therapeutic role, in the after-care team.
He must be in a position to carry on, and
reinforce, the therapeutic aspects of the case
worker's relationship with the patient and
relatives and to prepare them either for further
actual treatment or for the more detailed aspects
of their readjustment. It is his responsibility to
assess, and advise, on special treatment prob-
lems and to arrange for the further treatment of
the patients who require it. He must discuss
and supervise at all stages the handling technique
of the case worker and carry the responsibility
for difficult social and disposal decisions that
are sometimes required. His technical know-
ledge is necessary in the difficult problems of job
and training assessment, and he, too, must have
good liaison with the Ministry of Labour.
Professionally, he should act also as the link
with the general practitioner, the Ministry of
Pensions medical staff and other psychiatrists
who will be handling the patient. He must be
prepared equally to assist actively and thera-
peutically in the patient's domestic environment.
Here his special status gives him a therapeutic
" authority " relationship which is lacking in
the case worker/patient relationship, but which
is the essential successor to that relationship.
In addition to these more or less therapeutic
roles, the psychiatrist has a general advisory
and educational function in the team. It is his
task to interpret to the case workers the technical
psychological implications and limitations of
the patient's condition, personality and environ-
ment, as well as any purely medical or surgical
aspects which may arise. He must co-operate
with the senior psychiatric social worker in
the training of younger and relatively inexperi-
enced case workers, and be prepared to discuss
and advise on the general problems of their
work.

Liaison with other Bodies
-----------------------------

It will be clear from what has already been
said that the after-care team must have good
and personal liaison, not only with the existing
psychiatric treatment services, but with the
Ministry of Pensions, the Ministry of Labour
and all those social service organizations in the
locality which play a part in community care
or social welfare. Contacts are very necessary,
too, with the individual patient's doctor and
sometimes with his employer, his social club, or
some government department which can help
him in his trade. Invariably these contacts are
better made personally by a member of the team,
rather than by letter or telephone. It is surprising
how often the man who appears so unhelpful in
his letters turns out to be most co-operative when
met face to face, or when a full personal discus-
sion has enabled him for the first time to see
the whole picture.

Perhaps the most interesting aspect of this
liaison with other organizations was its develop-
ment. Whilst, in many cases, the after-care team
began as suppliants requesting help, very often
a reciprocal liaison and relationship was quickly
built up. Thus organizations from which we
had asked for help in the individual case were
often the very bodies which referred other cases
to After-Care for its special help. Towards the
end of the period under review, an increasing
number of the new referrals were reaching the
after-care team from the Ministry of Labour,
the British Red Cross Society, the local Social
Services Committees and other similar bodies.
Such a two-way relationship was of immense
value both to the after-care team and to its
patients.

The most important single organization with
which good liaison was necessary was the
Disablement and Rehabilitation Section of the
Ministry of Labour, and this, too, offers a good
example of the mutual two-way relationship
described. The Disablement Resettlement
Officers were at first approached for help
in the employment problems of individual
patients referred to them by the team, but
so good did the liaison become that an increas-
ingly large number of men, who were an
employment problem to the D.R.O.s themselves,
were referred to the after-care team for their
technical advice and help. In addition, both
the consulting psychiatrist and the psychiatric
social worker were asked by the regional
office of the Ministry of Labour to give a
series of lectures at the regularly held training
courses for D.R.O.s. A number of such
lectures on the psychiatric and allied aspects of
employment problems and rehabilitation were
given during 1948. As a result, both the
D.R.O.s and the after-care team gained an
increased insight into each other's work, with
its limitations and possibilities, and an increased
ability to help each other over individual cases.
Liaison with the existing psychiatric clinic
services presented its own difficulties. The
wide distribution of these clinics, and their
organization under so many different local
authorities, prevented the close individual
contact with all psychiatrists which would have
been ideal. But the general relationship with
the clinic psychiatrists remained good, and they
were at all times prepared to extend special help
and facilities for treatment. As with many
private medical practitioners, the same two-way
relationship of referring difficulties between the
after-care team and the clinic psychiatrist took
place in some instances. One difficulty, however,
which did arise was that, once a patient had
been referred to and taken under the treatment
care of a clinic, it was sometimes difficult to
obtain adequate information about the further
clinical progress of the patient. This must be
attributed in the main to the overworked
condition of most of the clinics and their
natural orientation vis-a-vis the patient's own
general practitioner.

Selection of Suitable Cases for After-Care
In assessing the value of our after-care
methods, we have been struck by the absence
of generally accepted criteria as to what makes
a case specially suitable for after-care. We did
not always feel that cases had been ideally
selected by the Service hospitals, whilst other
patients who reached the organization later
from other sources could, with benefit, have
been referred in the first place. After-care was,
of course, voluntary on the part of the patients,
and all did not accept it after being selected for
it. In formulating our own criteria we would
emphasize the distinction between cases needing
after-care, and those likely specially to benefit
from it.

In the first category could be placed most of
the recovered, or partially recovered, psychotics.
Whilst it would be untrue to say that no recov-
ered psychotic will really benefit by after-care,
it is true that, if many post-psychotic symptoms
remain, little can be done in the way of active
help. Nevertheless, such cases remain in
urgent need of general supervision, and advice
and support to the relatives may be of very great
value. They are thus, rightly, regarded as
suitable for referral. This need for supervision
is perhaps even greater with ex-service psychotic
patients than with those from civilian hospitals.
The tendency, described in very general terms,
is for the Service hospital to discharge its
patients, for administrative reasons, at a rather
earlier stage of recovery and with less personal
preparation of the relatives than do the corre-
sponding civilian mental hospitals. Such " near-
recovered " psychotics are apt to produce very
difficult disposal decisions for the after-care
team.

The true constitutional psychopath and the
grossly socially unstable individual are almost
always entirely unsuitable cases for after-care,
as is the very chronic hysteric with fixed inacces-
sible symptoms related to an insoluble environ-
mental problem. Such patients are too apt
to use, or try to use, the after-care organization
as just another means of escape, and a mature
relationship rarely if ever develops in this type
of case.

It would, however, be far from correct to
regard all cases with a long-standing neurotic
background as unsuitable. The insecure, inade-
quate individual, who has broken down with
frank symptoms under slight stress, is often one
with whom a satisfactory therapeutic relation-
ship can be built up. Such men may begin by
leaning too heavily on the support of the case
worker, but with good technique a remarkably
satisfactory attitude towards the problems of life,
with great and lasting benefit to the patient, can
be built up. Where the breakdown was of an
anxiety or hysterical type, and where it was
reactive to some considerable personal stress,
a similar mature approach to the problem may
be developed. Again, the case worker will
have to initiate all the early moves in solving
the domestic or work problem, but she can do
so in such a way that the patient feels himself
realistically facing up to the very problems
which caused his breakdown. It is in this type
of case that the team-work of psychiatrist and
case worker together is so valuable.

The borderline mental defective presents
another special problem of after-care. Here
again the role is a supervisory one, but if the
employment problem can be satisfactorily
handled, and the employer and relatives tactfully
helped in methods of handling, such men can
give valuable service, under guidance, to the
community.

The ex-prisoner of war is another type of case
where after-care is of special value. Unfortu-
nately, many of our cases of this type reached us
through other organizations a considerable time
after the patient's release from the Services, and
many presented a very difficult problem. The
difficulty that such men have in facing, and
adjusting to, the inevitable problems of post-war
life is very real and its effects are cumulative.
Their very difficulty of adjustment means that
they are often overwhelmed by those very social
and economic difficulties which they cannot
understand. Such men are in urgent need not
only of active therapy but of careful guidance
and help. Many have, as a result of their
difficulties, serious domestic problems, and
these, too, require special handling.

The solution of a domestic, work or emotional
problem, though essentially a part of treatment,
is often difficult for the psychotherapist working
alone, and with his special relationship to the
patient as an individual. Such cases are most
suitable for the team approach of both psychia-
trist and case worker, and they formed, for
obvious reasons, a considerable proportion of
the cases referred from Service hospitals.
The criteria for suitability for after-care are
thus rather different from those governing the
selection of cases for more orthodox and direct
therapy. In brief, it is our opinion that the
after-care team has a very definite place in
the treatment of those very cases which fail to
respond quickly to more direct and individual
therapy. As such, the after-care team has an
important part to play in the community's total
mental health organization.

Conclusions
-------------

Although we fully realize the rather special
nature of the particular after-care scheme here
described, it is felt that some general conclusions
are valid and applicable to the general sphere
of community care. Some of these conclusions
are not new, but have been proved elsewhere in
the established team-technique of many child
guidance clinics and some adult psychiatric
clinics and hospitals. Nevertheless, we feel
that they justify repetition, especially at this
time when so many local authorities are
assuming, for the first time, the responsibility
for after-care, and when the lack of trained
personnel render a considerable proportion of
these authorities severely under-equipped to
meet their new task.

1. After-care must represent a complete team
approach by both psychiatrist and psychia-
tric social worker. Each has a definite
individual role to play, but, in the integra-
tion of their efforts, each is augmented and
complemented.

2. After-care is not merely social welfare and
assistance in the ordinary meaning of the
words, but is an active therapeutic
process demanding special skills and
techniques from its team members. The
team must therefore consist of adequately
trained psychiatrist and psychiatric social
workers (or social workers under the
supervision of P.S.W.s) each of whom is
prepared to appreciate and understand the
dynamic socio-psychological aspects of
the clinical problem.

3. Very close personal co-operation and liaison
is necessary with many bodies, both
voluntary and established, whose work
touches on community care or the social
services. Without such liaison it will be
impossible for the team to appreciate, as
they always must, both the limitations and
possibilities of the reality situation.

4. After-care represents an important, and
numerically large, part of any scheme
which is to provide for a total mental
health service in a community. Apart
from its function of continuing and
augmenting the more orthodox forms of
therapy, an after-care organization has the
means of helping patients who would
otherwise never reach the net of the
orthodox treatment clinic. There seems
here to be the justification of an after-care
organization on a regional basis, closely
working with the orthodox clinic but
organized and administered separately
from it.

The capacity to understand the individual . . . depends on our sensitivity, our intelligence, our experience,
and our training. But not on these only. To understand we must see clearly, and we do not see clearly if we are
blinded by envy, pride, personal ambition, jealousy, fear or greed. No amount of intelligence or training will make
us understand if our observations are deflected by these distorting influences.
Professor J. C. Spence.
