News and Notes
===============

Conference on Mental Health

H.R.H. The Duchess of Kent has consented to
attend the inaugural session of the Association's
Conference on Mental Health to be held on March
' 17th-18th, 1949, at Seymour Hall, London, W.l.
The meeting will also be honoured by the presence
of Sir Wilson Jameson, G.B.E., K.C.B., M.D.,
F.R.C.P., Chief Medical Officer, Ministry of Health
and Ministry of Pensions. The Conference has the
official support of the relevant Government Ministries of the United Kingdom and Northern Ireland.
Papers will be given by the following speakers:
Thursday, March 17th

Subject?First experiences of recent social legislation and implications for Mental Health
(National Health Service Act, National Assistance Act, National Insurance Act, and the
Children Act).

Speakers?Prof. D. R. MacCalman, M.D.,
F.R.C.P.
Miss Marjorie A. Brown, M.A.
Miss P. Armstrong.
Friday, March 18th
Subject?The need for understanding the individual?as part of the training and function of
Doctors, Nurses, Teachers and Social Workers.
Speakers?Prof. J. C. Spence, M.D., F.R.C.P.
Prof. Brian Stanley, M.A.
Miss May Irvine, M.A.
Prof. A. N. Shimmin, M.A. (Professor of Social
Science, University of Leeds) will preside at the
first day's sessions, and on the second day Dr G. B.
Jeffery, M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S. (Director, Institute of
Education, University of London) will be in the
chair.

The inclusive fee, admitting to all sessions and a
copy of the printed Report is ?1 5s.; Day Tickets
(excluding Report), lis. 6d.; Sessional Tickets,
6s. each. Reductions in these fees are allowed to
Full Members of the National Association for
Mental Health. The Association's Mental Health
Exhibit, to which reference is made below, will
be on view at Seymour Hall during the Conference
period.

Copies of the printed programme and all other
information may be obtained on application to the
Conference Secretary, National Association for
Mental Health, 39 Queen Anne Street, London, W.l.

Mental Health Exhibit
----------------------
An illustrated brochure, containing details of the
Association's Mental Health Exhibit, has recently
been published, and copies (price 3d. each) may be
obtained on application. The Exhibit, which was
displayed at the International Congress on Mental
Health at Central Hall, Westminster, last August,
is available for hire to Local Authorities, voluntary
organizations, etc., for display at Health Weeks
and other similar functions. The Exhibit comprises
six separate box units illustrating some of the main
problems of mental health during the different age
groups, from infancy to maturity, with particulars
of the voluntary and statutory services provided
or projected.

N.A.M.H. Forthcoming Courses
The programme of the Education Department of
the National Association for Mental Health for
the next few months includes the following Courses:
For Medical Officers (in conjunction with the
Extra-Mural Department of the University
of London)
Three Courses of three weeks each, to be held
from February 28th to March 19th; May 2nd
to 21st; and October 3rd to 22nd.
Vacancies for all three Courses are now fully
booked.

For Teachers (organized for Ministry of Education)
Two Courses of three weeks each, to be held
respectively from July 11th to 28th at
Whitelands College, Putney, and from
September 5th to 23rd at Grove House,
Roehampton.

Applications for these Courses must be made
through Local Education Authorities.
For Staffs of Children''s Homes
At the request of the Home Office, plans for
a three weeks' Residential Course to be held
from May 30th to June 18th at the Probation
Hostel, Draycott Place, London, S.W.3,
are under consideration.

For further particulars, apply to the Education
Secretary, 39 Queen Anne Street, W.l.
A fourth Course for Local Authority Officers in
the Mental Health Service is being held in London
as we go to press.

N.A.M.H. Homes and Hostels
For Epileptics
The pioneer Convalescent Home for epileptics
at Fairwarp, Sussex, has been so successful that the
Association is now planning to open a second
Home?Kelsale Court, Saxmundham, Suffolk?
during the spring, with the help of a generous
grant from King Edward's Hospital Fund. This
is a delightful house, able to accommodate at least
twenty-five patients, situated in pleasant grounds
in the village of Kelsall, about twenty miles from
Ipswich. The sea is within a distance of three
miles, and the station within a mile. It is hoped to
secure the co-operation of the East Anglian Regional
Hospital Board. The charge per patient will be
?3 13s. 6d. per week. Both men and women will be
admitted, convalescing from illness or operative
treatment.

New Agricultural Hostel
----------------------
The Association has welcomed a request from the
Yorkshire (West Riding) Agricultural Executive
Committee to open a Hostel in their area for
thirty to forty land workers?mentally defective
men who have had institutional training. Premises
are in view and it is hoped that the Hostel may open
in the spring.

Holiday Homes

The Association's two Holiday Homes at Bognor
Regis and Rhyl have been fully booked up from
March until the end of November, and far more
applications for parties of patients from Mental
Deficiency Institutions and Occupation Centres
have been received than can be accepted. There
is, therefore, urgent need for additional Homes,
and information about possible premises in seaside
towns in the north, east and west will be gratefully
received for investigation.

Information and enquiries should be addressed
to the Homes and Hostels Department, 39 Queen
Anne Street, London, W.l.

Essay Competition for Nurses
-----------------------------
The subject chosen for this year's " Lord "
Memorial Essay Competition (founded by the
Society of the Crown of our Lord in memory of the
late Dr J. R. Lord, C.B.E., and administered by
the National Association for Mental Health) is:
" The ways and means by which the Nurse
can help the Patient to achieve the fullest
possible practical and social re-adjustment."
Essays, of approximately 2,000 words, are invited
from nurses holding:

(a) The Certificate issued by the General Nursing
Council for Nurses on the Register for Mental
Nurses or the Register for Nurses for Mental
Defectives; or
(b) The R.M.P.A. Certificates of Proficiency in
Mental Nursing and in the Nursing of Mental
Defectives
and dealing with cases of mental disorder, or mental
deficiency, whether in mental hospitals, mental
deficiency institutions, psychiatric clinics and/or
allied psychiatric services where mental nurses are
employed.

The following prizes will be offered for the two
best essays:

First Prize: ?3 3s. and a medal.
Second Prize: ?1 Is.
The closing date is May 31st, 1949. Copies of
the announcement and full particulars of the
arrangements may be obtained from the Secretary,
Public Relations Department, N.A.M.H., 39 Queen
Anne Street, London, W.l.

Prison Commissioners' Report, 1947
In May, 1948, the average prison population
exceeded 19,700?the maximum for a period of
some forty years and over, and over 6,000 more
than in 1946. Part of the rise may be accounted
for by an increase in the number of longer sentences,
but an increase in actual receptions is also a contributory factor and there is no reason to suppose
that the upward curve is nearing its peak.
This state of affairs produces severe overcrowding
in existing prisons, and despite every effort it has
been impossible to obtain the additional accommodation needed, even by acquiring country houses
or camp sites. During the year only one small new
camp for about 100 men was opened at Aldington,
Kent.

On the other hand, there is a decrease in the
number of women prisoners from 7,381 receptions
in 1945 to 4,912 in 1946. An interesting new
development in connection with women prisoners
is recorded under a section headed " Social Assistance " which attempts to allay the anxiety about
home affairs (referred to by Dr Charity Taylor
in her talk noted below) so often felt by women
newly admitted. With the co-operation of the
W.V.S., an experimental scheme was instituted at
Holloway. W.V.S. representatives attend every
evening in the " reception " to offer help to anyone
beset by urgent problems needing immediate
attention and to render "first aid" service. A
similar experiment was tried at Durham and,
although the demand was not found to be large
enough to justify the setting up of a regular service,
arrangements can be made for dealing with any
cases that may arise.

In the chapter headed " Health and Hygiene ",
the Principal Medical Officer at Wormwood Scrubbs
reports a development in group psychotherapy made
possible by the opening of the "New Ward " in
September, 1946, which has had good results.
Several cases have been referred to the National
Association for after-care on release, and the
usefulness of the psychiatric social worker at the
prison is fully recognized. Psychiatric treatment
given at the Wakefield centre has been extended
and has relieved Wormwood Scrubbs of a substantial number of cases.

Work with young convicts?mostly youths
convicted of murder and sentenced to detention
during His Majesty's pleasure?has had some good
results. Its members seem to respond to the
psychological approach, in conjunction with active
rehabilitatiQn measures, so that a noticeable
atmosphere of progress can be recorded.
At Holloway, a useful investigation has been
begun into mental and physical states of women
convicted of child neglect.

A note of warning is, however, given as to the
inability of psychological treatment to prevent
further criminal activity, and it is explained that its
true function is to bring abnormal psychological
factors into consciousness in such a way that any
repetition of a criminal act can only take place if
willed and intended. More than this it cannot
achieve.

The Report records the need of an intake of
900 additional prison officers by March 31st, 1949.
To achieve this target, energetic measures have been
taken, including the dispatch of a recruiting mission
to Palestine early in 1947 offering employment to
363 members of the Palestine Police and Prison
Services on demobilization. Hope was expressed
that the target might be reached. In the medical
staff also a serious shortage is reported, and at the
time of its preparation there were sixteen vacancies.
During the year, Prison Medical Officers ceased
to be a separate departmental class and were
assimilated into the general Treasury class of
Government Medical Officers.

*' Imprisonment "
Members of the National Association for Mental
Health who had the privilege of hearing, at its
Annual Meeting in January, the talk given by
Dr Charity Taylor, Governor of Holloway Prison,
must have gone away inspired by her conception
of what imprisonment may achieve even if it is
undergone in one of London's oldest and most
forbidding-looking prison buildings.

Dr Taylor said that she and her staff tried not
only to reform prisoners but to send them out
" nicer people " than they were when admitted?to
teach them to be kind to one another, and to make
them realize that their enforced and unwelcome
association could be turned into a real community
life. The hard core of " old lags " presented, of
course, special problems. Untroubled by anxieties
as to happenings outside (in this presenting a
striking contrast to the first offenders who so often
were deeply concerned about home affairs), their
whole attention was concentrated on what was
happening " inside ", and though they were ready
enough to accept authority, they regarded their
fellows as fair game for malice and uncharitableness.
At the same time, however, it was elicited from
Dr Taylor in answer to a question, that she did not
advocate the close segregation of this group of
prisoners which, in her opinion, only intensifies
the evil. She felt that a careful dilution of the
classification by very carefully selected other
prisoners might yield good results.

Psychiatric treatment, in her experience, was
useful in certain cases?particularly in those of
neurotics suffering from obsessional and anxiety
states?but frequently treatment of this kind was
too late, and it was, of course, repudiated by the
" old lags Nor does it necessarily affect the
patients' criminality.

The question of employment?so vital in men's
prisons?was not, in Holloway, an acute problem.
The majority of the women were needed at home on
their release, and industrial training would be of
no interest to some of them.

One problem was touched upon by Dr Taylor
with which she said she was powerless to deal?that
of the stigma attached by society to those who had
been in prison. Nor had she any easy solution to
offer in regard to it.

Those who heard this delightfully unofficial and
" human " account of prison life will read with
heightened interest the Report of the Prison Commissioners, a note on which appears above.

An Inquiry into Punishment
The Home Secretary has appointed a Committee
to rev^w existing methods of punishment in prisons
and Borstal Institutions (excluding, in these cases,
corporal punishment), and in Approved Schools
and Remand Homes; to consider the procedure
adopted in inquiries into breaches of discipline, and
to recommend whether any changes in the methods
and procedure are necessary or desirable.
Its Chairman is Mr. H. W. F. Franklin (Headmaster of Epsom College, Surrey), and included in
its membership is Dr Desmond Curran who holds
the post of Psychiatrist at St. George's Hospital.
Anyone interested in the work of the Committee
is invited to communicate with one or other of the
Joint Secretaries, Mr. D. Pettigrew, Prison Commission, Horseferry House, Thorney Street, London,
S.W.I, and Mrs. M. G. Kewley, Children's Department, Home Office, Whitehall, S.W.I.
Lunacy and Mental Treatment in 1947
The Report on the Mental Health Services
previously published by the Board of Control will,
in future, be included in the Annual Report of the
Ministry of Health, but meanwhile there has been
issued separately the Annual Report of the Board
to the Lord Chancellor, on the Lunacy and Mental
Treatment Acts.

At the end of 1947, there were 144,736 patients
under care (compared with 146,444 in 1946). Of
this number, 128,817 were in public mental hospitals,
and such hospitals were then overcrowded to an
extent of 14,668 (in 1946, this figure was 16,662).
The incidence of mental illness has not increased,
but the increase in the general population has led to
a growing demand for accommodation which
has not been overtaken since 1939, when building
stopped. Moreover, at the end of 1947 there were
still 5,509 mental hospital beds diverted to wartime
purposes, and of those set free during the year, 3,965
could not be used owing to the need of restoration
or re-equipment. Shortage of nursing staff also
resulted in inability to use 1,981 beds which could
otherwise have been made available, but it is pointed
out that this figure represents less than 1 ? 6 per
cent, of the whole, and that the shortages are
highly localized.
Voluntary admissions constituted 54-5 per cent,
of the total admissions during the year (compared
with 50-8 per cent, in 1946) but it is noted with
concern that many mental hospitals now limit
admission to certified cases and decline to receive
voluntary patients. This is obviously an effect of
the pressure on accommodation, but one which
must be regarded as most disturbing and retrograde,
and in the long run likely to lead to even more
overcrowding in its denial of early treatment. It
is therefore to be sincerely hoped that it is only a
very temporary expedient.

Mental Health Advisory Committee
--------------------------------
The Central Health Services Council, set up in
accordance with the provisions of Section 2*of the
National Health Service Act, is instituting nine
standing advisory committees, one of which is to be
concerned with mental health.

The members of this Committee are as follows:
Appointed by Central Health Services Council
Mr. C. F. Comer (Confederation of Health
Service Employees), Sir Allen Daley, Professor
Aubrey Lewis, Dr W. G. Masefield, Sir Cecil
Oakes.

Representing Organizations
--------------------------
Mr. Claude Bartlett (Male Nurse), Dr John
Bowlby, Dr W. Russell Brain, Dr Noel
Burke, Dr Desmond Curran, Dr Wm.
Sutherland Macdonald, Mrs. McDougall
(P.S.W.), Alderman Mervyn Payne, Dr J. R.
Rees, Dr J. Ivison Russell, Mr. Philip E.
Vernon (Psychologist), Miss B. J. Wall,
S.R.N.

The National Association for Mental Health was
one of the bodies invited to nominate two persons
to serve on the Committee, and Dr J. R. Rees was
nominated by it, as well as by other organizations.
Disabled Persons, Some Facts and Figures
In the chapter of the Ministry of Labour's Report
for 1947 dealing with this subject, it is stated that
of the 828,666 disabled persons registered as at
October 20th, 1947, "nervous and mental disorders " accounted for 66,832.

The total number of disabled persons recorded as
unemployed on December 15th, 1947, was 74,343
(70,943 males and 3,400 females), compared with
72,799 in December, 1946. Of these, 63,555 were
classified as capable of employment under ordinary
conditions, and 10,788 as being severely disabled
and in need of sheltered employment.

During the year, 7,356 disabled men and 674
disabled women were admitted to training courses,
under Section 2 of the Disabled Persons (Employment) Act, under the Ministry of Labour's Vocational Training Scheme. In some of the courses,
places for disabled workers were specially reserved.
Information as to the types of disability from which
the trainees suffered is not given in the Report, so it
cannot be ascertained to what extent psychiatric
patients have responded to the training given. At
the end of 1947, 6,812 persons had completed
.training and 3,784 were still undergoing it.
In addition to the Egham Industrial Rehabilitation
Centre? it was planned to open others, but owing to
difficulty in obtaining suitable premises it was
decided instead to establish in Government Training
Centres having accommodation available, nonresidential units and one unit to be partly residential.
At Sutton, Surrey, a special psychiatric centre was
established to provide short-term rehabilitation for
men and women disabled by psychosis or psychoneurosis.

For the seriously disabled, the Disabled Persons
Employment Corporation opened, during 1947,
11 new " Remploy " factories, making a total of 15
in the country as a whole. At the end of the year, a
further 29 were in course of erection or adaptation.
As a long-term policy, the Corporation has fixed as
its target 100 factories. In connection with the
Bridgend and Edinburgh factories, 58 home-workers
were employed and surveys on the opening for a
Home-Workers' Scheme were being made in other
areas.

Out of 625 " voluntary undertakings " employing
625 severely disabled persons, only 5 had found it
necessary to make claims for financial assistance in
respect of working deficits. Capital assistance was
given in one case.

The Sheltered Employment Committee of the
National Advisory Council gave special consideration to the question of employment for epileptics,
and at the Salford Remploy Factory six epileptics
were employed as an experiment.

A follow-up enquiry, after a period of six weeks
of placement, showed that of the 26,225 cases placed
in ordinary or designated employment during the
quarter ended September 30th, 1947, 57-1 per cent,
were satisfactorily resettled, 24-4 per cent, were not
satisfactory, and in about 18-5 per cent, of the cases
information was not obtainable.

Some additional information is given in a more
recently published report issued by the Standing
Committee on the Rehabilitation and Resettlement
of Disabled Persons (1949).

From this we learn that on August 16th, 1948,
about 905,000 were registered as disabled. A
classification of these, as at April 4th, 1948 (it is
stated that there is no reason to think that there is
appreciable variation in the relative proportions
found on any specified date), shows that psychiatric
disability accounted for 5-7 per cent, of persons on
the Register, as compared with 42-7 per cent, in
the surgical group, 34-9 per cent, in the medical
group and 16-7 per cent, grouped as "others"
which included the blind and deaf.

Joint Research into Child Development
An interesting example of "combined operations " is to be seen in the recently-instituted
research project for a training and research centre
in connection with a residential and day nursery,
a nursery school and a maternity and child welfare
centre, provided in Bloomsbury by the Governors
of the Foundling Hospital. The Medical Officer
of Health for St. Pancras is deeply interested in the
scheme, and associated with its operation is the
Institute of Child Health (whose Director is
Prof. Alan Moncrieff), the Institute of Education
(London University), the Child Guidance Clinic
at Great Ormond Street Hospital, and the
Central Council for Training in Child Care (Home
Office).

The Central Council's first training course for
supervisors and tutors held in connection with the
new scheme, began in January, with Dr Agatha
Bowley as senior lecturer and Miss J. E. Cass (also
acting as honorary educational supervisor of the
day nursery) as tutor. A part-time medical
assistant and two assistants in educational research
have also been appointed.

The children in the nurseries and the nursery
school will be the subject matter for the research
and if possible babies and young children in the area
who do not attend them, and it is hoped thus to
evaluate the advantages and drawbacks of the
various types of provision.

The research may, as a long-term policy, be
extended to a follow-up of the children concerned,
through their school life until, as adolescents, they
may become members of the Youth Centre in the
Harmsworth Memorial Playground on the
Foundling site.

Marriage Guidance
The Report of the Departmental Committee on
Grants for the Development of Marriage Guidance
provides an interesting new example of the scope
and value of purely voluntary enterprise leading,
after its pioneer stage, to recognition and financial
support by central and local government.

The Committee has recommended that the three
organizations mainly concerned?the National Marriage Guidance Council, the Catholic Marriage
Advisory Council and the Family Welfare Association?should be given Government grants, and that
in the setting up of local centres Local Authorities
shall be empowered to give help under Section 136
of the Local Government Act, one half of any
expenditure so incurred being recoverable from the
Government.

It is further recommended that the three organizations should join together to devise schemes for
selecting and training Marriage Guidance Counsellors, and that they should appoint nine representatives to a training body to be set up, with a Chairman
and two other members appointed by the Home
Secretary, one member appointed by the Minister
of Health and one by the Minister of Education.
The whole cost of training, during an experimental
period of five years, should, it is considered, be
borne by the Government.

Children Act, 1948
The Advisory Council provided for in Section 43
of the Children Act has now been appointed by the
Home Secretary. Its members are as follows:
Professor Alan Moncrieff (Chairman), Lady
Allen of Hurtwood, Dr Muriel Barton Hall,
Mr. R. Beloe, Miss S. C. Bertie, Mrs. F. M.
Brown, Mr. P. B. Dingle, Mrs. K. W. JonesRoberts, Mr. P. T. Kirkpatrick, Mrs. G. R.
Morrah, Miss L. M. Rendel, O.B.E., and the
Hon. David Smith.

On the Council will also serve departmental
representatives of the Home Office and the Ministries
of Education, Health, and Labour.

Mental Health in South Africa
The Report of the South African National
Council for Mental Health for the year ended
March 31st, 1948, describes a year of vigorous and
expanding activity on the part of the Central Office,
and of its local Mental Health Societies?in Durban,
Pietermaritzburg, Cape Town, East London, Port
Elizabeth, and Johannesburg. In addition to other
forms of mental health work, it is interesting to note
that all these Societies are responsible for Psychiatric
Clinics. In Johannesburg there is an old-established
Occupation Centre for boys, and one for younger
children is planned. A seventh Society was founded
in Bloemfontein in March, 1948, which gives good
promise of rapid progress.

In its survey of the field, the Report notes the
following subjects: Occupational Therapy, Training
of Mental Nurses and Social Workers, institutional
accommodation for Mental Defectives, the lack of
suitable mental tests for non-European children, the
Inter-Departmental Committee on " Deviate"
Children and the Bill for the education of children
who are handicapped, the shortage of mental
hospitals and the need for bringing private mental
homes under the Mental Disorders Act.

An accompanying leaflet refers to public apathy
as being the greatest enemy of the Mental Health
Movement, but the fact that street collections in
93 places throughout the Union produced the sum
of ?1,488 shows that the existence of the Movement
must now be widely known, and demonstrates that
some response to its needs can be evoked.
The National Council's Organizing Secretary is
Miss Una Fischer, and its postal address: P.O. Box
2587, Johannesburg.

Music in Mental Hospitals
-------------------------
In a recent issue of The Hospital there is an
interesting report of some preliminary experimental
work undertaken at Warlingham Park Hospital, for
the purpose of ascertaining the value of music as a
method of group therapy. To a selected group of
patients?consisting of manic-depressives and schizophrenics with a few neurotics and psychopaths?
various types of gramophone records have been
played and discussed over a period beginning in
July, 1947. The results are recorded as follows:
" Romantic" music often produced emotional
release but did hot tend to facilitate group cohesion;
serious contemporary music brought repressed
emotional forces into consciousness, in the case of
some inhibited schizophrenics, classical music
appeared to give a greater feeling of security; but
quite the most effective music for increasing the
harmony of the group proved to be traditional and
folk songs from different countries.

" This music, based on the most deep-seated
human and cosmic .relationships, strikes a universal
chord which binds people together, whether they
are normal or emotionally disturbed."
It is interesting to note that, despite popular
ideas, programmes of purely sedative music given
at bedtime in the hope of quietening refractory
patients, merely bored and irritated them?sometimes even leading to fighting ! Mixed programmes, however, were appreciated, producing
temporary beneficial effects on moods although no
noticeable ones on sleep.

The article concludes with an account of the
service offered by the Council for Music in Hospitals. Particulars of this may be obtained from the
Organizer, Miss Sheila McCreery, 20 Deering Road,
Reigate, Surrey, who also has for disposal a few
copies of the report on the Warlingham Park
experiment reprinted from The Hospital. A stamped addressed envelope should accompany applications.

An American looks at English Mental Hospitals
An interesting survey of sixteen Mental Hospitals
in this country made in the summer of 1947 by
Dr Dallas Pratt has been circulated by the National
Mental Health Foundation, Philadelphia. (Dr.
Pratt's article on American Mental Hospitals
(Mental Health, Vol. VII, No. 2) will be remembered
and should be read in this connection.) Here he
has roughly assessed the progress attained by the
hospitals visited, classified less than a quarter as
" progressive more than half as " average " and
a quarter as " backward ". Judged by the same
standard he would say that in America one-half to
three-quarters of the State Hospitals were " backward ", most of the rest " average ", and " very
few indeed " could be considered as " progressive
His findings are most clearly set out under various
heads, and some of the many interesting comparisons
made are as follows:

In England, expenditure on maintenance is about
50 per cent, higher than in the States, and the
minimum rates are twice as high as their lowest.
In America the care of patients in the wards is
largely in the hands of untrained and often ignorant
attendants, the proportion of graduate nurses to
patients in 1946 being only 1 to 143, whereas it has
" apparently not occurred to the British that the
nursing care of the mentally ill could conceivably
be entrusted to anyone except a nurse
Mental Hospitals in America are usually much
larger than those in England, i.e. containing an
average of 2,658 beds as against our own average of
1,261.

Dr Pratt, in recording his impressions of the
wards in the hospitals visited, notes the atmosphere
as being " that of a home-y old fashioned boardinghouse " with " gleaming wood and brass testifying
to the English passion for polishing and the
omnipresent vases of fresh flowers to their devotion
to gardening He was specially struck by the
fact that the disturbed wards were (apart from the
patients) indistinguishable from the others, with
the same quantity of exposed glass, furniture,
pictures and flowers. Compared with American
hospitals, Dr Pratt refers to the general impression
of observers that English hospital patients are less
disturbed, which is sometimes attributed to the
phlegmatic British temperament. He suggests,
however, that:

" the less disturbed character of English refractory
wards is owing rather to a combination of: intelligent and humane nursing care; the frequent use of
occupation and recreation (particularly out-of-doors
activity); the absence of mechanical restraint and
other violent methods; and finally, active physical
treatment, including shock therapy and, in some
hospitals, prolonged narcosis."

Besides Mental Hospitals, there are sections of
the survey dealing with certain neurosis centres, and
with public relations.

Dr Pratt states at the outset that his survey was
intended to be nothing more than " a friendly
gathering of information and impressions, an effort
to learn about advances in care and treatment, and
a mutual sharing of problems But the facts and
figures assembled in it give such a clear picture of
the present position that it will be read with profit
and interest on both sides of the Atlantic.
Copies may be obtained from Messrs. H. K. Lewis
& Co. Ltd., 136 Gower Street, London, W.C.I
(price 3s. 6d.) or direct from the National Mental
Health Foundation, 1520 Race Street, Philadelphia,
Pa., U.S.A., price $50.

Occupation Centres and Parents
--------------------------------
The importance of interesting parents in the
training of their children who are attending an
Occupation Centre is an axiom which cannot be
stressed too often, and we are glad to call attention
to a successful enterprise with this end in view.
The East Leeds Occupation Centre has formed a
Parents' Association which holds a monthly meeting
on the Centre premises. To it, fathers as well as
mothers gladly come, and every effort is made to
encourage their taking an active part in the proceedings, e.g. by proposing votes of thanks. Speakers
have included the Medical Superintendent of the
local Mental Deficiency Colony, and a local Magistrate. The meetings also afford an opportunity
for the staff and parents to discuss individual
problems connected with the children, as time for
social intercourse is always allowed.
