The Prison Service in 1948
===========================

The Report issued by the Prison Commissioners
m September covers the year 1948 except for most
of the statistical information contained in it which
felates to the previous year. As usual, the Report
ls a vigorous and informative document revealing
a progressive spirit and a hopeful outlook despite
certain discouraging factors in the situation?
factors to which prominence is inevitably given in
l the press.

Some Statistics
-----------------

In July, 1948, the daily average prison population
feached 20,000 and there is reason to believe that
jt may yet exceed this figure. Nor can the situation
"e now chiefly attributed to the fact that the pro-
Portion of indictable to non-indictable offences
has increased, resulting in a greater proportion of
Prisoners with longer sentences; there has been
a substantial increase in the actual number of
receptions, as a consequence of which local prisons
are seriously overcrowded, and during 1947 some
2,000 men were sleeping three in a cell.
An interesting table gives a list of offences and
the number of persons convicted in each group
over a period of years. To quote a few instances:
1938, the number of convictions for " burglary,
housebreaking, etc. " was 2,498, compared with
5>474 in 1946 and 6,149 in 1947. For " offences
of violence ", the figures were respectively 529,
717. and 728. On the other hand, certain non-
indictable offences have strikingly diminished,
e-8- " assaults which in 1938 numbered 1,691
and in 1947 had dropped to 948, although this
?second figure compares unfavourably with 1946
jyhen it was 799. The " cruelty to children"
hgures are striking; in 1938, 181, in 1946, 136, and
ln 1947, 209, whereas as long ago as 1913 they were
as high as 1,028. An interpretation of these rises
and falls and their relation to changing social
conditions and standards, to the effects of two war
Periods, and to new legislative measures, would
yield interesting data.

In the age-group 16 to 21 (young offenders),
'he convictions in 1947 for indictable offences
showed a decrease of 1,099 on the previous year,
and, as compared with the peak year of 1945,
a. decrease of 4,721. The Commissioners note
with regret, however, that during 1947, 712 youths
and 88 girls were sent to prison for a first proved
offence.

Training of Prisoners
----------------------

A.t the end of 1947, a separate prison (Lewes)
^as set aside for young offenders, and former
^entres at Bedford, Bristol, Winchester and
Wormwood Scrubbs are now closed.

New " Training Prisons " have been opened at
Sudbury (Derbyshire) and The Verne (Portland),
and negotiations for the purchase of a second
training prison for women at Hill Hall, Essex, are
reported to have been on the verge of completion
at the time of writing.

Askham Grange?the Training Prison for women
established some two years ago?now holds its
full complement of 60, and only one of the 93 new
admissions during 1948 proved unsuitable. There
have been no disciplinary reports, no escapes and
no re-convictions, and the following statement
bears witness to the striking success of the
experiment:

" The improvement in manners, appearance,
industry and co-operation of the women has been
well maintained, there is always an atmosphere oj
friendliness, and freedom from. fear and anxiety
makes a noticeable difference in their behaviour in
a short time. Their readiness to shoulder responsibility
is praiseworthy. Friendship with the local in-
habitants is now firmly established, they are invited
to all our social activities and always come in full
force.''''

Mental Health of Prisoners
---------------------------

During 1947, the number of prisoners found to
be insane or mentally defective on remand was
272 and 247 respectively. In addition, 5,090
persons were remanded to prison for mental
observation and report (compared with 502 the
previous year). 33 prisoners and Borstal inmates
were transferred to mental hospitals during
their sentences, and 41 were certified under the
Mental Deficiency Acts, of whom 33 were removed
to institutions, 6 were handed over to local
authorities on the expiration of sentence, and 2
were discharged to their own homes.

The number of prisoners found to be epileptic
was 259 (an increase of 46 on the 1946 figures),
and 280 doubtful cases were kept under medical
observation and provided with suitable employment
whilst in prison.

An investigation is being carried out at Worm-
wood Scrubbs and Wandsworth, in collaboration
with the Maudsley Hospital, into prisoners (willing
to undergo tests) who are psychopathic personalities.
A new development in connection with provision
for psychological treatment, designed to meet the
needs of prisoners serving short sentences, has been
initiated. Under this scheme, psychiatrists in the
service of Regional Hospital Boards will begin the
treatment of selected cases whilst still in prison
with a view to continuing it at an outside Clinic
after the patient's sentence has expired. This
should obviate the difficulty of getting an ex-
prisoner to attend for treatment by a fresh
psychiatrist?a plan rarely consented to owing to
dislike of revealing his past history. The alternative
?to arrange treatment at an outside clinic during
sentence?is found to be equally unsatisfactory
largely owing to the sharp contrast between the
clinic and the prison to which the patient has to
return. So far, however, it has only been possible
to put the new scheme into operation in one Region
owing to the scarcity of psychiatric personnel.
Co-operation between the prison medical service
and the public psychiatric service has also been
effected in some regions through a scheme by which
senior prison medical officers take an active part
in the work of local psychiatric clinics, thus
providing a valuable interchange of experience.

These few items of information from the Report
will serve as an indication of its value and interest.
It can be obtained from H.M. Stationery Office,
Kingsway, London, W.C.2, at the price of 2s. 8d.
post free.
