
We submitted this letter to our reviewer and have
pleasure in printing his reply.?Ed.

The " outworn theology " to which I referred in
my review is that which is based on a conception
of God as a jealous deity easily moved to wrath and
vengeance?a theology involving patriarchal attitudes
seen mainly in the Old Testament, and still held by
a small minority of religious groups. The " new "
theology, revealed by the life, teaching and death
of Christ as described in the New Testament does not
conflict with the findings of psychological science in
the view of an increasing number of medical and
non-medical psychologists.

Many hard words were said about Darwin. His
chief protagonist, Huxley, dealt with a number of
them especially in his famous debate with Wilber-
force. Freud also incurred the opprobium of most
of his critics, both within and without the medical
profession, but I agree that " persecution" is
perhaps too strong a word and is often associated
with heresy hunting. To traditional orthodox
opinion, however, Freud and Darwin were both
heretics.

With regard to the incidence of professed religion
in the normal population, it all depends on whether
the patients were nominal or practising Christians.
If the total figures of church attendances were to be
taken over the last fifty years then many people who
" profess " religion nowadays do not practise it,
at least not in a group sense. If every place of
worship had only half of its professed adherents in
attendance once a week, then our churches would be
in a flourishing state indeed. It is most likely,
however, that the Marriage Guidance Centre
in London, which has such strong church connec-
tions, did carefully differentiate between nominal
and practising Christians and did not classify every
client describing himself as " C. of E." as " profes-
sing to religion ". The explanation of the high
percentage referred to, may moreover lie in another
direction?viz. that people in this category are
likely to be specially concerned about a right
marriage relationship in view of their conception
of what constitutes a true marriage.

Your reviewer would assure his critic that he
shares the conviction that in such a marriage a live
healthy religion is an important factor and plays a
vital part in producing stability and happiness.
A.T..

Further correspondence on this subject is invited.?Ed.
