Inebriety
==========

284 COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS.

In a useful and entertaining article contributed to a recent
number of the New York Medical Record, its author, Dr. T. D.
Crothers, discusses some obscure cases of inebriety. He regards
this disease as more complex in its character than insanity, and
complains that it has never received the careful and continuous
study which it so fully deserves. Thorough examination, how-
ever, of the natural history of some cases, their progress being
followed from stage to stage, will in his opinion furnish in-
valuable evidence both of physical causation and physical law,
and the following example of a case in which the causation was
clear and traceable, is well worthy of attention :
" A , a strong, vigorous merchant, aged 30, with no
heredity and temperate, suffered from a partial sunstroke. He
remained greatly debilitated for two months in bed, then began
to use spirits to excess, and was a continuous inebriate up to
death, four years later. He made great exertions to recover by
the pledge and prayer, and failed and died of dementia. The
drink craving was clearly traced to the brain injury from sun-
stroke. No possible causation of vice could be traced to the
first use of spirits, and the progress of the case was regular in
spite of all means to check it."
As an instance of apparently very obscure cases, which when
sifted reveal an evident physical causation, Dr. Crothers quotes
the subjoined history; the appended " remarks," serving to ex-
plain in a satisfactory manner, much of the obscurity :
" The next case is a border-land one, full of mystery, but
when carefully studied has clear outlines of an unmistakable
physical causation. B ,was born of healthy parents and grew
up a vigorous man, temperate and correct in all his habits. He
was a prosperous mill owner and attentive to business. At 31
years of age he married, and his wife was killed on the wedding
tour in an accident. His grief was very profound; for two
months he was unable to do any business except to walk to the
mill a few moments every day and direct some little matters.
He took tonics under the direction of a physician, and complained
generally of sleeplessness and poor appetite. A year after he
began to frequent low places and use spirits over the bar and
associate with bad company. Later he was intoxicated in public.
COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS. 285
Ihen he neglected his business, bought fast horses, and became
dishonest, doing many things that were foreign to his previous
character. Gradually he sank from bad to worse, and finally
was sent to State prison for forgery. His property was gone,
and he became a gambler and inebriate of a low type."
Remarks.?" In this case the most prominent symptoms were
low, vicious propensities seeking an outlet in bad society and
drink. When the history was studied it was clear that the
shock of the sudden death of his wife produced a psychical
traumatism; some change in the normal functional action of
the nerve centres, which became the starting point of a general
moral and physical degeneration ; some loss of nerve force, mani-
fest clearly in departures from health and changes of thought
and action. The sudden shock of grief produced permanent
alterations of character. His disposition changed; all his
previous motives and ambitions in life vanished. He left the
Church and began to lead a most irregular life, giving no reason
except that he was discouraged. At times he seemed to manifest
grief at his conduct and make an effort to recover, but soon
relapsed. His brain retained, during the sober moments, an
appearance of health in thought and action. He talked and
reasoned clearly, and made efforts to recover; signed the pledge ;
asked the prayers of the Church ; then, in the moment of
greatest promise of success, fell precipitately into the lowest
company and state of drinking. There was no reasoning or
calculation in this ; the mind seemed at a certain point to be
incapable of forming any views of the subject, and to act under
a diseased impulse that was beyond control. The radical change
of character and of motive, beginning at a certain point, leading
rapidly to ruin, pointed to a physical cause uninfluenced by any
moral state previous to this time."
The influence of traumatism is one of which the conse-
quences would seem not worthy of extended study ; and little as
has been done hitherto in this field of observation, there can be
no doubt that results already tend to show the success which
may attend its cultivation. As a means of assisting further
research, and to indicate the directions in which information
relating to the laws of inebriety are to be studied, Dr. Crother
formulates the following conclusions :
First. All cases of inebriety should be studied carefully to
ascertain not only the heredity, but the possible history of
traumatism, either psychical or physical. As in epilepsy scars
on the scalp may often furnish clear indications of the chain of
causes. Fevers, and any disease or events which have pro-
foundly influenced the organism and nervous system are always
prominent factors in the history.
286 COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS.
Second. Inebriety is a central disease of the nervous
ganglia, which may either follow a regular line of march
down to chronicity or death, or to be attended with uncertain
halts, long pauses, or rapid progress, from some unknown
causes; but, whatever its course may be, always following a
certain order and regularity, in the stages of degeneration, that
is seen and may in many be predicted.
Third. From a knowledge of the cases the varied means of
treatment can be applied which will be most effectual in
restoration. If the case is chronic and incurable such a study
will point out the best means to limit and control its progress
in the least harmful channels.
Fourth. Inebriety and its problems must be studied by
medical men above the superstitious theories of reformers and
clergymen, before we shall have anj positive facts upon which
to base accurate methods of treatment and cure.
Writing on " Inebriety and how to deal with it," in the
Quarterly Journal of Inebriety, Dr. J. C. Jackson indicates four
stages of progress through which every person must pass in
order to become a drunkard. These are :
1. Stimulation ;
2. Intoxication or blood-poisoning ;
3 Enervation or nervous prostration ;
4. Inebriety or drunkenness.
This division is justified by resort to physiological data, and
will probably not be objected to by those who stay to consider
the reasoning on which it is founded. Dr. Jackson asserts that
no man ever became a drunkard who was not in the habit or
practice of simulation ; who has not, in other words, by habitual
indulgence induced an unnatural and numerically increased
pulsation, this being the effect of some cause operating in the
nerve centres, and through them exciting the heart to increased
activity.
This thesis must be, at least, difficult to disprove, and equally
so that when the heart has been continuously subject to the
influence of any stimulant, the point which marks the first step
to drunkenness has been reached. In the words of Dr. Jackson,
the patient is " a person living above his organic or constitu-
tional power to live healthfully. If, then, he so excites himself
that his organic forces are compelled habitually to act beyond
their natural capacity, he has begun a course by which, if he
continues in it, he must die, either by accident or disease,
in spite of his constitutional ability to live, or he will die a
drunkard."
There is much to recommend the view expressed in this
Paper, and especially in respect to the inescapable influence
COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS. 287
exercised over the individual who once becomes thoroughly
accustomed to the artificial exaltation induced by stimulants
of whatever description. The confirmed drunkard, in effect,
enters on a course of existence which necessitates his living
beyond a natural rate, and the limits over which the force at his
command will suffice to carry him must mainly depend on the
individual characteristics which determine his powers of re-
sistance. Once, however, the stage described as enervation has
been reached possibilities of restoration must be few and far
between; whence it occurs, t herefore, few instances of reclamation
of drunkards can be recorded. Dr. Jackson thinks that a pro-
portion of one in ten is a very liberal allowance. More than
this are certainly not saved from the physical ruin which follows
in the wake of inebriates.
Management of American Asylums.
Readers of reports presented by American asylum superin-
tendents on the institutions under their care, must have been
struck by the oftentimes incongruous assemblage of informa-
tion and requests contained in these documents. Apparently,
also, the same reflection has occurred to a home observer of
the facts, for in a late number of the Journal of Nervous
and Mental Disease, Dr. C. L. Dana has fully discussed the
matter in an article on Asylum Reform. Judging from his
strictures Dr. Dana does not hold a very exalted notion of
the way in which the asylums are conducted, or of the
scientific work done in connection with them. He concludes a
striking Paper thus : " This absence of scientific work is not
always and entirely the superintendent's fault. Asylums are
poorly equipped; in some States it is worth his position for an
officer to ask the Legislature for a microscope or a laboratory.
But when we find one report used in the expounding of phreno-
logy, another in pleading eloquently for 20,000 raspberry
bushes, another which seems infused solely with the warm hope
that the Legislature will furnish a new boiler, another which
happily informs us of the agricultural antagonism between
Squashes and witch-grass, and a number of others which simply
contain the praise of the Lord in a quarter of a column?and
then the statistics,?when we read the not infrequent reports of
this kind, it is perhaps reasonable to enter a protest. It
seems but fair to expect that the reports should show that
their authors are not only good superintendents but earnest
and studious phvsicians. And such evidence I have not always
found."
288 COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS.
Voluntary Drunkards and Dipsomaniacs.
The distinction to be drawn between voluntary drunkards
and dipsomaniacs is one which frequently causes a puzzling
amount of indecision to even those most accustomed to consider
the question. The following rational remarks on it from the
Alienist and Neurologist will be read with interest:
" The difference between voluntary drunkards and dipsoma-
niacs consists not only in the inherited neuropathic condition
of the latter, but in prolonged vaso-motor disturbance, which
often persists after a spree in the latter, whereas in the former
the normal vaso-motor condition affecting the cerebral circula-
tion and cell activity is soon regained, enabling the one to
abandon drink, if he will, while the other is still irresolute and
unstable. Cardiac gangliopathic states, too, are often persistent,
in our experience of dipsomaniacs, so that an increased heart
activity and more than naturally rapid pulse are second nature
to these unfortunates.
" Dipsomaniacs are accordingly not safe against repeated
sprees, notwithstanding their promises of reform, for many
months after the liquor of the last indulgence is entirely out of
them, whereas the common drinking man, without the fatal
heritage, who indulges from appetite alone, may be, if the in-
centive to self-restraint be strong.
" It is therefore only folly to create and endow reformatory
hospitals for dipsomaniacs without legal provision for prolonged
detention which cannot be evaded--not less than a year in all
cases, often longer. The links of the chain of heredity are
generally too strongly forged to be broken so easily as some
imagine.
" It is an organic slavery that the State undertakes to free
these unfortunates from when it organises hospitals for inebri-
ates, and it should take care of the slave till the master
relinquishes his hold, and then guard the slave in his freedom
ever after, even though the right of habeas corpus be permitted
only such a conditional hold as will not re-enslave whom the
State proposes to make free, that he may enjoy the benefits of
true life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, and bless and
care for those whom he may be bound in law to care for and
support, but whom he does not, and cannot take care of and
maintain in his pathological thraldom."
The ' Non-restraint ' Lunatic System in America.
In a recent number of the Lancet, the question of non-
restraint, as followed out in America, is thus remarked on :?
COMMENTS OX CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS. 289
" It is amazing, as well as amusing, to read in a recent number
of the Boston Medical Journal an announcement to the effect
that the medical superintendent of an asylum numbering 800 (!)
inmates, i many violent and noisy, making them difficult to
control,' has dared to adopt the non-restraint system. Of course
it is only at one asylum that this temerity has been shown, and
even there the doctor stands on his reserved right to restrain
either by the usual devices or by the use of sedatives, if he
thinks it necessary. By-and-by, if this sort of thing goes on,
some one in connection with a public hospital will be making
the public hair stand on end, and at the same time earning for
himself eternal gratitude, by venturing to give the victim of a
formidable operation chloroform! Happily, however, it is only
in respect to the management of the insane America lags about
forty years behind the rest of the world, and is now just
beginning, in a very small and limited way, to perceive what
other peoples have long recognised - namely, that insanity is
not either a ' visitation' or a crime, but simply a disease, which
only needs to be treated on medical principles to be brought
within the pale of human influences, when its victims will be
found not less easily manageable than the sane."
Intea-cranial Disease and Choked Disc.
Dr. Edward Gr. Loring contributes to the June number of
the New York Medical Journal and Obstetrical Review an
article on the nervous connection between intra-cranial disease
and choked disc, the conclusions of which are: 1. That the vaso-
motor theory, as advanced by Benedikt, is not sufficient to
explain either the mode of transmission of the morbid irritation
within the head, or the resulting neuritis optica. 2. That the
irritation is conveyed, not by the isolated fibres of the sympa-
thetic system, as stated by Benedikt; but through the agency of
the trigeminus. 3. That choked disc or papillitis, in con-
nection with brain disease, is the expression of an irritation or
compression of certain intra-cranial fibres of the fifth pair
which preside over the blood supply of the disc and neighbour-
ing parts, and also maintain the healthy processes of waste and
repair of the tissues themselves. This being so, he adds, the
same analogies and distinctions between " irritation" and
" inflammation" can be made here as with sympathetic
ophthalmia, so that here, as well as there, the irritation may
exist as such for an indefinite time, or may so reduce the vitality
and resisting power of the tissue of the disc and surrounding
290 COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS.
parts as to develop gradually, or explode suddenly, into an actual
inflammation?that is, into a neuritis. The immediate and
exciting cause of this neuritis may then be either an external
one, such as exposure to cold or heat, over-exertion, either
mental or physical, or, indeed, too much exposure to light, the
effects of which, under the weakened condition of the organ,
may be looked upon as a " traumatism "; or the exciting cause
may be an internal one, such as some irritation from the con-
dition of the blood and circulating fluids, either chemical or
mechanical, either local or general, which, insufficient in
itself to produce any bad effect upon a normal disc, may yet
be just sufficient to produce a condition of inflammation in a
part that is weakened and irritable.
Allocejiria.
Brain contains a communication from Dr. Ferrier on a case
in his clinic which illustrates the condition named " allochiria,"
by Obersteiner. The distinguishing features of the disease are
a perversion of sensibility and erroneous reference of sensory
impressions to the corresponding part of the other side of the
body. In Dr. Ferrier's case the patient was a man, twenty-nine
years of age, admitted to King's College Hospital with history of
severe cranial inj ury, causing prolonged unconsciousness, followed
by motor disorder of a combined ataxic and liemiplegic character,
together with the temporary remarkable perversion of sensory
localisation. There was no ansesthesia, the slightest touch being
readily perceived, but unhesitatingly referred to the corre-
sponding point of the other side. In addition, the reflex actions
were also transposed in sensation, thus offering a most curious
combination of characters, on which speculation might be in-
dulged to an indefinite extent. The following extracts from Dr.
Ferrier's notes will be of interest in connection with the case.
" On admission.?Patientis a healthy-looking, well-nourished
man. Expression of face peculiar, eyes having a fixed stare
and ' far ' look ; power of convergence apparently entirely gone.
Cannot maintain equilibrium with the feet together, and
staggers from side to side when walking, the legs having
a tendency to cross one another. Left leg distinctly weaker
than the right limb, the left hand than the right. Facial
movement equal on both sides, but the tongue tends a little to
the right.
" Sensation.?Tactile sensibility is throughout normal as
regards delicacy and quickness of response, but there is a most
remarkable condition of allochiria, or localisation of impressions
on the wrong side, as well as a similar reversal of reflex response
COMMENTS OiN CONTEMPOKARY JOURNALS. 291
to tactile stimuli, affecting the legs from the groin downwards
and also the tongue, inside of the mouth, and the nostrils. A
touch on the right great toe was at once referred to the same
spot on the left and vice versa, a similar condition extending on
every point on both legs up to the groin. Above the groin
impressions were correctly localised whichever side was touched.
The conjunctiva} and both sides generally of the head and face
were similarly and normally responsive to stimidi. But a feather
or a spill of paper in one nostril immediately caused retraction
of the head, and lachrymation, the patient at the same time
rubbing the other nostril where the irritation was felt. The
same kind of results were obtained on experimenting with the
tongue and mucous membrane of the mouth, and this not only
as regards mere tactile sensibility, but in respect also of taste.
That the indications afforded by the patient might, without
doubt, be accepted as reliable, he was securely blindfolded
during the trials, his reference to the side on which he ex-
perienced the sensation being more than ever reversed, exactly
the opposite to that which was the seat of irritation. The most
remarkable point, however, was undoubtedly brought out in
connection with the reflex reaction. Then, tickling the sole of
one foot, caused retraction of the other, the foot actually tickled
remaining perfectly still; so also when one thigh was tickled
on its inner side the other was at once flexed; and when the sole
of one foot and the inside of the opposite thigh were simul-
taneously tickled, crossed reflex reaction of the foot and thigh
occurred.
Light was normal, the pupils reacted to luminous stimuli
in a regular manner, and the ophthalmoscope revealed nothing
unusual. Except absence of convergence for near objects, the
ocular movements were readily performed.
Hearing was defective in the right ear ; patellar reaction
was exaggerated especially on the left side.
The patient complained greatly of headache, especially in
the forehead and occiput, and when the latter region was per-
cussed, the pain was intensified, or if not present at the moment,
was at once excited.
Under treatment improvement in all the symptoms took
place, and after six months the man left the hospital, having
recovered so far that the allochiria was no longer present,
sensation being experienced and referred in a normal manner.
The left leg, however, continued to be feebler than the right,
and deafness persisted in the right ear. The face had lost its
peculiar startled expression and power of converging the eyes was
regained. _
Dr. Ferrier abstains from speculating on the possible patho-
PART II. VOL. VIII. NEW SERIES. X
202 COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS.
logical explanations of the signs observed in this interesting
case, and contents himself with simply recording the symptoms
and progress. It is quite possible that now the appearances
have been so faithfully and graphically described, other observers
may be fortunate enough to meet with similar instances of per-
verted sensibility, and add the results of their examination to
what is already known. Until a further stock of information
concerning this curious condition is found, it is probably best
that attempts to unfold the mystery surrounding it should be
let alone.
Habit.
W e are so accustomed to employ the term " habit " in a sense
that is seemingly justifiable, that a few sensible remarks on it
by Dr. William A. Hammond, in the American Journal of
Stimulants and Narcotics, are quite worthy of being reproduced.
Dr. Hammond concludes that "when a living being performs
an act under the operation of certain impressions which are
received, there is a tendency towards the performance of a similar
acf if like influences are brought to bear upon the organism.
" This disposition to repetition is not limited to physical
acts ; it prevails in regard to almost every function of the body
and mind, and forms often an important element in the promo-
tion of disease.
" Habit, therefore, is periodicity, and may be defined as the
disposition which the organism acquires from the frequent per-
formance of certain acts to repeat these acts till some more
powerful force intervenes.
" Again, it is well known that the impressions, or conse-
quences which result from the action of certain agents, become
less marked if the operation of the cause be repeated. Thus
the system becomes habituated to the action of alcohol, opium,
chloral, and many other substances, so that while a small quan-
tity will, in the first instance, produce the characteristic result,
the dose must gradually be made larger or be more frequently
repeated in order to be followed by a corresponding effect.
" The influence of habit over the ordinary operations of the
economy is plainly seen. The sensations of hunger and thirst
are experienced at stated periods of the day, because by frequently
eating or drinking at those times the system, as it were, expects
a repetition, and hence the appropriate sensation is experienced.
The votary of opium or chloral is subject to the same law, and
invariably feels the want of the customary sedative if its inges-
tion be delayed for even a short time.
" The oft-repeated impression has left its traces each time
until at last it assumes a local habitation and becomes per-
COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS. 293
manently fixed in the brain, not to be lost unless through some
more powerful influence acting in a similar manner to the first.
" Besides this, the various organs of the body also become
habituated to the effects of stimulants and sedatives, such as
alcohol, tobacco, opium, chloral, and the like, and are the seat
of various painful sensations if the supply be cut off.
" Relative to the propriety of stopping habits which are
injurious to the body or mind, there can be no doubt. To do so,
often involves the causation of much tempurary suffering, but
the object to be ultimately gained is of far greater importance,
and is well worth ail the pain and anguish that may have to be
endured."
Insanity in the United States.
In a late number of the Journal of Mental and Nervous
Diseases Dr. C. L. Dana gives the following statistics respect-
ing the insane population of the United States of America.
There were, in 1880, in round numbers, 8!),000 (to 96,000)
insane, which gives a ratio of 1-570 (1*520) of the population.
The census ratio in 1860 was 1*1,310; in 1870, 1*1,100; in
1875, 1*953. The population increased in the decade 1870 to
1880 about 26 per cent., while the insane population has appa-
rently increased over 100 per cent. As regards the distribu-
tion of insanity and its increase, the proportion of insane is
greatest in New England, where the ratio is 1 to 357. Here,
however, the rate of increase is becoming slower. In propor-
tionate number of insane, after the New England and Pacific
States, come the Middle States (1 to 446), then the Western
(1 to 570), and then the Southern (1 to 780). In 1881, 74
State and 14 large private asylums, with a capacity approxi-
mately for 31,900, but holding 39,145. At a very low estimate,
therefore, American asylums are overcrowded to the extent of
10,000 patients, while there are about 50,000 who are not in
anv asylums at all. The amount of capital invested in these
institutions is ?8,000,000, an average cost of over ?100,000. It
takes about ?1,600,000 a year to maintain them, or ?16,400
for each institution, not including interest. Adding interest
the total annual expenditure for the care of the insane amounts
to ?2,400,000. The annual cost per patient has been variously
estimated at from ?33 to ?63.
Guiteau's Brain.
Following the execution of the late President Garfield's
assassin a careful examination of the criminal's brain was made,
X 'I
294 COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS.
and the subjoined report was presented on the subject to the
New York Medical Record by Drs, W. J. Morton and C. L.
Dana.
Pieces of brain from the left frontal lobe, the right central
convolution, the cerebellum, and a piece of the spinal cord just
below the medulla were obtained about five hours after death,
and three and a half after the opening of the cranium. These
pieces were placed in seventy per cent, alcohol for twenty-four
hours, then in absolute alcohol until sufficiently hard to cut.
Over one hundred sections were made and stained in various
fluids, chiefly in Bismarck brown, carmine, and hematoxylin.
Sections were also stained in osmic acid, analine blue, Lugol's
solution, vesuvin, &c. Other sections were soaked in ether, and
in concentrated acetic acid.
These various methods were employed chiefly in order to
determine positively the nature of certain peculiar bodies seen
under the microscope. They were quite numerous, but were
mostly in the white matter. They were generally round in
shape, but sometimes appeared in agglutinated masses. They
were somewhat translucent, and measured from yJ-g- to inch
in diameter. Some, perhaps, were smaller. They had the
appearance of not being incorporated in the brain-tissue itself.
They stained with Bismarck brown, vesuvin, and gave a rose-
red colour with analine blue?this being usually considered a
reliable test for amyloid matter. But they were not stained
with iodine, even after soaking sections twenty-four hours in
water to remove the alcohol. They were not dissolved by soak-
ing sections half an hour in ether, and they were not stained by
osmic acid. Hence, they were apparently not fat. They were
not dissolved in, but were brought out strongly by soaking
sections in strong acetic acid, a substance which dissolves
colloid matter.
These bodies were found in sections from the frontal lobes,
central convolutions, and spinal cord. We saw none in the
cerebellum; but only a few sections were made of this part.
We regard them as post-mortem products. One of the writers
lias sections from the spinal cord of a man who died from teta-
nus which show apparently similar bodies. Certain writers on
cerebral pathology have described similar bodies as being
" proteinaceous" and as either post-mortem or the result of
chronic brain disease. The analine reaction was very striking,
and might perhaps justify an opinion that they are amyloid
bodies, though they gave no iodine reaction.
The writers observed occasional thickened blood-vessels in
the cortex. No other change of interest was noted. The peri-
vascular spaces, the cells, the nuclei, all presented no abnormali-
COMMENTS OX CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS. 295
ties which we could detect. There were no aneurisms, and no
pigmentation. The large motor-cells from the right central
convolutions (one of which was small) were abundantly present,
and were normal in appearance.
A Proof of Localisation in Practice.
An interesting case tending to illustrate the doctrine of
localisation, is communicated to the June number of the
Archives of Medicine, by Dr. Wm. S. Cheeseman. The
patient was a woman, aged 42, with no history of injury
or syphilis, but she had long been subject to headache. In
January last she began to lose power over her right hand
and arm, and on February 18th completely lost the use of
both hand and arm, but continued to perform her domestic
duties. On February 21st she attended a prayer meeting,
and was there seized with a convulsion. On recovering con-
sciousness she was hemiplegic on the right side. February
22nd she was admitted into hospital with right hemiplegia and
dysphasia, though the mental faculties seemed unimpaired.
Her condition so far improved that the paralysis of the lower
limb became paresis, while that of the face disappeared. More
or less contraction of hand and arm supervened, and she gradu-
ally became duller, had involuntary evacuations, vomited con-
siderably, had several convulsions, and finally died in coma on
April 11th, 1882. No ophthalmoscopic examination was made.
Autopsy two and a half hours after death. Nothing abnormal
in organs of chest or abdomen?skull, meninges and surface of
brain as usual. After removing the brain a bulging was noted
at the top of the left ascending frontal convolution, the
ascending parietal convolution being pushed backward to make
room for it. To the touch this was very soft. A longitudinal
section through it exposed a rounded mass as large as an English
walnut, reddish brown in colour, soft and friable, the cortex
covering it being swollen and gelatinous. The section also
revealed in the white substance beneath, and behind the mass a
second of the same size, its lower border nearly reaching the
roof of the left lateral ventricle. These were separated by a
narrow partition of compromised white substance. The right
hemisphere was normal. A microscopic examination of the
specimens showed, in the opinion of Prof. W. Welsh, that it
consisted of nerve-cell gliomata.
Stammering.
Professor Delver gives the following rules for the observance
of stammerers, in the Cincinnati Lancet and Clinic.
296 COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS.
1. Serious and persevering practice, until it becomes a
settled habit.
2. Before speaking to take a full and quiet breath and to
renew the respiration according to the sense of the phrase, and
never to speak when the air is exhausted.
3. Put into practice the observations made relative to the
movements of the lips and tongue.
4. Preserve a good syllabation. This is easily hidden by the
intonations and inflexions of the voice.
5. Speak with assurance, watch over the emission of words,
exercise full control, and the more embarrassed seek the more to
speak slowly, coolly, and deliberately.
6. Inspiration, syllabation, and tranquillity include every-
thing, and they are equally indispensable.
7. Take advantage of all opportunities to speak slowly, par-
ticularly when in the presence of family or friends.
Electro-Therapeutics.
Dr. Julius Port severely condemns the ignorance which
concludes that no special education or capacity is necessary to
enable a skilful application of electricity to be made for
therapeutic purposes, and, in an article contributed to the
Detroit Lancet, he thus writes on the subject:?
"The prevailing impression that it requires no brains to
apply electricity is the curse of electro-therapeutics. Any
idiot, or mere infant, can hold two sponges to the body while
a current is passing; and if that were all of electricity in medi-
cine, the science of that department would be very largely
moonshine. A dose of opium or quinine any fool can give or
take, but to know when to use these drugs, how to use them,
when not to use them, requires oftentimes our best skill and
judgment. To know the diagnosis and pathology of subtle and
obscure diseases ; what form of application each disease requires ;
to know when to use localised faradisation ; when localised gal-
vanisation ; when general faradisation; when central galvanisa-
tion ; when electrolysis, and when galvano-cautery; and how
and when to combine two or more of these methods ; and how
to change them to vary with changes in the condition of the
patient; how to modify the strength and current according to
the wants of the case?all this knowledge only comes from hard
study and long experience. When we consider that there are many
forms of electricity, each adapted to particular cases, and that
each one of these requires long and faithful study to master details,
we can, in a measure, appreciate the magnitude of the science
of electro-therapeutics. As a rule, a patient never receives any
COMMENTS OX CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS. 297
permanent benefit from the application of electricity, except
when applied by a competent electro-therapeutist. Left to the
public, this branch of science would pass out of memory. Left
to the charlatan, it would do more injury than could be remedied
by a host of reputable physicians. A physician who speaks
lightly of electricity only shows Lis ignorance, and lends his
assistance to force this valuable agent into the realm of
quackery.
" I am more than convinced that it requires quite as much
skill and experience, and quite as good judgment to become an
accomplished electro-therapeutist, as it does to become an ac-
complished surgeon and physician. Electricity in the hands
of an incompetent person is a dangerous remedy; in competent
hands it is a powerful agent for good. Indiscriminately used
it falls into bad repute: if the cases are carefully selected,
and the remedy used in an intelligent manner, we may reason-
ably expect good results. It is somewhat humiliating to
be obliged to acknowledge that very few physicians give the
therapeutics of electricity any attention. Magnetism, galvani-
sation, and faradisation are alike to them. If asked to define
or explain something of its principles, they reply in so vague
and unsatisfactory a manner that the inquirer is satisfied at
once that they are treading on unknown territory. As phy-
sicians, if we wish to benefit the public, it becomes our duty to
thoroughly investigate and understand the nature of any remedy
which is entitled to consideration. It behoves us to inquire
into any plan of treatment which promises to benefit a sick
person. When we meet with visionary people, demoralised on
medical topics, who know, in their own minds, more of medi-
cines and the physiological effects of remedies than a studious,
well-informed physician could expect to acquire in a lifelong
experience; when we meet with knowing people, who are
sceptical as to remedies and physicians, who, to use a hackneyed
expression, are crank on theories which have no foundation in
fact, who are practically a neighbourhood nuisance and danger-
ous to be at large; if they are allowed to peddle their crack-
brain views in the community, it is enough to disgust any man.
Such people exist in every community, and it becomes the first
duty of the physician to warn the public, and, lest it be deceived
and suffer from the meddlesome misrepresentations of these
beings, to give them a wide berth. No person would be such a
fool as to attempt to run a locomotive without properly under-
standing the machinery and the power which drives it; but
every day we meet with people who assume to know more of the
human mechanism than a medical man who has devoted his
life to the study. In the first instance they would expect to
298 COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS.
be blown up, and thus end their brilliant career; in the second
case, if their meddlesome interference causes the death of a
patient, they can lay the blame on the doctor, and this bright
particular neighbourhood adviser would be spared to keep up
his or her devilish perturbations. These things are not ima-
ginary, they are constantly before us; and if, as physicians, we
can be the means of warning the public against, some of these
impostors, medical and social, whom we meet almost every day,
our work will be well done."
Tabes Dorsalis and Patellar Reflex.
The existence of patellar reflexes in patients affected with
locomotor ataxy is of such rare occurrence that any authenti-
cated instance is well worthy of notice and preservation in our
records. A case of the kind is mentioned in the New York
Medical Record, as having been observed by Dr. James Leslie,
of Hamilton, Canada, in a shoemaker, aged forty-five years.
The symptoms of inco-ordination without loss of muscular
power were well marked. There were no lightning-like pains,
however, and the tendon-reflex at the knee was very distinct,
The patient had not had syphilis. He received the most
benefit from daily forcible flexion of the thighs upon the
abdomen.
Electrical Batus,
The misuse of electricity by quacks, who subvert its employ-
ment in baths to purposes of pecuniary gain, and without any
desire to make it of scientific utility, has been frequently com-
plained of by those who have been convinced of the real thera-
peutic efficacy of electric applications in cases of disease. The
question appears to have excited a good deal of attention
recently in American medical circles, and the editor of the
New York Record avers that from the testimony given it
cannot be doubted that the electrical bath deserves a place in
therapeutics, and that it should not be relegated so entirely to
charlatans as heretofore. There are a number of prosperous
quacks in New York who live in fine style upon the profits of
electrical baths alone, using them largely in rheumatic and
nervous diseases.
The administration of electricity by baths is not difficult.
An ordinary bath-tub has often been used. It is better, how
ever, that the tub be of some non-conducting material like
wood. A double-cell faradic battery will furnish quite enough
electricity. The electrodes should be large, made of metal or
carbon, and should dip several inches into the water. The
patient lies in the tub so that neither electrode touches him,
COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS. 299
The current is passed generally from one shoulder to the
opposite foot. It may, however, be localised. The general
effect of the current can be strengthened by adding salt, soda,
or an acid to the water. The baths are generally given for from
ten to twenty minutes, and repeated alternate days.
The claim for the electrical bath is that it is the best way to
apply general faradisation. It is certain that by the influence
of the warm water the skin is made a better conductor. It is
well known that the dry skin opposes immense resistance to
electrical currents, and that it is largely by virtue of its pores
that electricity passes through to a sensible extent. The warm
bath moistens the skin, dilates its ducts, stimulating at the
same time the cutaneous vessels and glands. The conditions
are thus favourable for the so-called catalytic actions of the
electrical current.
The objection occasionally made that water is a poor cor-
ductor, and hence not suitable for electrical action, is quite
trivial. The resistance of pure water as compared with that of
mercury is about 120,000,000 to 1 ; that of salt water, how-
ever, is better by only five or ten millions, and the resistance of
salt water is nearly the same as that of the moist tissues. In
other words, water is a vastly better conductor than the skin
under ordinary conditions.
There is no reason a priori, therefore, why the electrical
bath should not be useful, and we have referred to the matter at
some length because it is quite possible for the general prac-
titioner to prescribe and use it as well as the specialist.
Its real value, however, has of course to be tested by clinical
experience. Very many practitioners have used it success-
fully in mercurial and alcoholic tremor, acute and chronic
rheumatism, obstinate sciatica, neurasthenia, &c. Weisflog has
used local electrical baths in rheumatism with good results.
What is needed, however, is further careful clinical records,
whicli shall tell the failures as well as successes from this treat-
ment. The former, we fear, as in electro-therapeutics generally,
will not he rare.
Alcohol and Disease.
At the last meeting of the British Medical Association, Dr.
Norman Kerr communicated a valuably suggestive paper on
the public medicine aspect of the alcohol question, in which he
endeavoured to trace the amount of sickness and death caused
by alcohol. Some diseases, he said, were caused by alcohol
alone, as delirium tremens, dipsomania, and alcohol poisoning,
acute and chronic. Some, which arose from other causes, some-
300 COMMENTS OX COMTEMPORARY JOURNALS.
times were caused by alcohol directly, as alcoholic phthisis,
gout, and paraplegia. Alcohol might also be a main contri-
butory factor, as in fatal frostbite and sunstroke after drinking.
The proportion of sickness and death from alcohol had been
shown in the Government returns of the Indian army for 1849.
The mortality of the temperate was double and that of the
intemperate quadruple that of the total abstainers. The ab-
staining deaths were 11*1 per 1,000; the temperate 23*1 ; and
the intemperate 44*5. The admissions of the abstainers were
only 10*7 per 1,000 less than those of the temperate, showing
that the diseases of the former took a milder form. Insurance
companies were so satisfied of the superior healthfulness of
the abstinent, that one had paid the abstainers insured 23 per
cent, additional bonus, and another offered an extra bonus of
20 per cent. The influence of alcohol on the death-rate was
well illustrated in the Registrar-General's report for 1880,
from which it could be seen that in every class except one
the mortality had steadily diminished ; but in Class III. the
mortality had as steadily increased. In this class the principal
increase had been in deaths from diseases of the brain and
nervous system, of the organs of circulation, of the respiratory
organs, of the liver, and of the kidneys. These were precisely
the organs most apt to be seriously affected by indulgence
in alcohol. Di. Kerr had estimated the annual deaths from
personal intemperance in the United Kingdom at 40,500.
Others made it larger. The indirect fatality by violence,
disease, poverty, &c., arising from the intemperance of others,
would probably raise the number to 120,000 or 200,000. For
the cure of dipsomania, total abstinence was indispensable.
Heredity was the chief predisposing cause. The marked in-
crease in the variety and consumption of unintoxicating beve-
rages was an aspect of the question which called for the con-
sideration of students of public health, as an increased use of
non-intoxicants was a favourable omen of the future improved
sobriety and consequent health of the community.
Alcoholic Epilepsy.
According to the Quarterly Journal of Inebriety, the term
alcoholic epilepsy is not clinically correct. Many of these
cases are only moderate alcoholics, and the epileptic symptoms
cannot be attributed to this drug. The alcohol merely
explodes a degeneracy which comes from other causes. Cerebral
traumatism in its widest sense often produces inebriety, which
takes on epileptic symptoms. Often epilepsy is ushered in by
excess in the use of alcohol. Here epilepsy is the disease, and
the drink-craving only a symptom. To t)e alcoholic epilepsy
COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS. 301
the case must be shown to spring directly from excessive use of
alcohol. The condition known as alcoholism is the chronic
stage of inebriety. The disease is inebriety with epileptic
symptoms. Some cases of inebriety exhibit epileptic symptoms
with every toxic effect of alcohol. Others never develop these
symptoms through many years of excess. The epileptic
symptoms are due to other conditions than that produced by
alcohol. Alcoholic epilepsy is only the name of a condition of
inebriety, and not the name of a distinct disease.
Insanity of Inebriety.
Writing under this head in the Quarterly Journal of Inebriety,
Dr. W. Nasse quotes two very interesting cases under treatment
in the asylum over which he has charge. The symptoms recog-
nised in them, and in fifty other cases admitted during a period
of two years, and arising from abuse of alcohol, are classed by
Dr. Nasse, after Marcell, as hallucinations and delirious con-
ceptions, totally ignoring all regard for the physical and moral
welfare of themselves and others. No special incoherence of
ideas is noticed, memory and power of concentration seem
natural, also the will appears strong. A mania for suicide,
accompanied with jealousy, and occasionally febrile conditions,
are the most prominent symptoms in these cases. Insomnia is
often present, also delirium of agitation, more or less inter-
mittent. This form of insanity resembles Lipomania, described
by Calmoil. Not unfrequently hallucinations of a painful
character precede the suicidal mania; fear, restlessness, anxiety,
jealousy, hatred against their best friends and surroundings,
are often the prominent prodromic signs. Later, when the
disease has reached its chronic state, distortions of the muscles
of the face and tongue, amesthesia of the extremities, dis-
turbances of the digestion, are common. Such are some of
the most significant symptoms of this form of inebriety. In
one hundred and sixty cases admitted in the hospital at Sigiburn
during two years, there were fifty cases of this form of insanity.
The almost exclusive cause was alcohol. The following cases
are given as illustrating this form of disease better than any
description of symptoms :?
CASE I.
H. F., age 44, farmer. No hereditary predisposition to
disease. Of medium intelligence; proud, self-conceited in
manner, and always healthy and rugged. Started in business
and failed a few years after; then was obliged to work hard to
support his family. About this time he began to drink sud-
302 COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS.
denly to great excess, and later drank less, and continued for
six years to alternate between short periods of excessive drink-
ing, with long intervals of moderate indulgence. Never had
delirium tremens. After an attack of severe drinking he was
prostrated in bed with a low form of fever, which continued many
days. Began then to have suspicions that his wife was plotting
to kill him. Heard noises at night, such as voices, threats,
slanders; wanted to die; had suicidal manias, muscular trem-
blings, and sleeplessness. This continued for some months
without change, then he was brought to an asylum. His
appearance was as follows : thin in person, face red, arteries
rigid, pupil of the right eye larger than the left, left part of
the face flabby, shivering of the facial muscles when talking,
pushes the tongue straight out, and complains of heaviness in
the forehead, also interrupted sleep. Protests against staying
in the asylum, says he is not sick, complains of persecution,
which he dates back to his youth, hears voices which threaten
him, saying that he is to be shot, that the ball is already on
its way, hears his wife's voice at the door telling him that he
must die, acknowledging that his hearing is more acute in
bed. His wife shouts to him through the ke)7hole that he is
a horse, and immediately he is made miserable by equine
odours. He hears other voices calling him a dog, and begs the
nurse to open the window so that he can get rid of the canine
odour. He hears the voice of Grod, and has the taste of the
Host in his mouth. From these and other voices he knows
what is going on, and what will happen in the future. All his
friends and relatives have conspired against him, and daily
persecute him in every way. He is constantly seeking methods
to take his own life, and escape from these afflictions. Gene-
rally he is elated and egotistical, also quite happy at times.
Keeps himself separate from others. During the thirteen
months' residence in the asylum he steadily improved in
physical health, but the old delusions remained. He was at
length discharged as incurable.
CASE II.
A baker, age 45. Both parents insane in youth and early
manhood ; was very irritable and unpleasant in his manners, of
average intelligence and industry. Married, and has nine chil-
dren. He is very poor. Drank suddenly and to great excess
for several weeks, ending in an acute attack of delirium tremens.
He did not recover from this for a long time. He then com-
plained of persecution, sleeplessness, hears voices threatening
him, wishes to escape by taking his life. Left part of his face
COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS. H03
flabby, has a shivering of the facial muscles, sleeps badly, is
elated and extremely irritable, and suspicious of every one.
Would write kind letters to his wife in the moments of his
greatest suspicion. Delirium of grandeur would alternate with
those of persecution. After a few months' residence in the
asylum these symptoms disappeared ; his health became better,
so he was discharged. A year later he was readmitted to the
asylum as a chronic incurable. Some of the points of difference
between these cases (which are noted as Lipomanias and deli-
rium tremens) may be noted thus :?In delirium tremens the
hallucination is mostly of the eyes, in the other it is of the ear.
The feeling and condition of the organs are changed in Lipo-
mania, and sensations of heat and burning are present. The
sense of smell i^ affected, and the taste also. Many symptoms
of paralysis, which are commonly seen in alcoholism, may be
present, such as shaking of the lips, tongue, and facial muscles,
difficulty in talking, formication, also anaesthesia, motor dis-
turbances, and obscure psychical symptoms. These symptoms
are more or less unequally distributed through, and are rarely
seen in cases of delirium tremens. Inequality of the pupils is
also prominent. Suicidal mania is always present.
Cardiac Symptoms or Chorea.
Dr. 0. Sturges {Brain, July 1881) summarises the several
factors of the heart symptoms thus:?1. In the course of the
chorea of childhood the heart's action is apt to become irregular
or uneven, and its first sound to be followed by apex-murmur,
which is variable in pitch, influenced by posture, seldom audible
in the axilla or at the angle of the scapula, and which disappears
along with or shortly after the chorea, the heart and the circula-
tion suffering no injury. 2. This liability on the part of the
heart to what, from its signs, would seem to be a functional
disturbance, is independent of the violence or method of the
chorea, but dependent upon the age of the patient, the younger
children being most, and the elder least, liable ; while beyond
childhood there is little, if any, liability of the kind. 3. These
heart signs of chorea?acute rheumatism being excluded?give
rise, as a general rule, to no symptoms whatever affecting the
health or comfort of the child. They make no apparent differ-
ence to the prospects of recovery, or to the structural integrity
of the heart. Nevertheless, choreic children having this murmur
and happening to die either with, or shortly after recovery from
the chorea, very commonly exhibit a beading of recent lymph
on the mitral valves. Such, he says, are the chief statements
which statistics seem to warrant. To these he adds another.
304 COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS.
which, so far as he knows, has never been statistically recorded,
but which no one will gainsay. It is, indeed, the most constant
of all the heart symptoms of chorea, and met with at a later
age than the rest. He refers to the acceleration of the heart and
pulse.
Ligature of the Vertebral Arteries for Epilepsy.
The treatment of epilepsy by means of ligaturing the vertebral
arteries, introduced by Dr. William Alexander, of Liverpool,
has been followed up by its author in numerous cases since the
first publication of his papers on the subject. In a late number
of Brain he gives the history of all the patients who could be
found subsequently to leaving his care after recovery from the
operation to which they had been submitted at his hands ; and
several additional instances are recorded. Eespecting the utility
of the operation, Dr. Alexander remarks that in twenty-one
cases referred to in his paper, three have been quite well for
nearly a year. Nine others have been free from fits, and for
such a space of time that it may be said a cure has resulted or
is likely to result; and eight have improved in so many
respects, or are improving so steadily, that the operation would
be justifiable were no better results ever obtained. The case of
one patient, who died in a fit two months after his discharge
from hospital, is regarded as an accident such as occasionally
occurs in all epileptic establishments. The state of his kidneys
was so surprising as to lead Dr. Alexander to examine the urine
in all cases before operating. He adds that the diminution of
the fits after operation makes him doubt if the renal disease had
any influence on their production. Dr. Alexander then con-
tinues, " t now think that ligature of the external arteries
ought to take its place as a recognised operation for the cure of
epilepsy, when other means, such as the removal of peripheral
causes of irritation, and the soothing of irritated nerve-centres
by drugs have failed.
" The surgical difficulties of the operation can easily be
overcome by practice. My method of operation does not in-
volve any important structures. The danger to the patient's
life is very small; and should the operation fail to relieve the
fits, the patient is in no respect worse off than before. No
instance of any deformity or disability on the part of the
patient has, as yet, been noticed by me, or reported to me by
anyone.
" To afford reasonable hopes of success the epilepsy must not
be allowed to become too chronic. It should, therefore, be
performed as soon as it becomes evident that drugs have no
COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS. 305
curative effect, but that they only diminish the fits by tempo-
rarily paralysing the nerve-centres. In some of the very chronic
cases improvement has resulted, and I am not yet prepared to
say how far that improvement may progress, or how far it may
yet retrogress.
" Before performing the operation, every external irritating
cause should be, as far as possible, removed. This cannot
always be done. Nor is it necessary, provided it be not done,
that its nature or severity is the sole cause of the epilepsy.
When the sensibility of the epileptic nerve centre or centres is
reduced, that cause will have no more effect in producing fits
than it has in any other healthy, non-epileptic individual.
" Where the exciting causes of epilepsy are cerebral, and
are accompanied by or alternating with uncontrollable anger or
maniacal excitement, the effects of operation are not so appa-
rent or so permanent. In two cases in which imperfect success
was attained, the cause to which it was due was probably
cerebral excitement; and the same cause is apprehended to
produce a similar want of success in another case. The exciting
causes in those instances are so powerful and so uncontrollable
that the stimulation of the epileptic centres soon restores the
blood supply, on the principle that ubi stimulus ibi flux"
In old cases of chronic epilepsy the operation mitigates the
disease, and may, Dr. Alexander thinks, ultimately cure the
fits. In one case where power was restored to a paralysed arm,
the effect upon the cord must have been decided, and was
unmistakable.
Inspecting the explanation to be given of the effect
of the operation, Dr. Alexander maintains a cautious reserve.
He suggests that the epileptic centres may be rendered hyper-
sensitive through some powerful shock. The circulation is in
many cases restored to the normal, and hyper-excitability is
shown by only one fit or a series of fits. In other cases the
hyper-sensibility exists, but only produces epileptic attacks in
consequence of peripheral excitement caused by worms, gastric
or sexual disturbances, or of the cerebral irritation produced
by anger. That we can influence for good the nutrition of the
medulla, and of the upper, or even of the lower spinal cord, by
ligature of the vertebral centres, Dr. Alexander has incontestably
proved. Latterly, also, he has ligatured both arteries in all
cases, that the greatest possible effect may ensue. The risk, he
declares, is no greater, but experience has demonstrated that the
effect is both greater and more permanent.
