Note on the Essential Psychic Signs of General Functional Neuratrophia or Neurasthenia
=======================================================================================

181vArt. II.?*
By C. H. HUGHES, M.D. St. Louis.
<e Tiie subject of latent and unrecognised morbid mind," said
Forbes Winslow in his classical and unequalled treatise on
Obscure Diseases of the Brain and Mind, " is yet in its infancy."
Much that -was unknown to the profession before this great
observer penetrated the then unexplored wilderness of obscure
cerebro-mental pathology, and led others to the later discovery
of new truth, still remained undiscovered up to the time of his
death. Much has since become familiar ground, but more yet
remains to be brought to light, both ?within and external to the
brain, in connection with the nervous system and related mind.
Among the subjects of which we have of late years learned
much, and of which we are destined to yet learn more, is that
of general functional neuratropliia or neurasthenia, for which
we are so much indebted to Van Deusen, a Michigan insane
asylum superintendent, who, in 1867, first emphatically dif-
ferentiated it in this country as a distinct form of disease.
The Kalamazoo Hospital superintendent had, up to that
time, studied and described it as " a form of nervous exhaustion
culminating in insanity," its usual ending when not arrested in
its course by fortuitous circumstances in the life and surround-
ings of the patient, or successful treatment.
Since Van Deusen's concise pioneer description, the contribu-
tions of Beard, Ball and Benedikt, Cordes, Erb, Growers, Jewell,
and the present writer have appeared, until the few sentences of
the past having been extended to pages and pages have been
enlarged to volumes.
But it is still possible to more briefly describe its distin-
guishing features than has yet been done, so that it may be
even more generally recognised. This brief description is pos-
sible through its characteristic psychic symptoms, some of which
are never absent when the disease is present. We draw the
picture solely from our personal observation of the disorder.
Neurasthenia, differentiated from its complications, antece-
* Read before the Missouri State Medical Association, at H.iruiibal, Mo.,
May 18, 1882.
o 2
182 NOTE ON THE ESSENTIAL PSYCHIC SIGNS OF GENERAL
dents, and gravest sequences, is a more or less general failure of
the normal nutrition appropriatiug power in the higher nerve
centres, especially the psychical, leading to consequences short
of appreciable structural change?a pure neuratrophia which is
only functional in its effects and confined, in expression, to an
altered and lowered functionation in the nervous system itself.
The neuratrophia here is solely functional, not at all structural,
so far as can be sensibly appreciated, whatever structural change
may be conceded in neurasthenia being merely conjectural and
undemonstrable, except through theoretical deduction. Thus
we should restrict and circumscribe the term neurasthenia, were
we to use the term at all, but we prefer in its stead the more
definite term, functional neuratrophia.
General functional neuratrophia (if you do not cavil at the
term we offer), is a state of nerve starvation due to causes inhe-
rent in the nervous system itself, having its appropriate sym-
ptomatic expression in nervous exhaustion and its immediate
sequences, the chief and most significant of which are psychical.
The physical symptoms, however, are not to be ignored, though
we do not intend to here discuss them. The general tired
feeling and sensation of inadequacy to the demands of duty in
the presence of some accustomed and easily performed mental
work, and the quick break-down which follows the attempt,
even though not forewarned by a sense of insufficiency and
weariness, are significant.
The transitory localisations of symptoms which appear in the
progress of general neurasthenia, have led to such distinctive
differentiations as cerebrasthenia and myalasthenia, according
as the symptoms appear most prominently in the head or spine,
and the term gangliasthenia has been proposed for ganglionic neu-
ratrophia and, consequently, debility; but whether the heart,
or the cord, or the brain functionate abnormally at different
times, the brain always displays, early in the progress of this
disease, evidence of the defective nutrition, and the failure is
markedly in the vaso-motor centres, which, being inadequately
nourished, permit of secondary morbid vascular states, which
are often mistaken for the primary disease.
Neuratrophia is primary when a precedent antemia is not
the cause; secondary and symptomatic itself, where blood
defects induce it, but then not strictly entitled to be called
neuratrophia.
General functional neuratrophia being, as we have said, so
seldom entirely dissevered from cerebral debility from atrophic
causes, that the psychic symptoms contribute the most important,
as they make the distinguishing feature, in its symptomatology,
the latter are the special evidences by which we may often dif-
FUNCTIONAL NEURATROPHIA OR NEURASTHENIA. 183
ferentiate from graver cerebrospinal and sympathetic system
disorders, and need only now claim our attention.
The panophobia, of Esquirol; the pathophobia or hypochon-
driasis, of the old writers ; the toxiphobia, of old alienists ; and
Hammond's synonym mysophobia (the gravest of neurasthenic
psychic symptoms, by the way); the claustraphobia, of Ball;
and its antipodal agoraphobia, of Maschede ; the monophobia,
panophobia, phobophobia, astraphobia, anthropophobia, and
topophobia of Beard; the gynephobia, of Spitzka; the sidero-
mophobia, of Eigler; the agoraphobia, of Westphal; with
Rosenthal's synonym of platzangst, and Benedict's similar
platzscliwindel; the sypholophobia; hydrophobia (dread of
large bodies of water, a natural dread in horses); thanatophobia
or necrophobia and necropalophobia (fear of death and grave
yards); and the numberless other fears, needless here to name,
not natural to certain persons, but which come upon them when
neuratrophic ill-health overtakes them, are expressions of a
certain psychical change, not at all limited by the special terms
thus far coined to express them?not to be limited either by the
many words likely to be constructed from Greek, Latin, or
Saxon languages by expert philologists amongst us.
It would be an almost endless task to enumerate the many
morbid fears of the neuratrophic. Their name is legion to a
mind fertile in verbal coinage, and some are even unnameable.
For example, such singular morbid fear as that which takes
possession of a naturally fearless man at the approach of a
familiar face, and causes him to go a way and hide himself, as
happened lately with one of my patients; such unfamiliar fear
to a naturally brave man, of taking once delightful journeys,
without rational cause for the newly awakened fear, save only in
the state of the nervous system. The unusual fear and inde-
cision which sometimes seizes once bold men without cause
external to themselves, and partly paralyses their psychic
centres in the midst of " enterprises of great pith and moment,"
which, in their best estate they would, without hesitancy, have
carried to successful issue, delighting in encountering and over-
coming the real obstacles which their present feeble brains build
in fancy too high to overcome. This is debility of brain, and
the fears, forebodings of evil and morbid unnatural dreads
of adverse consequences of ordinary mental movements are its
characteristics, and associated with these are the timidity and
irresolution or transitory, fleeting, or spasmodic decision supple-
menting the former natural firmness of mind, apparent when
the brain was strong.
The mental substratum underlying these unaccustomed
morbid fears and dreads, and morbidly coloured perceptions,
"184 NOTE OF THE ESSENTIAL PSYCHIC SIGNS OF GENERAL
conceptions, and misconceptions, is timidity or irresolution
and irritability of manner and speech not natural to the
person, and this state of morbid feeling has not been reasonably
acquired by any rational experience in the history of the
person * A change less marked, but none the less real than that
which takes place in insanity, has come over the natural mental
character of the victim of general functional neuratrophia.
This characteristic change in his manner of thought, feeling or
movement is noted by his friends, in marked cases, as well by
his physician. A degree of mental and nervous instability and
irritability accompanies this timidity, and is the essential basis
of the morbid fears the victim of functional neuratrophia feels.
He weeps more easily and sleeps more difficultly than he used
to. Nerve instability, mental timidity, dread and fear and
easily hurt feelings, and later on, illusion and hallucination.
Later still, delusions obtrude, when insanity confronts us, of
which general functional neuratrophia, with special cerebras-
thenic expression, is a most frequent precursor in many organ-
isms. But timidity underlies the morbid fears, as, later on, the
hallucinations underlie the culminating delusions.
This fact has not been noted by others, and it is the most
important fact to the general practitioner, for the initial stage
of unnatural timidity and irresolution, which the family
physician may discover if he looks for it, is the time when the
impending calamity may be averted, by counselling the patient
to promptly suspend business, and seek relief and recuperation
in restorative medicine, and rest from mental strain through
temporary change and recreation.
Insanity is closely applied to neuratrophia, and is its fre-
quent sequence as Van Deusen wrote. The morbid fears of the
neurasthenic are but the shadows of graver coming mental
events cast before. Often the advanced lunatic has no more of
delusion than the trepidation and fear in their various forms,
somewhat aggravated, of the neurasthenic. As neurasthenia
frequently advances to insanity, so positive and well defined
insanity sometimes recedes to simple neurasthenia.
Esquirol has thus painted some of the advanced neurasthenic
denizens of Salpetriere and Charenton?" Certain persons who
suffer from panophobia are afraid at the approach of night and
darkness " {Mai. Merit, p. 216). " Lypemaniacs dread obscurity,
solitude, insomnia, the terrors of sleep; fear, terror, jealousy,
* Some men are naturally superstitious and fearful of evil happenings. Some
fear to travel on steamboats, some on ears, or to ascend heights, and some by
reason of past experiences have special cause for certain fears. But the fear of
the neuratrophic is causeless and unnatural to him and preceded by an unaccus-
tomed irresolution and timidity.
FUNCTIONAL NEURATUOP1IIA Oil NEURASTHENIA. 185
and hallucinations keep them awake." " I once bad in charge,"
said he, " a lady whom the slightest noise filled with terror,
especially during the obscurity of the night. The steps of a
person walking lightly caused her to shudder, and the wind
caused her to tremble. The noise which she herself made while
in bed frightened her and obliged her to utter cries of terror. I
enabled this panophobist to sleep at night by keeping a light
in her chamber, and placing a woman with her who watched
during the whole night." (lb. p. 116).
How like a phase of neurasthenia ie this, and what is mania,
often, but intensified, aggravated, cerebral neurasthenia?ex-
haustion of the brain either from sanguineous impoverishment
or blood pressure ? True neurasthenia is neurotrophasthenia,
from failure, from whatever cause on the part of the involved
nerve centres to appropriate the requisite nutrition for that
normal repair of tissue which is essential to the maintenance of
healthy tone and function, and like the unstrung lyre, responding
" out of tune and harsh " to the player.
If our experience did not give us many illustrations we
could readily conjecture what might be its psychic symptoms.
They are the symptoms of inadequate nerve nutrition, and in
the higher centres of the cerebrum there are instability, irreso-
lution, timidity, dread and fear, morbid and groundless sus-
picions, hallucination and delusion, not natural to the individual
in his best estate, positive hallucinations and delusions, appear-
ing generally when greater than mere neuratrophic changes are
affected in the cerebrum, and the debility has passed into
insanity and more or less organic change.
This note would be anything but brief were we to attempt
to name all the psychic signs of general functional neuratrophia.
We have not even mentioned all of the morbid fears of the
neurasthenic. No terms have yet been given to that inexplic-
able fear of one's own voice and other familiar sounds once
heard with pleasure by these nerve-weakened miserables, nor
for the dread of certain dreams, of receiving once welcome
visits from friends who have never offended, nor for the fear of
riding in certain vehicles when no previous experience toun-
dates the fear, and the numberless other nameless fears which
unnaturally oppress these patients.
The feature of functional neuratrophia to be italicized is
the timidity not natural to the person out of which these
fears grow, and give to the mental character that notable
change in which irresolution replaces former decision of cha-
racter, and supplements even natural fearlessness with fearful-
Bess and dreads innumerable.
Beard's view, that the characteristic of neurasthenic tear is
186 NOTE OF THE ESSENTIAL PSYCHIC SIGNS, ETC.
in the degree rather than in the kind, is only partly true.
Their fears may be common to others, not neurasthenic, but
the}7 are not usual with the person afflicted with neuratrophia
in his healthiest nerve condition. The mental change of cha-
racter in general functional neuratrophia is none the less real
though far less in degree than that which attends upon insanity.
It is seen in the mental movements as it is shown in the voice
and walk and in functional nerve irritability and inertia. This
change is a psychical timidity and indecision of mind and
manner, whether it displays itself in monophobia, deutophobia,
tritophobia, panophobia, or whether it has not taken shape in
a single definite fear, or in multiple fears defined.
The aim of this note is to be practical rather than learned,
and it is hoped that it may be received in the spirit in which it
is prepared. We think too much has been made of the subject
by some writers. Perhaps you may conclude that we have
made too little of it.
