Grace
======

:Author:  Bernice Leland, B.S.,
Critic Teacher, Detroit Normal School.

Grace appeared in the principal's office on the first day of
school in September. She looked to be between five and six years
old. She was round-faced, wide-eyed and solemn. No one knew
whence she had come nor whither she was bound, for she had no
record of any kind with her. When she was questioned her vocabulary seemed to consist solely of head shakings and a few utterly
unintelligible syllables. It is not recorded how Grace happened to
be thrust into a second grade that first day. But it was the second
grade teacher who began to complain, a few days later, of "that
little new girl." Said she, "I could not find out anything from her
if she did know it, for I can not understand one thing she says.
I do not even know her name." Very soon, Grace was demoted to
the first grade where the teacher registered the same complaint.
So it happened that she came to be examined.

The first part of the interview was not very reassuring to the
examiner. If Grace had any opinion on the topic of conversation
which was introduced, she did not voice it. She merely looked out
of wide blue eyes with an expression which threatened tears. " You
seem to me like a pretty nice little girl, and I want to know what
your name is. Can you tell me?" ventured the examiner in a
manner meant to be very reassuring. The little girl deliberated
carefully. Then she ran the risk of a single syllable. It was
scarcely audible, but the long sound of "a" could be made out.
The examiner made a guess. "Oh, yes," said she, "your name
is Kate, isn't it?" The guess was wrong and Grace wagged her
head. Other trials equally unsuccessful followed. Then she
thought of "Grace."

"Is your name Grace?" The child replied, "Eh." The examiner explained that she liked that name, and would she be willing
to try saying it plainly with help? Grace signified her willingness
to try the somewhat doubtful experiment. And so her first lesson
began.

At command, she opened her mouth, wider and wider, imitating
the examiner. She thrust her tongue out, but found it quite impossible to place the tip on the roof of her mouth or to move it from
side to side with any precision. The movements were all vague and
uncertain. She smiled with lips tightly pursed as though smiling
were not at all a habit with her. But when her attention was called
to the wide, open-lipped smile of the examiner, she managed a very
fair imitation. With help she voiced "e-e-e-e-e" quite plainly, also
"ah," and gave the sound of "s." Within a few minutes she had
said "Yes" and "Grace" well enough for any one to understand
her. These results were encouraging, and that afternoon further
exploration added to the morning's information:

1. Both initial and final consonants were frequently omitted
e. g., "tone" for "stone," "ta" for "glass," "poi" for "bird," but
"tat" for "cat," "pabbit" for "rabbit."
2. Substitutions were numerous and not always consistent,
e. g., "put" or "boot" for "book," "tawell" or "kawell" for
"squirrel." She said "chited" for "dish" and "pit" for "with."
"Boy" was "atoo."
3. She either omitted "r" or used a substitute, e. g., "tee" for
"tree," "towah" for "girl," "das" for "grass," "fow" for "flower."
She avoided "1" too, e. g.} "pay" for "play," "boks" for "blocks."
4. She said "key" and "hat" correctly.
5. She said "yet" for "yes" instead of "eh" as in the morning.

She could not read at all, she knew the names of no letters, and
some of her writing was reversed. She wrote with her left hand.
Her minimum time on the Witmer formboard was 30 seconds
made on the third trial. She removed the blocks without plan but
did not use a trial and error method in replacing. She used either
hand. Her maximum time was one minute ten seconds on the second
trial when the distribution of attention was imperfect. Her first
trial was completed in 40 seconds. The quality of the performance
was adequate, and by the Young standardization falls at 6.5 years.
She failed on the Witmer cylinders the first time, leaving six
errors after one minute thirty seconds. The corrections were made
and in one minute twenty seconds, she had replaced the blocks
correctly.

She copied a red square on a white background with design
cubes, also a single and a double chevron. Her persistent attention
was noticeably adequate, analytic concentration less so.
Her memory span visual- audito-motor, taken by tapping was
5; auditory alone, eyes closed, was also 5.
As a result of these observations, the examiner concluded:
1. That Grace had an adequate equipment for learning school
subjects.

2. That the kinaesthesia of correct speech had never been
established, but that it could be now.
3. That the motor apparatus other than that concerned in speech
was not working properly.

4. That her failure in school was due to the lack in speech
development. An emotional reaction of fear added to the difficulty.

Accordingly it was recommended that Grace be transferred at
once to a small group of children whose difficulties were being
analyzed in the Restoration Room. This change was made on
September 16th. When her school record was located, some days
later, in a neighboring school, it was found that she was six years
ten months old. She had been in the kindergarten, and had already
spent a year in the first half of the first grade. She had experienced
half-day sessions only and had not been promoted in June. Other
children in the family, older than Grace, were doing satisfactory
school work, but are merely "average," not among the brightest of
the pupils in the room.

Grace's education began at once, with an aim to giving her what
she needed, whenever she happened to be ready for it without regard
for the fact that no one else in the room needed the instruction given
her. In other words, this child, deviating from the line of so-called
normal seven-year-old children, required specific individual care,
the character of which should be determined by the test findings
and the attempt to teach. Accordingly she was given Speech Exercises, emphasizing breath control, use of the correct organ of speech
and the correct position of the organ. Having been known to sajr
a word correctly once, she has not been allowed to say it in any other
way in the teacher's hearing. It has been interesting to notice the
attitude of the other children in the room, which is so organized that
informal activity on their part is regularly expected. They have
taken it upon themselves to "teach" her and have emphasized
very effectively what the teacher has tried to accomplish. She
must not talk "baby talk," and they tell her so. Grace may frequently be seen in a corner of the room repeating Mother Goose
rhymes, sounding letters, or reading for an older child whose criticisms of careless, imperfect articulation are speedily forthcoming.
Just now we are all engaged in getting her to talk louder. The
results are encouraging. At odd moments, just before dismissal
perhaps, some one asks her to say a little poem for the group or to
read her work of the morning. She does so in a subdued voice and
still somewhat timidly. Her articulation is infinitely improved.
Her errors now are such as "tumling" for "tumbling" or "eveything" for "everything." When she has finished some one is sure to
say, "How well Grace speaks today, doesn't she, Miss L.?" Or,
"That was nice, Grace. We can tell what you say now." Grace
smiles, and another grain of self-respect is added to her once depleted
supply. Her first effort last October ended in a flood of tears.
All of this is incidental to the fifty minutes per week which we spend
in speech instruction. Conversations, casual and otherwise, are a
part of every day's business. Very early in our observation of her
we found that she tried to carry over into her reading and other
speech what we were trying to make sure of in her individual lesson.
We talk about any interesting thing, home and babies, food, flowers
and pictures. Her statements must be truthful and her sentences
completed. One day as she enumerated the dinner possibilities,
she suddenly ventured, "I like raisin pie." That initial "r" was
quite a triumph. She had not been drilled on that word, and her
independent effort indicates the attitude she has come to take toward
the entire performance. Cooperation at home has helped. There
is an older brother whose teasing about her speech has been quite
unbearable to her. One glad day, she announced to him that she
had a "teacher now who could teach her to talk," and Wesley, whose
name was once a hopeless jumble for her, but which she says perfectly now, has been persuaded to transfer his energy from making
her miserable to giving her richly deserved commendation. Her
mother could understand very little of what she said in September,
but she has no trouble now. The entire family frown upon "baby
talk," but their criticisms are constructive and helpful now.
A large part of each day has been devoted to school subjects.
Reading in a class with three other little folks has been given 150
minutes per week. When the absence of other children or any unusual
circumstance made it possible, an extra lesson was given her, sometimes alone, sometimes with others. It was felt that she needed
the stimulation of competition, and that she especially needed to be
conscious of her own success in the presence of the other children.
She was accordingly placed in a group, all of whom were ready to
start, as she was, at a given point. But, as was expected, she has
become a leader, with one other child in the class a close second.
It has become necessary now, of course, to remove these two from the
group, but the end has been accomplished. The others in the room
enjoy playing "school" with Grace, when the assignment of work
for the morning has been completed. For a time the older children
taught her. But now she is passing on to the next fellow "down
and out," what she has observed to be helpful in her case. A few
weeks ago a new boy entered the room. Last week, Grace seated
him in a chair before her and proceeded to hear him read. Such
activity as this is entirely spontaneous with her. She has had only
the encouragement of success and the informal atmosphere of the
Restoration Room.

She began learning the Aldine Primer Rhymes on September
16th. It was found that she knew some of them, but imperfectly,
and she had no reading vocabulary at all. At first the association
between the written symbols and the process which she heard called
"reading" was difficult to get. This seems hardly possible, for she
had had considerable school experience. When it finally became
clear to her that what was written on the board stood for what had
been spoken to her a moment before, her bewildered state of mind
began to clear, and she associated the printed or written symbol
with a given rhyme correctly and readily enough. But the impression of the spoken symbol faded quickly, e. g., for weeks she could
not remember "want" without first repeating the rhyme in which
she had first heard and seen it. She always did this at once without
waiting to be told. Other such words were "again," "other," "glad,"
"no," and "on." More concrete words such as "boy," "jump,"
"nest," gave her less trouble. Her improvement has kept pace
noticeably with her improvement in speech. On December 18th
she completed the Primer, reading several pages that day easily.
Her favorite type of lesson requires that she find answers from the
pages of her book to the questions written on the board, e. g., "When
does Bluebird sing?" Grace searches diligently for a few minutes
and then replies, "He sings in the morning" Also she is very fond
of playing the lesson, taking easily the part of the boy, girl, tree,
sheep or bird. She does not make mistakes, for she comprehends
perfectly the meaning of the paragraph which is being interpreted.
Grace is teaching herself arithmetic at present. Ten attractive
white cards hang in the front of the room. On each one is a group
of colored figures?flowers, circus riders, girls, or soldiers. The
digit corresponding to the number of figures is conspicuous on the
card. She is given a paper on which she finds such a lesson as this?
4+3+8+2+7+5. She discovers how many beads, sticks or whatever she may choose as material to count out, by matching the
figure she does not know with the white cards. She has this stage
of the work pretty well accomplished now, and is beginning to figure
out combinations. She knows that 5 = 3+2 or 4+1, 4 = 2+2 or
3+1, also she knows 2 and 3. This is all desk work. She has had
no class periods.

She has had no formal writing lessons, but she has practiced
circles, scallops, loops, and lines. She has copied words from her
reading vocabulary, written words and phrases from memory, and
answers to questions, as seat work. The record for September 26th
states that her arm movements were growing more free and the form
of her letters quite perfect. She made use of either hand until
October 13th, when she seems to have permanently shifted to the
left hand. She had been told to use the hand that seemed "easiest"
at first. On September 26th she wrote "me" and "em" in the same
lesson. After October 17th there is no record of any reversed
writing. Now her writing is even, legible and fairly large.
Her spelling has been incidental to her reading and mostly oral.
But she can write many words from dictation, and uses her knowledge
in the question work referred to before.

Another very important type of work keeps her busy at intelligence exercises. Unfortunately the equipment of the room does not
contain an adequate supply of material for this. Nevertheless,
much has been accomplished. When Grace was first confronted
with the problem of putting a simple puzzle together, she was most
uneasy. She shifted about in her seat, looked appealingly at the
teacher, fingered a few pieces, and began to do something else.
She did not know that she was carefully watched. After a few
minutes, she returned the puzzle to the folder and slid it into the
drawer of her desk. But she found as the daj^s passed that she
could not meet problems in that way?the puzzle kept reappearing.
So she made an effort, but it was a failure so far as the puzzle was
concerned. After several such trials, the teacher told her that the
pieces fitted together smoothly and did not need to be pounded.
This seemed to give her the proper clue, and she would work away
at the thing quite patiently. She has mastered all of the dozen or
so which we have, since then. They vary in difficulty from such
as are supplied for kindergartens to finely cut jig-saw puzzles.
Further problems with blocks, patterns for mat weaving, bead stringing, or design cubes have been put before her. As she becomes
familiar with each new type of material, it is made a part of her
play material, and she uses it as freely as she chooses. She is constantly making choices, meeting new situations as she moves about
the room developing initiative, and taking great pride in her accomplishments. On October 17th she noticed that another child was
being timed on the Witmer Cylinders. This apparatus has been
in the room, but she had not used it since her first effort, the first
week in September. She crossed the room and watched quietly
while Robert finished, then glancing eagerly at the teacher, she began
removing the cylinders. Her shortest time on three trials was 55
seconds, and the quality of the performance was excellent. On
December 9th she replaced the cylinders in 42 seconds, and all but
five were correctly placed in the recess the first time.
During the second week of November, Grace was given the
Binet test. Her basal age was five years. Her failures were on
the Comprehensions, Fingers, Pictures and all of the eight-year tests.
Her mental age was six years six months, and her I. Q., 95.
We feel that the improvement which has taken place during her
stay in the Restoration Room has justified all the effort made in
her behalf. She is ready to begin the second half of the first grade
now. At her present rate of progress, she should complete this by
Easter. She can surely be given a start on the next grade before
June. It seems best to keep her with the small group for a time and
to accustom her gradually to a large class. She must be very sure
of herself before the final transfer is made. We shall send her on
errands to rooms where there are many children, and she shall read
and recite for them.

Her history has purposely been left to be recorded last, because
it could not be secured until much of the foregoing had been accomplished. She was born normally, of healthy parents. She was
tongue-tied, but the ligament was cut within the first few weeks.
When she was three years old her mother died suddenly, and she
became the care of an elderly aunt. She had begun to talk when
about fifteen months old, but as this woman could not understand
her she was most impatient with her and is said to have punished
her severely and, her stepmother feels, unjustly. When she was
five years old, her father remarried and brought her home. She
has never been ill, and nothing unusual can be discovered in the
family history.

This record has been written in some detail, because there are so
many children like Grace in our public schools. Surely more might
have been accomplished with her in a regular grade than was, but she
seems to have just drifted along, learning nothing that she was
expected to learn and dropping farther and farther behind in the
race. Such a case requires a great deal of patience on the part of the
teacher, careful, accurate observation, the more of specialized knowledge the better, and last, but by no means least, a firm, optimistic
belief in the worthwhileness of the task.
