Don: A Curable Case of Arrested Development Due to a Fear Psychosis the Result of Shock in a Three-year-old Infant
====================================================================================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1919, by Lightner Witraer, Editor. r
4 t ft.t \ i
Vol. XIII, Nos. 4-7 MaJ 15, L * '
ORTHOGENIC CASES.
XIV.?
By Ligiitner Witmer, Ph.D.
He was five years old last July, and so I entered him the following autumn in a near-by school, where he is the youngest of a group
of first-grade children. His teacher says that he reads better than
any of them and, except that he is poor in handwork, she considers
him as competent as the other children.
'Published originally in the Ladies' Home Journal for April, 1919, under the caption "What I Did With
Don," and reprinted fiy permission. With this case I am able, for the first time, to prove that an arrest of
development amounting to feeblemindedness may be cured and the child entirely restored to normal mentality.
At the age of two years and seven months this boy responded to every test like a feebleminded child and he
was diagnosed by competent experts as feebleminded. Today he is a normal boy, not quite seven years old,
reading, writing and doing the number work of the second school year. Either he was not feebleminded and the
diagnosis was a mistaken one, or feeblemindedness can be cured. What is feeblemindedness?a performance
level or an irremediable mental defect? Don's response to treatment shows that he had grave but not irremediable
defects. His arrest of development was nearly complete, the result of disease and the psychosis which accompanied the disease.
When a normal adult becomes insane we observe a marked change in character. "He is no longer himself,"
we say, and a prominent symptom is a reduction of mental level called technically "dementia." Auto-intoxication, disease and shock may cause insanity. Let U3 suppose that one or all of these causes affect a child in his first
or second year. We shall not be able to observe much change in the child's mentality except that his mental
development will be arrested. I maintain that one type of feeblemindedness, better called arrested development,
is due to the same causes which produce insanity in an adult, and that in some cases the psychosis or mental disorder can be cured and the child restored to completely normal condition, provided the case be taken in hand
early enough.
Except to the very observant eye of an experienced expert, these cases look more like feeblemindedness than
neanity. Nevertheless, they are a species of feeblemindedness or insanity, whichever name we choose to apply,
very different from the congenital imbecile, one of the mongolian type, for example. The mental disorders of
children which cause arrest of development and apparent feeblemindedness are as diverse as the mental disorders
observed and classified by the alienists. A child may be either feebleminded or insane, or he may be both
feebleminded and insane. Some of the Orthogenic Cases reported in the earlier numbers of the Psychological
Clinic, notably Orthogenic Cases Nos. 4, 6, 12 and 13, are not primarily cases of congenital defect, but cases of
mental disorder in which there is a greater presumption of possible cure than in the case of the child vtho is both
qualitatively and quantitatively feebleminded.
Orthogenic Case XIV presents a clinical picture of fear, antagonism, anger, and obstinacy, in consequence of
which the mental development was arrested until the motivation yielded to orthogenic treatment. The etiology
is uncertain, something like hydocephaly was suspected but rejected as the explanatory cause. It may have been
malnutrition, but I incline to believe it was only the shock of an attack of whooping cough.
Orthogenic Case XV entitled "The Feminine Absolute' is a case of arrested development, especially in schoo
subjects, symptomatically a fear psychosis and an obstinate refusal to take an education: in general, the kind of
behavior characterizing hysteria as a type of mental perversion.
98 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
"Terence," said he to his pal, the gardener, who was taking
him to school the first day, "don't call me Donnie when we get near
the school; don't call me Donnie or Don; call me Donald, which
is right."
I saw Donald for the first time when he was two years and seven
months old. His father carried him into my office, and deposited
him, a soulless lump, upon the couch. He sat there with the stolidity
of a Buddhist image, absorbed in the inspection of a card which he
held in his pudgy hands, as regardless of his father and mother as
of the new objects about him. While his gaze moved over the card,
he scratched the back of it gently and incessantly with his finger
nails. At times he gritted his teeth; and then again he made a
crooning, humming sound with which it is his habit to lull himself
to sleep.
He paid no attention to a rattle, to a bright-colored ball or to
a picture book which I held before him, but every effort to remove
the card from his hands he resisted. His face, already crimson,
became empurpled. His physiognomy took on an expression of
angry hostility; and I retreated before the approaching storm,
leaving him again to his absorption in the card.
"He is fond of music," his mother said; but the liveliest strains
of the talking machine were powerless to distract him from his chosen
preoccupation. In the months to come I was to discover that by
preference he would sit or lie in bed for hours, looking attentively
at the object which he happened to be holding in his hands. It
appeared to be persistent, concentrated attention, that most difficult
and valuable of mental powers to cultivate.
From two to six years the child has the flitting attention of a
monkey. " How do you select your monkeys for training?" a trainer
of animals was once asked.
"I hold a lighted match before them," he replied, "and pick
out as the easiest to train those that look longest at the burning
match."
Donald would look at nothing but his card. One could not
guess what lay behind those dull blue eyes. Was it interest, or only
emptiness of mind?the dreamy listlessness with which the corner
loafer looks at the passing world?
"What are those abrasions about the mouth and ears?" I
asked.
"When he gets angry," his mother said, "he will scratch and
tear at them."
"What else can he do?" I asked, not venturing to break in
upon this obstinate immobility by trying to get him to perform
ORTHOGENIC CASES 99
the simple task which might, perchance, reveal some hidden mental
ability.
"Can he walk?"
"Alittle, but he only began about two months ago," she replied.
"Until he was over two years old he hadn't even crawled; and he
only learned to crawl by his nurse taking hold of his knees and
advancing them one after the other."
As the flower blooms, the fish swims or the bird flies, so the
child crawls, walks and talks. It is the unfolding of his own instinctive impulses. But this child had to be taught to crawl and to walk,
and even yet he could only toddle about uncertainly. If he fell
upon his face he would lie helplessly crying with his nose to the
floor. Either he did not have the strength to change his position,
or he did not know how, or he was unwilling to make the effort.
He never uttered a word spontaneously, and he could repeat
at command only a few words like "Kitty," "Mamma"?eight
words in all. His understanding of language seemed to be limited
to pointing to his head, eyes, ears and nose when these words were
spoken. Even a chimpanzee of the same age as this boy, if brought
up in human surroundings, will give evidence of understanding more
of spoken language than this boy did. He could not feed himself.
A much younger child can hold a cup or a spoon, but this boy could
not even close his lips upon a cup when it was offered to him. He
was still in diapers, and weeks were to pass before he could be safely
clothed like the normal boy of two years and a half.
At two years and seven months Donald was doing no more
than many a child does at twelve months, no more than every
child should do at fifteen months. No one who saw him needed
to consult an expert before deciding that he was subnormal. You
had only to look at the large head?"top-heavy Bill" one of his
teachers called him?the fat red face, the expressionless eyes and the
helpless body, to arrive instantly at the conviction that "this child
is feeble-minded."
And feeble-minded I thought him?of such low grade that I
refused at first to accept him for educational treatment in my school.
With reluctance I finally yielded to the parents' pleas. He was the
youngest child I had ever accepted for psychological treatment, and
apparently the most hopeless.
The expert, like the parent, bases his opinion on the child's
appearance, behavior and history. But even more important than
these is the "attemvt to teach." In doubtful cases I do not like to
express an opinion until after I have observed the results of attempt100 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ing to teach the child something new. This can often be done at the
first examination, but I could not even begin to teach Donald.
"I should like to see him walk," I said. But when he was
lifted from the couch, put upon his feet and made to walk, he burst
into a paroxysm of rage. His eyes became bloodshot; even his
gums bled. When he was put back upon the couch he returned to
his contemplative absorption in the card. Offered a block, he
made no effort to take it. He even closed his eyes, as though the
very sight of it and me were more than he could endure.
When I took the card away, so as to secure his undivided attention, he had another paroxysm of rage. From this, however, I
derived a little hope, for passion and rage may be an expression of
strength. The child at least had energy at his disposal. His violent
resistance evidenced resolute determination. Obstinate children are
better material for training than the overpliant sort. I looked at
him, sitting impassive, but always bolt upright, and this, too, I
thought an encouraging sign.
"He is a very easy child to neglect," one of my teachers entered
in her report soon after he came to the school. "If you let him alone
he will sit or lie in bed for hours and give no trouble. It is only
when you try to do something with him, to dress him, or bathe liim,
even at times to feed him, that the trouble begins."
It takes some time and care to adjust a child to new surroundings, so I considered it no great misfortune that Donnie promptly
got the measles. For a couple of weeks it was necessary to isolate
him in the care of a trained nurse. This probably helped to make
him less resistant to strangers. Perhaps there also awoke within
his soul some responsive feeling of gratification when the soothing
hand of the nurse or the doctor brought him relief from his distress
of body. One month after Donnie's arrival I began his education.
"What to do" and "How to do it" are two puzzling questions
confronting teacher and parent at every turn. To answer the first
question is to present the aims of education. In the early years of
education the three R's are the chief objective. The answer to the
second question, "How to do it," will determine our method of
procedure.
Educational aims and practice are commonly the outcome of
theory. For example, an interesting and important theory of recent
origin is the Montessori method. It aims to develop a child's natural
abilities. It also has a theory of educational practice. It emphasizes
and, in the opinion of many, relies exclusively upon appealing to the
child's natural inclinations and desires. Deprecating the use of
constraint and force, it throws the reins over the neck of the horse.
ORTHOGENIC CASES. 101
Several children have been brought to me for examination and
educational treatment who were nearly ruined by too close adherence
to this supposed Montessori method.
I hold that constraint and liberty have equal value. At one
time constraint, at another liberty, will bring the best results. The
wise employment of constraint and force calls for greater intelligence
and judgment on the part of teacher and parent than the leaving
of the child free to work out his own salvation and development.
I try to approach the problem of educating a child like Donald
without any preferred theory. More than twenty years of experience has led me to see that there is some good in most theories.
A few are fit only for the scrap heap. One guiding principle, however, has stood the test of time and use: "The first task of teacher
and parent is to gain and hold the child's attention by giving him
something he can do, and after that, something he can't do"?
this in general is my method.
My educational aim is to develop attention by choosing tasks
which develop it. Whether a child be one year of age, or two years,
or six, whether he be in high school or college, the guiding principle
of the educator should be to gain and hold attention first, and then
to cultivate concentration, alertness, persistence and endurance, all
of these being attributes of attention.
For the rest, I feel my way. I watch the child to discover what
he does with interest and with ease, and from here I get him to take
a step forward in the direction best calculated to bring him to what
I am aiming at, "the next higher level of attention." Montessori
provides the child with stimulating objects?her didactic material?
and leaves it with the child to make the next step forward. This is
doubtless an acceptable procedure; but suppose the child refuses
to take a step in any direction. He must be shoved.
To shove a child in the direction you want him to go is easy if
the child is pliant and submissive. If he is a fighter like.Donnie,
and if, like him, he has no desires except to be let alone, the development of attention and the enforcement of obedience must go hand
in hand.
When you have a trout on a hook at the end of a thin line, the
only way to land him is to play him. He is lively and vigorous. He
has desires which conflict with yours. If you use too much force
you will break the line. If you use skill, yielding and yet constraining, you will in time get him into your basket. In this way the
skilful teacher "plays" the child. The hook of attention is attached
to the line of obedience, and then she watches the child's every
move to insure his advance in the required direction. Shall she coax
102 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
or force him? On the lee shore of this question many a gallant
educational craft lies shipwrecked.
You can coax most children, some of the time at least, byappealing to their interests and desires, even as the hunter entices
the deer to come within gunshot by appealing to its curiosity. But
some children can't be coaxed, any more than you can wheedle a
trout into your basket.
For example, take Donald. He did not have a keen desire
even for food. He would not eat prunes, apparently because he
disliked their appearance, and so they had to be mixed with his
cereal in order to get him to eat them. He would not drink milk
or water from a transparent glass. It must be offered to him in a
cup. In the early days, indeed, he declined to drink water at all,
and got his only liquid in the shape of milk or soup.
He declined to accept a sugarplum offered as a reward of merit;
and if you took away the object he so fondly clasped in his hands,
and then yielded to his ragings and returned it to him, he would
very likely throw it violently across the room. He disliked to be
dressed. He disliked to be taken out of bed and put on the floor.
He disliked to be taken for a walk.
All these things aroused angry resistance; and in his passion
he went so far as to do himself bodily injury; but as long as Donald
held something in his hand there was peace and quiet.
" What to do with him?" He could not be bathed and dressed in
this happy state of calm contemplation. Take away what he held
and his hands went up to his ears and mouth, tearing at them till
they bled. Tell him to keep his hands down, they went up just
the same; perhaps he only scratched himself a little more strenuously.
Put mittens on him, as his former nurse did, and he still went through
the motions.
Smack his hands, anger and passion intensified the violence of
his resistance. The only thing to do was to hold his hands. Could
he be compelled to keep them down after they were released? The
historic battle lasted for an hour and a half. His hands were held
while his teacher spoke to him from time to time: "If I let your
hands go, will you keep them down?"
He raged, he stormed, he grew apoplectic, but the hands were
firmly held. At eveiy lull in the storm they were released, and up
they went again. In the end he gave in. Ninety minutes showed
remarkable endurance, determination and consistency of purpose,
qualities which might be successfully employed in his educational
development later.
Never again did Donnie hold out for so long on this or any
ORTHOGENIC CASES. 103
other issue. My records show that though he raged at intervals
during the ensuing twelve months, the longest period of resistance
lasted for ten minutes only. He had learned his lesson. There was
an inevitable persistence that would outlast his own. He might as
well give in first as last.
Obedience may be enforced by punishment, by suggestion and
threat, or by impression. Of all these the most effective is impression?to get home to the child the impression of a will stronger than
his own, and, above all, the impression of its inevitableness. This
struggle of opposing wills begins soon after the child is born; and
my experience shows that no child is too young or too feeble-minded
to know when his will has prevailed, and to profit by it.
The next lesson which the child must learn is to give attention.
Many times each day the teacher admonishes her class: "Pay attention." But how is the child to learn to pay attention? How shall
we compel him to give attention if he refuses it? The drillmaster
commands "Attention!" and expects from his squad of soldiers an
obedient alertness to concentrate upon the execution of his command.
Behind the drillmaster's command is the threat of punishment for
disobedience; in the last resort, even the threat of death. But how
may we oppose successfully the conflicting impulses and desires of
a little child? How awaken the child's interest in something in
which he is not yet interested? This is the real problem of beginning
an education.
I took my form board?a tray of eleven blocks of different
shapes, each block fitting into a recess of the same shape from which
it can be easily removed and then replaced. A four-year old child
is able on the first trial to replace every block. He does it slowly,
perhaps, and with many errors, but he corrects his errors and finally
succeeds. His method of solving the new problem set him by the
form board may reveal to the observing psychologist many of the
child's abilities and defects.
As children increase in years they replace the blocks with greater
speed, precision and dexterity, but even twenty-five per cent of
three-year-old children can successfully replace the blocks without
instruction. Many normal children of two years and a half, and
even older children, may fail to get all the blocks in place, and some
may not succeed with a single block; but very few normal children
over two years of age will be unable at least to pick up a block and
try to do something with it.
When the form board was put before Donnie, he made not the
slightest effort to obey the order to replace the blocks. I put a block
in his hand and guided it to the proper recess. Quickly I picked
104 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the block out, put it in his hand again and said: "Put it back."
He instantly replaced it. A dozen times I repeated this performance.
His movements increased in accuracy and speed. Thus I proved
to my gratification: (1) That he could be made to obey a command;
(2) that he had sufficient control over the movements of his hand
and arm to hold the block and adjust it into place; (3) that he was
able to see the space, giving to the task sufficient concentration of
attention to accomplish what he had undertaken; (4) that he had
enough persistence to repeat a task over and over again; and (5)
that he learned something from each performance as was shown
by improvement in speed and accuracy.
I then repeated the experiment with a second block, obtaining
a like result. I was now able to proceed to the real test of his
capacity for educational development. I took out both blocks,
leaving two spaces empty, and handed him first one and then the
other. I was amazed to find that even on the first trial he put the
right block in the right space. I also observed that for the first time
he showed a little interest in the performance.
On the fourth day of training, when six recesses were exposed,
he put in two blocks successfully; then he became obstinate and
dropped the block on the bed, dragged it across the board and
finally put it in the wrong recess. At length, after much urging, he
had four blocks in place, but he persistently refused to do anything
with the other two. On the fourteenth day, however, he reached
for the board as soon as he saw it, fell to work immediately and put
nine blocks away correctly. On the next day, with all the spaces
exposed, he put away the eleven blocks in one minute and fifteen
seconds. Thus, fifteen days after his first lessons began, he was
doing the form board as well as the average four-year-old.
Observing that his interest increased with the difficulty of the
task I set him, I decided to try him with my cylinder test. This is
a modification of the Montessori cylinders, but it is more difficult
than any of the Montessori material, combining the three sets of
cylinders into one. I call it an "intelligence" test, and it is of
sufficient difficulty to make it a useful test even with college students.
Donnie mastered this test in thirteen days. He showed from the
beginning the greatest interest and avidity for it. He would reject
the form board and hold his hand out eagerly for the cylinder.
As soon as he had learned to do the cylinders, I picked up a
large capital letter B made of wood and, giving it to him, said:
"Donald, this is B. Put B on the chair." When he had done this
I said: "Give me B." In this way I taught him to pick the letter
B out of a jumble of six other letters. In the afternoon of the same
ORTHOGENIC CASES. 105
day he appeared to have forgotten it, but the next day he learned
to pick out three letters from a confused pile of six, and he was able
to name the letter B.
On the day following, exactly one month after his training had
begun, a very satisfactory test showed that he had retained the
three letters he had learned the day before, and he was able in
addition to learn three more letters. One month later he could
pick out and name all the letters of the alphabet, the capital wooden
letters as well as the capital and small letters printed very large in
a child's 'pictorial alphabet book. He was now doing work which
six-year-old children are just about able to do in the first school
year.
From the results of this "attempt to teach" I discovered that
Donald had an aptitude for recognizing, remembering and discriminating forms. Teachers are advised to select their material and
methods so as to appeal to the child's interests.. In the beginning
Donald gave no evidence of having the slightest interest in form.
This interest developed only under compulsion, though it was
undoubtedly founded upon the fact that he learned easily what
some children learn only with effort. He was, withal, very human.
He always chose the easy way. To fill a board with thirty-six pegs
bored him. Monotonous and easy tasks still bore him.
We never could get him to take an interest in the Montessori
buttoning and lacing frames, and even now he will never dress himself
if he can get somebody else to do it for him. He learned to like
the form board, cylinders and letters because this work was relatively
easy for him. He had a natural aptitude for form discrimination, a
tenacious memory and that greatest endowment of the human
being, intelligence. To use his natural abilities gave him pleasure
and excited interest. We were always able to carry him along more
quickly in the direction indicated by his natural abilities; thus he
learned his letters in half the time it took him to distinguish and
name colors.
The quick change from distaste to liking was characteristic of
Donald. He hated to walk. At times he was dragged outdoors,
screaming and raging. At times he was enticed to walk by trundling
ahead of him a moving wagon; for, like other children, Donald was
interested in motion, and this one interest alone we did not have
to draw out or cultivate.
One day he was kept outdoors twenty-minutes, howling all the
time, and only stopped when he was taken upstairs and put to bed.
A week later he went outdoors with eagerness, and walked about
poking a stick here and there into the ground, or picking up stray
106 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
objects, until he was made to sit down and rest. Then he howled
because he was not allowed to keep on walking.
He could say so few words when he came, and was so slow
learning, that I was not sure he would ever learn to talk. Asked
to say "shoe," he would make a sound like "h-m?" with a rising
inflection, as though he had not quite heard the word, but would
be delighted to oblige you if you would only say it again and a
little plainer.
After you had repeated the same word fifty times, always getting
the same response, you lost confidence in his desire and ability to
please. He learned the word "shoe" when his teacher, tossing his
shoe in the air, said with great gusto each time she caught it "shoe!"
This amused him, but it took ten minutes to get him to follow suit.
When he finally gave the word he mimicked her exact tone.
In the same way I taught him to give the sound of V, at which
he balked for a long time. It was only because he was amused at
the way in which I elongated the sound, that he was finally'' induced
to imitate it.
Soon he was learning words rapidly, and at the end of the second
month, his initial vocabulary of eight words had increased to one
hundred and fourteen. With sixty-three of these words he had
some association evidencing at least a partial understanding. He
early showed that his intelligence was not defective. He had been
taught to "kiss the pretty lady" on the back of a magazine. In
the fifth week when he was given the magazine without the picture
of the lady, and was told to "kiss the pretty lady," he turned over
the pages, but, not finding the picture, hesitated. When the picture
was returned to the magazine, he recognized and kissed it.
After he had been with us three months he began to name objects:
"It's a spoon;" "It's a shoe;" "It's a lady." His sense of humor
could always be appealed to. He learned to grunt like a pig, to
gobble like a turkey, and even formal lessons were often enlivened
by grunts and gobbles. If some parts of his education were accompanied by tears, other parts won smiles, and awoke his full, rich
laughter.
After the second month of formal training and the third month
of his stay with us, Donald went to Nova Scotia for the summer.
There, by the seaside, he was given a month of full enjoyment, the
chance to adjust himself to the new environment and the opportunity to learn through natural and spontaneous reaction to people
and things. He was now picking up many new words, the names
of those about him, and even an occasional sentence. To the question, "Who are you?" he was taught to answer "I'm Sunny Don;"
ORTHOGENIC CASES. 107
and to "How do you feel?" to reply "I feel happy." "A new
Donald," a teacher records, "went to the seashore, a Donald cleareyed and clean-skinned, alert, with a disposition as good as it was
determined."
To carry forward my plan of training his powers of attention
and discrimination, I began to teach him numbers up to four by
holding up one or more fingers. At the same time he was taught to
put the three large wooden letters, C, A and T, together, and then
to pick and spell CAT and DOG when the whole six letters were
jumbled together. Next the words were printed on paper, and he
was taught to see, spell and read as separate words such sentences
as "I see a man," "A cat can see a dog." Before three months had
elapsed, and after only five months of formal training in all, I made
the crucial test, putting a primer into his hand for the first time.
Haltingly, to be sure, but like a normal child just beginning in the
first grade, he read the sentence: "A man can see a dog."
One day, just a year after Donald came to the school, his parents
visited him. He walked into the room and, carefully coached
beforehand, he greeted them: "How do you do, mother?" "How
do you do, father?" Otherwise his behavior was spontaneous and
wholly childlike. With the delight which he always took in showing
off, he said his pieces: "Little Bo-Peep," "Little Boy Blue" and
Stevenson's "Bed in Summer." His delivery was amusingly solemn,
his articulation perfect and his intonation reproduced the exact
tones of those who had taught him.
He read for his father and mother three pages from his primer.
He spelled words like jump and John, and he gave the four separate
sounds of jump. He put together a jig-saw puzzle of fifteen pieces.
He strung beads, picking out each color upon demand. He put
together twelve sliced animals, saying each time, "That's a bear,"
"That's a kangaroo," and so forth,enlisting his mother's co-operation
by: "Will mother put the kangaroo together? Will mother put
the elephant together?" Playing with blocks, he built up a house,
tumbling it down and then turning to his father with: "Will father
build a house?"
In one year he had arrived at this level of performance from a
condition so abnormal that when of his own accord he looked through
and around a picture frame at his teacher it was considered an event
worth recording.
Five months later Donald was four years old, and another
summer at the seashore brought him by the following autumn to a
stage of general development where I was willing for the first time
108 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
to consider him normal, lifting from the hearts of his parents the heavy
burden of a diagnosis of feeble-mindedness.
Having stirred to activity all the mental abilities which I considered essential to the normal child, our work was directed to
developing him in an all-round way. I did not push his reading in
the second year as I had done in the first. Attempting to teach
him phonic analysis as this is employed in language work, I made
up my mind that he was not ready for it. Primarily I was not
interested in having him read, write and cipher efficiently. I was
interested only in arousing his latent capacity to do this work.
I had no desire to produce an unbalanced monster.
In the past year and a half only I could easily have carried him
on to second-grade work, but his general abilities would still have
remained far behind those of a first-grade pupil. I used his natural
ability to distinguish form in order to develop his powers of attention,
and carried him far beyond the average child of his age in reading.
But in all this the training of attention was my chief concern because
I thought this essential for the development of his powers of observation, self-control and responsiveness to all the stimuli of a child's
environment.
It was necessary now to let time and steady training humanize
him, so we gave him what conspired to make him a normal, laughing,
playful child, ready to work at times, but always preferring to play.
In the further carrying out of this plan I entered him last autumn
in a small private day school, where he is in the first grade. His
class is now reading a little book which Donald finished reading a
year and a half ago, but he is learning from the class and his teacher
far more important things than what the "Little Red Hen" did.
He is beginning to adjust himself to the everj^day world of children
and adults in which he lives and must play his part.
If I began my work without a theory and without understanding
Donnie's mental status, I am far from that position how. I have
unraveled much of the mystery, and I find the understanding of
this one child of important value in interpreting the behavior and
progress of other normal children. I believe that Donnie was at
the start dominated by fear, which plays still an important role in
his behavior. His concentration on the card was in the nature of a
defensive reaction. He disliked to get out of bed because he was
afraid to get out of bed. He disliked to walk and talk because he
was afraid?perhaps of failure.
It was noted on one occasion that when taken outdoors he would
not stop screaming even after he had been put on the back of a pony.
I know now that this was the worst thing that could have been done
ORTHOGENIC CASES. 109
to him. Donnie is afraid of all animals. He takes kindly, however,
to little creatures and has often alarmed his teachers by bringing
them caterpillars and worms.
One day Donnie, while seated at a table playing with a train of
cars, had his attention called to the fact that a little gray kitten
was in the room. He was mortally afraid of it, so he would not turn
his head to look, but kept moving the train back and forth, saying
"Puff! Puff!" in the same absorbed concentration which was
characteristic of him at the beginning. He was ignoring the kitten
just as he used to ignore people he disliked by closing his eyes when
they came into the room.
He was afraid to look down a well, he was afraid of a doll, of
a soft rubber ball, of a balloon, a loaf of bread, a spinning top. He
was afraid to go on a sailboat the first time, but the second time he
went with joy. He took a fearful pleasure in trains, for he loved
them as moving things, and yet they terrified him. He would say:
''Let us go to town in the three trolleys;" but when you asked him
why he would rather go in the trolleys than in a train he would
never tell you.
He has never verbally admitted that he is afraid of anything.
"Won't hurt you," he very early exclaimed whenever he was frightened by anything; and this was one of his first spontaneous reflections. "Don't have to pat the pony," he would reiterate during
the many weeks required to get him to overcome his fear of the school
pet. The effort to take him out driving in a little pony cart, which
it was thought would entertain him, only succeeded after a period
of two months. But then, as was usual with him, he couldn't get
enough of driving behind the pony.
Even yet he is afraid. "I like dogs," he declared lately, as he
started on his way to school. "Nice kind dogs which don't bite,"
he added thoughtfully. Nevertheless, he managed unobtrusively to
place his companion between himself and every dog. "I like to pat
dogs," he boasted; but when one appeared unexpectedly he excused
himself tactfully: "I don't like them that color."
So, while Donnie is fearful, he is not a coward. He is doing his
best to overcome his fears, and he has worked out his own method
of doing this. He had no fear of dark or of the supernatural.
Fears and desires are the two greatest motive forces of mankind. No problem is more perplexing and none so absolutely fundamental as the proper treatment of fears and desires so that these
motive forces may excite the actions desired. As I understand Donnie
now, he had no desires, but many fears. We compelled him to do
those things which he feared. As soon as he had done the-fearful
110 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
thing, the fear, in many instances, disappeared and desire took its
place. Donnie is now afraid chiefly of what surprises him.
Donnie's obstinacy measured the intensity of his fear, but in
part it measured also the intensity of his desires. Always, from the
very beginning, Donnie has known just what he wanted. Never
was there any wabbly uncertainty of choice. He either desired it
or he didn't desire it. This, to my mind, is a strong and valuable
trait of character if you can turn it to the right use.
The desire for possession gives rise perhaps to his keenest
pleasure. He held on to his card, not only because it enabled him
to ignore the fearful things of the world about him, but he held on
to it because here was something "all his own." Not until recently
has he been willing to share any of his possessions with others. For
a long time he not only clung passionately to his own possessions, but
appropriated the playthings of all the other children as well, so much
so that his room was known as the "Robber's Den." He is now
so far advanced on the road to generosity that he will give away his
second-best toy.
He has always shown the same concentration of attention which
he showed at the beginning. One day recently he wore to school a
necktie which he had borrowed from the gardener, Terence. The
teacher could do nothing with him that day because he persistently
explored the attributes of his new possession. He met Terence,
who came to take him home, with the matured fruit of his morning's
work: "Terry, can you see the top of your necktie?"
His first craze was for automobiles, and then for sailboats,
bicycles, trains and cars?anything that moved. As he learned to
talk, he went through the magazines. "It's an automobile, see the
automobile," he kept reiterating. When he grew fond of excursions
abroad, "Are we going out, Agnes?" he would say, "Agnes, are we
going out?" a thousand times until he threatened to drive his nurse
to distraction. No child can have a better endowment for future
accomplishment later than this power of persistent concentration.
Donnie's traits of character are therefore positive traits. He
has a definite arraj' of abilities, keen desires, self-dependence. Even
from the first he preferred to walk alone, though in constant fear of
falling, rather than hold someone's hand. He only sought the
hand if a terrifying object came in view. With strong desires and
fears, strong likes and dislikes, Donnie has an equal capacity for
happiness and great unhappiness, for success and failure. He can
be sweet-tempered or angry and resentful. His emotional balance
is easily disturbed, and he still requires very careful handling.
ORTHOGENIC CASES. Ill
Of the cause of Donnie's mental condition when he came to us,
and which led several experts to diagnose him as feeble-minded, I
cannot be sure. He had an illness after birth, which I now believe
left his brain so devitalized that it permitted fear to gain the upper
hand over desire. Of one thing I am certain: If Donnie had not
been given the painstaking and expert training to which we subjected
him he would by now have fallen into a state of irremediable feeblemindedness.
