The Continuation Girl
======================

By Elmira Lodor, M.A.,
Kensington High School, Philadelphia.
With the enactment of the law stipulating that minors between
the ages of fourteen and sixteen who are employed must attend
school for the equivalent of not less than eight hours each week,
there was introduced into the school population of Philadelphia a
group of students who have brought with them, in addition to those
problems arising directly from the fact that their unit of school
work is not five days but only one, questions of adjustment much
more difficult of solution. These so-called "continuation" pupils
appear to differ from the other students not only in their attitude
toward school life in general, but also in their approach to any
specific school work. Since this differentiation is reported by the
teachers in charge of these pupils, it becomes the obligation of the
school to investigate whether or not these reported differences are
fundamental in character or whether they grow out of hastily drawn
generalizations, resulting from the superficial observations of the
teacher who, accustomed to the more easily aroused responses of the
full-time pupil, views somewhat askance the relatively unresponsive
attitude of this newcomer into the school community. If the
result of such an investigation points to the presence of differences
in those competencies, the existence of which is postulated in the
successful performance of school work, and not to differences in
efficiencies growing out of unlike training, then the question of
school adjustment resolves itself into an inquiry as to what should
be the special opportunities offered to these children, whereby the
eight hours a week may come to mean the fullest equipment toward
an efficient citizenship. These problems confronting all of the
Philadelphia high schools were especially pressing in the Kensington
High School for Girls because of its location among the mills and
factories of a large textile district. The neighborhood offers pecu-
liarly easy access to industry, to the boys and girls of the community;
hence there is a relatively large loss from full school work when the
age of fourteen is reached.
Because of these facts a preliminary survey of the first year
pupils in both the regular full-time classes and in the continuation
classes was carried on in the Kensington High School during 1918,
in an attempt to find some answer to the questions arising from the
(202)
THE CONTINUATION GIRL. 203
presence of the continuation student. As a result of this study a
more extended survey of the freshman girls in the two groups is in
process during the present year. While it is impossible to present
as yet all of the data gathered, nevertheless some of the findings
seem to be sufficiently suggestive to warrant their immediate state-
ment, in the hope that they may prove provocative of other in-
vestigations tending toward a better understanding of the particular
needs of these students.
Any attempt to evaluate the competencies and efficiencies of a
group of school children must include not merely an analysis of the
individuals as members of the school community, but must consider
also the social environment outside of the schoolroom. Obviously
the first question to present itself in an analytic study of the con-
tinuation girl is, therefore, that of the social stratification of the
district involved. Are these continuation pupils to be explained in
terms of inherent incapacity for school work as that work is generally
presented, or are they workers because of economic necessity alone?
Although in the study of the students in the Kensington High
School it was impossible to visit all of the homes of all of the girls,
a general knowledge of the social and economic condition of the
neighborhood was available. This was supplemented by informa-
tion obtained in part from a questionnaire sent to the home of each
student and in part from personal interviews with the students.
From these sources the following conclusions were drawn.
The community in which the school is located is a homogeneous
one from the social point of view. The girls in both the full-time
and in the continuation classes are the daughters of shop keepers,
tradesmen, artisans, mill operatives, etc. There are few of either
the laboring or of the professional classes represented. This similarity
in standards is also reflected in the fact that of the older brothers
and sisters of the girls in both groups a very small number completed
the eighth grade of the elementary schools, and less than one-half
of one per cent had attended high school classes.
There is a difference in the size of the families of the two groups.
This may be a contributing cause to a difference in economic pres-
sure which may have forced the one group into industry. The
average number of children in the families of the full-time students
is found to be three, whereas the average number of children in the
families of the continuation girls is four.
Racially there is little heterogeneity in the families studied.
There are neither Negroes nor Mongolians in the group. The per-
centage of Jewish girls also is small. These facts are of significance,
since they seem to indicate that any differences between the regular
204 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
full-time students and the continuation pupils are not to be ac-
counted for by marked differences in environment or heredity in so
far as that may be determined by a knowledge of race and economic
status. The conclusion in regard to the similarity in environment
is supported by the results of an examination of the records relating
to the place of birth of the students and of their parents. Of 197
regular pupils, 97 per cent are native born, 80 per cent having been
born in Philadelphia; and of 125 continuation pupils, 94 per cent
are native born, 86 per cent have been born in Philadelphia. The
records of the birthplace of the parents of these girls show that 67
per cent of the fathers and 68 per cent of the mothers of the regular
students are native born, while 56 per cent of the fathers and 53 per
cent of the mothers of the continuation girls are native born. There
is a slightly larger number of foreign-born parents among the con-
tinuation group, but it must not be forgotten that very few of these
families have lived a shorter time in the United States than fifteen
or sixteen years. Furthermore, as the records show, 86 per cent of
the families of the continuation girls have been in Philadelphia
during the entire life time of the girls examined.
The fact that so many of the girls in both groups have lived in
Philadelphia during all of their lives suggests that any differences to
be found are probably not due to differences in elementary school
training. According to the law, all of the girls must complete the
first six years of the elementary school before they are permitted to
become continuation pupils. A very small number of the contin-
uation girls examined?less than ten out of the whole number?had
dropped out of the regular classes in the seventh grade. About
ninety per cent of these girls had completed at least the first half of
the eighth grade before going to work. Since this is true, the pre-
liminary training of the two groups of girls when they entered the
ninth grade, i. e., the first year of high school, was not sufficiently
dissimilar to carry any weight in the interpretation of results.
There is a difference between the two groups so far as age dis-
tribution is concerned. The regular group includes a few thirteen-
year-old girls and a still smaller number of girls sixteen years of age
in addition to the large number of fourteen- and fifteen-year-old
girls. Since the law of Pennsylvania permits continuation work
between the fourteenth and sixteenth birthdays only, there are no
girls in this group except those of fourteen and fifteen years. If
differences are found in the performance levels of the two groups,
they may perhaps be accounted for by this difference in age dis-
tribution. If, however, and this seems to be true, the differences
persist when a comparison of the same age groups is made, then,
THE CONTINUATION GIRL. 205
obviously, chronological age is not the basic factor in producing the
dissimilarities of the two groups.
Since there seems to be little or no indication of social or eco-
nomic differentiation nor wide variations in preliminary training
by means of which any pronounced differences in school performance
might be explained, the next point of attack on the problem of the
dissimilarity of the two groups was made by means of tests, some
of which were given individually, some as group tests.
The following tests were selected, not with any thought that
they form an infallible index of the mental status of the performers,
but merely in the hope that they are sufficiently diversified to furnish
some clue to a possible analysis of differentiation of competencies.
I. The Witmer Formboard Test.
This test was given individually in a room in which no one was
present except the student and the examiner. The method employed
was that described by Young.1 The time for the completion of each
of the three trials was noted and the degree of general planfulness
displayed was scored. The median time score of the regular students
on the first trial was 20 seconds, on the second trial, 16 seconds and
on the third trial 12 seconds; while the median scores of the con-
tinuation students for the three trials were 22 seconds, 18 seconds
and 15 seconds. A rating for the planfulness displayed in the per-
formance was given on a three-point scale, viz., good, fair and poor.
Of the regular students, 55 per cent received the rating of good, 15
per cent fair, 30 per cent poor, while the records of the continuation
students show 50 per cent with a rating of good, 5 per cent fair, 45
per cent poor. A priori there might have been the thought that
probably the best performance of the formboard test would be found
among the continuation girls. That this is not true is shown by the
results, although these results do not indicate any decided difference
between the two groups. Because of the relatively simple character
of this test it is not being used in the present survey.
II. The Witmer Cylinders Test.
This test was also an individual performance. The method
used was that standardized by Paschall. The test was rated accord-
ing to the number of seconds necessary for the placing of the cylinders.
The median score of the regular students on the first trial was 73
seconds, on the second trial 55 seconds and on the third trial 45
seconds. The scores of the continuation girls for the three trials
were 67 seconds, 49 seconds, and 45 seconds. There is a slightly
i The Witmer Formboard, Psychological Clinic, June, 1916.
206 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
greater speed on the part of the continuation girls than that shown
by the regular students. Whether this is to be explained as the
result of greater competency and prompter adaptation to this par-
ticular stimulus or whether it is the outcome of a greater familiarity
with the handling of material is open to question. As the two
groups reach the same level of performance on the third trial, the
latter explanation may prove to be true. The results of the test
suggested its repetition. This is being carried on in the present
investigation. The same method is being followed for the first
trial. Out of 97 regular students taking this test, none failed, but
out of 56 continuation students, 2 were unable to complete the test.
The median time for the performance was 71 seconds for the regular
group and 72 seconds for the continuation pupils, consequently so
far as the first trial is concerned there is no difference between the
two groups in the second study.
III. Memory Span for Digits.
This test was given individually according to the method stand-
ardized by H. J. Humpstone. The test included three parts: (a)
determination of the memory span as evidenced by a repetition in
the order presented of the greatest number of digits possible to
repeat without error; (b) the memorizing by means of successive
presentations, of a group of digits of the next higher series to the
memory span; (c) determination of the memory span as evidenced
by a repetiton in the reverse order to that in which they were pre-
sented, of the greatest number of digits possible to repeat without
error. For 121 regular students (records of 1918 and of 1920) the
average number of digits in the forward repetition was 6.42, with a
mean variation of .86; while for 129 continuation students, the
average number of digits was 5.96, with a mean variation of .76.
The average number of trials necessary to learn the next higher series
was 5.03 for the regular students and 5.63 for the continuation pupils.
In the reverse order of repetition, the average number of digits cor-
rectly given by the regular students was 4.78, with a mean variation
of .80, and for the continuation girls, the average number was 4.66,
with a mean variation of .94.
IV. Memory Span for Syllables.
In 1920 the memory span for digits is being followed by a similar
test in which the material presented to the student is a graded series
of sentences in which each sentence contains one more sylable than
the preceding sentence. The average number of syllables correctly
THE CONTINUATION GIRL. 207
repeated by 88 regular pupils was 21, with a mean variation of 2.00;
and the average for 60 continuation students was 19.61, with a mean
variation of 2.50. If associability and memory are indexed by these
tests and if they play an important part in school performance,
does this slight but constant inferiority both in the memory span
for digits and in the memory span for syllables on the part of the
continuation group indicate that the lack of interest in school which
many of these girls frankly confess is due to an inherent incapacity
for the easy performance of the usual school work?
V. Ball and Field Test.1
This test was given as a group test in November, 1917, with
the result that a surprisingly large number of girls failed, viz., 77
per cent out of 177 regular students and 89 per cent of 104 contin-
uation pupils. Inquiry among the girls revealed the fact that the
word field carried no meaning for the greater number of them. To
determine whether or not this lack of familiarity with the meaning
of the word field influenced the results, the following directions were
substituted in 1918 for the original ones:
This is a big empty lot. In it you have lost a little ball. You
do not know exactly where. You only know that it is lost some-
where in the lot. Take the pencil and mark the path you would
follow in order to be sure to find the ball. Begin here (indicating
the gap in the circle) and show me what path you would take.
Following the same method of rating as that used in 1917, viz.,
scoring all attempts not superior as failures, the results of the test
with the modified directions show that 39.36 per cent of the regular
students failed and 75.75 per cent of the continuation students.
Using Terman's method of scoring gives the following results: Of
the regular students, 21.21 per cent were scored as failures, 18.15
per cent as inferior; of the continuation students 54.54 per cent
were scored as failures and 21.21 per cent as inferior. While the
change in the directions resulted in a general improvement in the
performance of the test, there is no lessening of the difference shown
by the two groups. This difference is also being displayed by the
girls in 1920. There is so marked a dissimilarity between the two
groups that we question whether this is an indication of a difference
in imageability or a difference in comprehension of the directions.
1 Terman's test from the Stanford revision, placed at ageB VIII and XII.
208 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
VI. Hard Directions Test.
The material used in this test was Wood worth and Wells Hard
Directions Test. It was given both in 1918 and in 1920 as a group
test according to the following method. The leaflets were distributed
face down to an entire class. The students were instructed to wait
for a given signal and when this signal was given they were to turn
the sheets over and to follow the printed directions exactly. At a
second signal they were told to stop work, even though the test had
not been completed. This method, of course, eliminates individual
time differences, but it makes possible a scoring in regard to ability
to finish the task within a specified time. The papers were scored
according to the number of errors made, an error being either an
omission or an incorrect insertion. In the case of the incomplete
or unfinished papers, the blanks not filled out after the last insertion
were counted as errors. By this method the greatest possible number
of errors is twenty-three.
Hard Directions Test.
Regulars, 1918
Continuation, 1918..
Regulars, 1920
Continuation, 1920..
Time
5 min.
5 "
3 min.
3 "
No. of Cases
62
62
268
215
% Complete
90.47
72.58
68.28
55.34
Errors
Mean
2.6
4.8
4.28
6.66
M. V.
1.8
3.7
3.88
3.06
With the reduction in time from five to three minutes, the
regular students were able to perform the test, so far as the number
of errors is concerned, as successfully as were the continuation girls
in the longer period. Did the two groups differ in the length and
kind of school life, these differences in the performance of the direc-
tions test might be accounted for by a difference in familiarity with
printed instructions. The two groups are so similar in their school
history that some other explanation must be sought to determine
why the continuation girls are unable to complete the test as success-
fully as do the regular students.
VII. Vocabulary Test.
The list of words used in this test is the list printed in the record
booklet of the Termain revision. The test was given individually,
following the ball and field test. Each student was provided with a
THE CONTINUATION GIRL. 209
printed copy of the entire list of 100 words, also a blank paper to
cover the list. She was directed to fix the cover sheet so that she
uncovers one word at a time down the list. The examiner was also
provided with a list. The student was instructed to pronounce the
words as she uncovered them and to tell what each word means.
She was told to say, "I do not know," when she read a word, the
meaning of which was unfamiliar to her. The examiner wrote on
her copy of the list the replies of the student. In scoring, the time
of each pupil was recorded, the total number of correct definitions
and the entire vocabulary, found by multiplying the number of words
defined correctly by 180, were also recorded. These summaries
follow:
Total Estimated Vocabulary.
No. of Cases
Minimum
Maximum
Median
Regulars
Continuation.
30
29
2970
1800
9090
7600
6172
4320
For this vocabulary test there has been substituted in 1920 a
range of information test which consists of a series of one hundred
words. This test was given as a group test to all of the regular
students simultaneously in one forty-five-minute period, and to the
continuation girls in three smaller groups during the same week.
Each of these groups also was limited to a forty-five-minute period
for the performance of the test. The printed lists of words were
distributed to the pupils, who were asked to write the meaning of
the words in their appropriate spaces. The papers were scored
according to the following method: a value of 3 was given for each
correct definition, 2 for each explanation, 1 for each answer which
simpty indicated familiarity with the word.
Range op Information Te3T.
No. Tested
Age
Score.
Min. Max. Mean. M. V.
Regular.
Continuation.
36
77
40
7
48
61
13
14
15
16
14
15
20
18
14
20
150
104
81
54
85
109
55.16
45.12
41.75
38.57
33.25
30.24
13.08
14.50
14.05
8.14
12.54
14.11
210 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Like the vocabulary test, this range of information test demon-
strates the difference between the two groups so far as scope of interest
is concerned, as well as the difference in ability to use language as
a tool.
From a consideration of the results of all of these tests it seems
reasonable to conclude that there is a demonstrable difference
between the two groups of girls studied. The continuation girls
have dropped out of school life, not only because of the lure of the
job, but also because the school has failed or possibly has been
unable to develop in both groups of girls an equal educability in the
intellectual operations required of them in the high school curric-
ulum. Whatever may be the ultimate explanation of this differen-
tiation, it is evident that a curriculum not inferior in quality but
different in content and method of presentation should be formulated
for the continuation student.
