Spoken Language an Essential Tool
==================================

By G. G. Ide, Ph.D.,
University of Pennsylvania.
Angie: Case No. 3498.
Angie lived in the coal fields of West Virginia. The company
who operated the fields gave the employees good houses in which to
live and good hours of employment, but whether they discouraged
school attendance or whether the parents were too indolent to care,
Angie attended school not more than six months in her life. She is
now sixteen years of age. She moved away from the coal fields on
the death of !aer father and came to live in Philadelphia. She is the
eldest of eight children. The mother is living, but with this large
family is not able to do much toward their support, and Angie is
expected to work. When she tried working, however, she did not
stick to her job. Because the work was too hard, or the pills made
her face swell, or she had a fight with another girl, she always quit
before the end of two weeks. Yet she realized that she had to work
to keep the family from "going under the ground."
Angie was tried out with all sorts of intelligence tests. She
responded well in every case where the tests did not depend upon
language. She learned rapidly and put her newly acquired informa-
tion to use. Her memory span was narrow, but adequate; her attention
excellent; her images definite. She could count, but she did not
know any of her combinations and was unable to make change. She
did not know one letter from another in reading, but she was easily
taught to read a page in a primer. In conversation about the condi-
tion of the family and how they were to be supported Angie's judg-
ment was good. She failed to hold her jobs because she had never
learned to control herself br how to deal with other people, part of
the reason for this being because she did not understand what others
were talking about but was always willing to take it for granted that
the conversation was not a compliment to her. Angie believes in
striking first and making inquiries afterwards, when necessary.
The root of Angie's trouble lies in her inability to talk or to
understand others when they talk. She does not use complete
sentences. She knows about only the most simple of facts and is
unable to do more than make herself understood about them. She
(216)
SPOKEN LANGUAGE AN ESSENTIAL TOOL. 217
has no speech defect and is not inherently mentally defective. Her
language defect is due to deprivation. She has had no opportunity
to learn in the home, and there has been no school for her.
Sophie: Case No. 3518.
Sophie was brought to the Psychological Clinic because she
wanted to go to business college, and a social worker interested in
her wanted vocational guidance. Sophie had just graduated from
the eighth grade of a city school. She is Polish, but does not speak
the language. English has been the language of the home. Sophie
is just past fifteen years. She has done well enough in school, about
average for her grade. She is a pleasant-looking blonde child with
the characteristic round head of her race. She is bright enough for
her years, if measurement is made in terms of performance tests, but
she reads in a stumbling fashion in the third reader, and when
attempting speech, she either recites her sentences or else drops into
a vernacular ending always with the street gamin's expression,
"See?" She does not speak a single sentence which is structurally
grammatical. She does not complete her sentences, using only the
high lights as it were and ending them all with the word "See."
As a means of communication, Sophie's language may pass on the
streets, but in a business office it is wholly inadequate. Eight years
of school training have left her with no more language training than
many a three-year-old can boast. This girl is not fitted for any
service which requires the use of words. If she has to work now,
she will make good in a job which does not depend upon her ability
to express or receive ideas.
Mary: Case No. 3510.
Mary is a machine operator. Because she and her parents deny
the school records of her age, the school claiming fifteen and the home
sixteen as the correct age, the school insists that she attend its
sessions, at least until the parents produce evidence that she has
passed her sixteenth birthday. Mary absolutely refused to go to
school and prosecution of her parents has been postponed in an
effort to find out what can be done with Mary. The Psychological
Clinic was therefore called in as a consultant to examine and advise
in Mary's case.
Heavy, dull and stolid looking, fully matured in size and figure,
Mary looks even more than the sixteen years she claims for herself.
One of the reasons she objects to the fifth grade is that the children
all call her "Mamma." She reads fairly well and knows the simpler
218 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
operations in arithmetic. She cannot work out problems. None of
the problems of the home have been given her for solution. While
she earns twelve dollars per week she does not use the money herself.
Her mother buys her clothes. The garments she wears for the street
are frail and not likely to wear, so it is doubtful whether the mother
could teach the child much about money matters. Mary's wages are
needed at home, but not to such an extent as to make it possible to
evade the attendance law by getting her a certificate to that end.
On mental examination Mary is found to be dull. She does
performance tests slowly but surely and pays good attention through-
out to the processes involved. She is not at all nervous even when
hurried. This agrees with the social worker's report that she is suc-
cessful as a worker on a power machine. She makes precise move-
ments which are unhurried. Mary has an adequate memoiy span
and does not respond as does the deficient girl. All her responses are
normal, except in the Binet-Simon tests where she is six or more
years retarded. She does not pass the twelve-year tests. She
cannot define abstract words, she does not classify, she has no
language for description. Her attempts to rearrange words to form
a sentence are absurd. Her understanding of moral questions is
good and her replies correct. She knows street life and is able to
care for herself. There has never been a breach of convention in
sex matters. But this girl cannot talk. Her sentences are incom-
plete. She uses signs to convey much of her meaning?shy smiles,
nods and gestures convey more than do her words. She has a very
limited vocabulary. She does not read so that she understands
enough to give back the gist of what she has read. Her parents are
good workers, but they have no language either. The school has
not been of much benefit to this child in giving her real training in
her English. The parents are not foreign-born. Their people have
been generations in the United States. It is not because of a foreign
language handicap that the vocabularies of the members of the family
are small. Mary cannot make good in school now. She is too old
to sit with the rest of the fifth graders, she is too large for their
company, and she is too mature to enjoy tasks for which she is
totally unfitted and for which she finds no use. She might have
been able to do better, but the time for that is past now. There is
no advantage to her or to the state in placing her in school.
The problem which these girls present is the same as those of
thousands of other children in our public schools today. It is the
problem of the child who comes from a home where language is not
an element in the training?where few books and newspapers appear,
SPOKEN LANGUAGE AN ESSENTIAL TOOL. 219
and where only the casual happenings of the day are discussed by
the family, that is, where a vocabulary of some thousand words or
so is sufficient to carry the family through any sort of crisis: or of
the child who comes from a home where a foreign language is spoken
and where his opportunity for the learning of English comes only
through his contact with the school and the children on the streets.
In either case the effect is the same. The child progresses through
the grades with just enough English to get him past the examinations.
He is often good in arithmetic and is passed on because his judgment
and his ability to solve problems are good enough for a child of his
grade, the language deficiency being passed over. The child learns
the descriptions required by his language class, he reads the books
required of the sixth grade, at least well enough to make his report
upon them, but he lacks the ability to express himself on the simplest
proposition in language suitable to gain his end. A child who can
talk only in the patois of the street, including the gestures and excla-
mations, is not really adequately trained in language.
The problem which the school has to face is very difficult to
solve. The teacher of English knows that the greatest value which
can be given to a lesson comes through the requirement which insists
upon spoken English as its medium. Discussions, descriptions and
oral reproduction produce much better results than does any amount
of written work. If children are taught to speak properly, they
must be given an opportunity to speak. The harassed teacher,
however, points to the requirements for her grade and shows the
amount of time which she could by hook and crook manage to
extract from the requirements for spoken English. With fifty children
in her room, the amount of time allotted per week is so small that
the opportunity for each one to talk is very limited, so limited that
the results are somewhat like those achieved in reading where the
stumblers get as much time as do the others (or more) but neverthe-
less the aggregate time they read per week is so small that practice
in reading is almost nil. Little can be gained in oral speech when
the amount of practice available is so limited. Many a child can do
as Sophie did?speak correctly and stagily for a moment, but carry
nothing of this over to her daily speech.
The foreign child whose parents speak a foreign language in
the home is another aspect of the same problem. He sits in kinder-
garten for a year or more and yet does not learn more than the
meanings of half a dozen commands during the whole time he is
there. He often enters first grade with no knowledge of English.
He may pick up enough of the language to get on to second grade
the first year, but the chances are that he remains in the first grade
220 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
at least two years before he has acquired enough language to read
at all. What is more important than that he should learn the
language of his country? These children are not the children of
immigrants. They are the children often of foreign-born parents,
but in many cases their parents were born in the United States and
still have failed to learn English enough to use it in their homes.
Many children who apparently understand a great deal of English
really understand their teachers?their gestures, the inflections of
their voices?and it is these they obey and not the words which the
teacher uses in her commands. Girls and boys of the sixth grade
still are talking the sort of English one expects of the foreigner of
three-months, residence.
The child who is dull can yet be taught to speak in something
other than street-hoodlum fashion. If his language is what he gets
on the street and his school training functions but occasionally, some-
thing has certainly been given him which is not his. The school
has not been active enough to overcome the training of the street.
Any advantage which the school gives him has been neutralized if
the earmarks of good English are not present. This does not mean
that the child shall speak with good accent and carefully chosen
words?a desirable result, but one certainly rarely achieved. It
does mean that the commonest errors of grammar shall be omitted,
the sentences shall be complete, and that he shall have words enough
to express himself fairly well on the simpler matters of life. There
is no need to suppose that he needs a vocabulary above his station
in life, but he should be able to speak of the affairs which concern
him without requiring the services of the expletive and the outspread
hands to finish the sentence he cannot complete.
The eighth grade graduate is being admitted to business colleges
and trade schools. It is supposed that he is able to write a simple
letter and to spell the more commonly used words with some degree
of facility and correctness. The truth is that not more than half
of these graduates are able to produce, without help, a creditable
piece of work. With no one to oversee them and correct them, they
are not able to do the simplest task correctly. The business college
protects itself by graduating the child when it considers him ready
and refusing to keep him within its halls if it judges him incompetent.
The trade school also practices elimination after trial, and makes
graduation depend upon success with the work in hand. The busi-
ness man protects himself by requiring speed on one process. The
plea from the business world is for more training. Perhaps the need
of more training might be lessened if the training which the children
receive in the elementary schools were better training.
SPOKEN LANGUAGE AN ESSENTIAL TOOL. 22i
Many children will never have an opportunity to learn language
in the home. They are in the position of the small boy who was
pointed out as the star of a second-grade class. He read well, he
spelled and wrote better than any of the rest of the class, and he
knew more number work than his class was supposed to have had.
When tried out with the Binet test which depends so much upon
language, his mental age was eight months less than his chrono-
logical age. A social worker visiting his home found that his mother
and father were ignorant Irish people, good-hearted and ambitious
for their boy, but offering him nothing in the home in the way of
opportunity to increase his vocabulary. What this boy gets in
language training must be secured in school. Thousands of children
are limited in the same fashion. They will never learn to speak
well in their homes. The school must give them all they are to have.
What is more useful to a child than the ability to express himself
in clear English?
Cannot a little more time be allotted to English in the lower
grades? Children are supposed to get their English training from
their reading, but must there not be more intensive training than
this offers? More emphasis on oral expression in the upper grades
and greater opportunity for oral work is necessary. Any child who
is not too dull to keep in the regular grades will profit by direct
language training.
There is no doubt that the primary teacher feels that her efforts
at teaching English are wasted because the teacher in the upper
grades does not continue the drill, and the teacher in the upper
grades criticises the teacher in the primary because she does not
send on a better product, and the teachers throughout the elementary
school criticise the critic who says that the school must teach English,
saying that the school can never overcome the effect of home training
or the lack of it.
No doubt under present conditions they are right, but the solu-
tion of the problem is still left to the school. Americans are to be
trained in the school. The school does not try to shirk its duty in
that respect. Part of the training for citizenship is the training in
language which places English above all other languages in this coun-
try and which makes the student so adept in his speech that he is
not marked off from his fellows because of its lack. This is not too
high a standard. The feeble-minded child can be taught to speak
properly and correctly. It is only by means of language?our
language?that our customs and institutions can be given to the
coming generation of American citizens. It is imperative that these
future citizens shall be given the tools with which to weld their
citizenship.
