Intelligence Tests Versus Teacher's Estimate
=============================================

By Ethel D. Whitmire,
Graduate Student, Leland Stanford Jr. University.
The following report is offered as a piece of evidence for the
accuracy of the intelligence tests in determining the ability of students
as opposed to the sometimes vague or indefinite judgment of the
teacher. The Stanford Revision of the Binet Simon tests was used
by the examiner in obtaining some special information about retarded
children. The two subjects specially described are pupils in the
high sixth grade of a large public school. The teacher of their class
gave a detailed account of difficulties concerning a number of back-
ward children and was particularly perplexed regarding Anna and
Roy. In her opinion neither one could accomplish the work of the
grade, but she said that of the two Anna was more capable, more
willing and more ambitious. There was no criticism of Roy's behav-
ior other than that he seemed too indifferent to apply the necessary
effort. Both pupils were going to be promoted, however, at the mid-
term because the incoming class would be too large to permit their
remaining in it.
Roy's attitude during the test was that of ordinary interest
coupled with an evident desire to answer the various questions as
well as possible. He volunteered the regret that he had not worked
harder to obtain better marks in school but had felt no other interest
beyond the ever-present desire to enlist in the navy. He frankly
acknowledged that he "hated" school and so informed the teacher.
From other sources the examiner learned that Roy's home life
is very unsettled. His mother is a confirmed alcoholic. His father
is engaged in the lumber business and is away from home most of
the time. Roy spends his vacations with his father and completed
the work of the fifth grade in a little school in the mountains near
the lumber camp. Upon returning to the city he said that his
experience in the mountains made him feel older than his former
schoolmates, and he was disappointed that he was not more advanced
in his studies. In his own words, "There I worked around the camp
on Saturdays and sometimes went hunting with the men on Sundays,
and when I came down here to school again I was not up in class
with the boys and girls I had known."
The results of the test were as follows: C. Age 13-7, M. Age 14-2,
I. Q. 106.
(197)
198 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Anna, the sccond subject, is of Italian parentage but speaks
English at home. Her mother was born in this country, and her
father came here as a boy. He had not had an education beyond the
fourth grade. Her mother had attended a convent for several years
and had been married at the age of sixteen. The family lived on a
small ranch belonging to an uncle, but the father was planning to
purchase it with his accumulated savings.
During the test Anna was very quiet, smiling continually and
rather blankly. When the questions belonging to the seven-year
group were reached her expression showed real interest, as she did
not have to hesitate for a suitable answer. She became communi-
cative and told the examiner that she liked to go to school, and that
she studied her lessons every day but forgot them easily. She has
been promoted fairly regularly but had not thought of trying to
progress farther than the eighth grade. She seemed like a very
young child when she added, like a list of virtuous acts, that she
always helped the teacher by watering the plants, cleaning the
boards and bringing fresh flowers for the room.
The results of the test were as follows: C. Age 13-6, M. Age
8-3, I. Q. 61.
We may only guess at the standard of the particular teacher in
regard to the meaning of general intelligence. The evidence in
Anna's case makes us conclude that the attitude of willingness,
attention and attempts at studying formed too large a part in the
definition of ability. The poor results of her efforts were excused
by the facts of a weak memory, lack of confidence and marked shyness.
Her ability was overestimated chiefly on account of her pleasant
nature. Roy's ability was underestimated because he did not come
up to the teacher's idea of showing the proper attitude towards his
work and therefore became difficult. He had made good progress
up to the fifth grade, and because he did not study this progress
had not continued. He was not plastic enough to accept the routine
with the cheerfulness of Anna, and so his rebellion was taken for
stupidity.
More definite conclusions might have been possible had not the
psychologist in charge desired that the results of the tests should not
be discussed with the teacher.
