Lunacy In Scotland
===================

274 Art. XII.?

The Commissioners in Lunacy for Scotland report that there
were under treatment on January 1, 1881, a total number of
10,012 patients, 4,692 being men, and 5,320 women. These
were distributed thus:?In royal and district asylums, 5,920 ;
in private asylums, 157 ; in parochial asylums, 1,342 ; in lunatic
wards of poorhouses, 714; and in private dwellings, 1,629. In the
lunatic department of the general prison, Perth, there were 55
inmates; and in training schools, 195 insane persons. Out of
these, excluding the 55 state lunatics in the Perth prison, 8,312
were pauper patients, 1,645 only being private ones; and it
may be noticed that the number of patients registered as being
in private asylums is only 157, whereas no less than 1,629 are
put down as located in private dwellings. An increase among
this class of patients, too, is recorded to the Dumber of 106,
101 being paupers, and 5 only private or non-pauper patients.
In explanation of the small proportion, 157 of patients in
private asylums, it may be explained that no pauper patient
is provided for in these institutions, and, in addition, the
Scotch system encourages a "boarding-out" plan, whereby
such patients as would in this country come into private
asylums are cared for in private dwelling-houses, either by
friends or by persons pecuniarily interested in their welfare.
These patients are consequently of two classes, and of the total
of 1,629, 113 rank as private, and 1,516 as paupers. Of the
whole number placed in private dwellings, 29 were in houses
possessed of special licences. The Commissioners explain that
the circumstances under which a non-pauper insane person
comes under their supervision are :

(1) If he is boarded in a private house for profit, and suffers
from mental disorder of confirmed character.
(2) If, whether kept for profit or not, he has been insane
for more than a year, and is subject to compulsory confinement
to the house, to restraint or coercion of any kind, or to harsh
and cruel treatment.
(3) If he possesses property which has been placed under
curatory by the Court of Session.

A large number of private patients living in family, who
are neither kept for profit nor restrained nor cruelly used,
are, they continue, thus beyond their jurisdiction. Even a
patient who is kept for profit does not require to be reported, if
it is certified by a registered medical practitioner that he is
afflicted with a malady which is not confirmed, and that it is
expedient to place him for a temporary residence, not exceeding
six months, in the house in which he is so kept.
Although they do not regard it as desirable that any class
of persons should be brought under official supervision unless
such supervision appears to be necessary to'guard against abuse,
they regard the systematic visitation of patients in private
dwellings as a duty of great importance in all cases where the
statute requires the supervision of the Board to be exercised.
Concerning an increase of 101 pauper patients in private
dwellings for 1880, and which contrasts with the little variation
in 'numbers for the preceding five years, the explanation is
offered that transfers from asylums to private dwellings have
far exceeded those to asylums from private dwellings, and also
that as many as 31 new cases in excess were reported by the
inspectors of the poor. The Deputy Commissioners present
most favourable reports of the conditions of patients in private
dwellings ; thus Deputy Commissioner Fraser says :
" The general condition of the patients in private dwellings
appears to me to be steadily improving. The recommendations
and requirements of the Board, especially in regard to lay and
medical supervision, have, on the whole, been most faithfully
carried out, and consequently the care and treatment of the
patients are better. It is at present exceptional to find neglect
of supervision, or the omission of its careful record in the book
kept for the purpose. There is also on the part of the bulk of
parochial boards a willingness to give effect to the suggestions
of the officers of the Board; and when new cases occur, the
standard of house accommodation and of comfort which is provided is generally such as at once to satisfy the Board."
And Deputy Commissioner Lawson reports that:
" The insane who are resident in private dwellings and
specially licensed houses throughout the district assigned to me
were found during my last visitation to be so well cared for
that only in a few instances was it necessary to make more
than merely casual suggestions for the improvement of their
conditions."

The overcrowding of asylums renders the necessity for a
boarding-out arrangement increasingly apparent, and this may
be taken to account for the number of such patients so situated
who with us would be provided for in one or other of the
private asylums. It is satisfactory to know that the results
obtained by this plan are favourable, but however much this
may appear to be the case, there cannot be expected that so
much benefit will be derived by patients thus precariously
situated, as would follow were' they regularly cared for by
experienced persons in duly appointed institutions for the
insane. Indeed^ the Commissioners themselves acknowledge
this, in a measure ; and it is significant that in spite of all the
favourable reports received by them they are nevertheless compelled to observe that " there are still, and perhaps there must
always be, cases in which we are compelled to give our sanction
to conditions that are not quite satisfactory. In the case of
patients under the care of their parents or other natural
guardians, it is sometimes impossible to obtain what we regard
as desirable to make the patient's condition satisfactory, without
removing him to other guardianship, or making some other
radical change in the arrangements to which the natural
guardians will not consent."

On the subject of private asylums the Commissioners are
united in commendation of the arrangements existing in them
for the comfort of patients ; and in no single instance is any
complaint uttered against either the administration or the
buildings. Special attention is again drawn to the success
attending the employment of lady attendants at Staughton
Hall Asylum, near Edinburgh. " They are in constant association
with the lady patients both in and out of doors, and they are
assisted by ordinary attendants, acting more or less as ladies' maids,
and by housemaids and tablemaids. The way in which this introduces ordinary domestic arrangements and habits into the life
of the asylum is believed to be very beneficial to the patients."
This plan has also been followed with success at the Whitehouse Asylum, where, in addition to the ordinary attendants,
four lady companions, who do no menial work, have charge of
the female patients.
Parochial asylums and lunatic wards of workhouses generally are favourably noticed by the Commissioners, who, beyond
suggesting improvements in the arrangements, &c., find no
fault with them.

During the year five patients were admitted to the establishment for State or criminal lunatics at Perth, and two patients,
one male and one female, were discharged recovered within the
same period. Four men and one woman were also sent away
not recovered, and four male prisoners died. On December
31, 1880, there remained a total of 55 inmates of the institution. The following important communications respecting this
asylum have been made to the Commissioners in Lunacy by the
Medical Commissioners, and should at any rate excite an immediate desire to remove the abuse complained of:
" The chief defect in the management of the establishment
continues to be due to the insufficiency of the extent of ground
devoted to the exercise and employment of men. The mental
condition of many of them might be greatly improved if a
suitable opportunity of employment were available ; and it is
impossible to provide this without a considerable addition to
the extent of land. A very large proportion of the men are in
a condition of constant excitement or irritability, which is
injurious both to themselves and the other inmates, and which
would be greatly allayed by out-door occupation. Many of them
labour under forms of insanity which are similar to those met
with in ordinary asylums, and which are found comparatively
free from dangerous violence and not requiring special treatment when in such institutions, though in these wards it is
found necessary to keep them under frequent mechanical
restraint.

" It is perhaps impossible, in the present circumstances of
the establishment, to avoid resorting to this extensive use of
mechanical restraint; but it cannot be overlooked that in most
cases it intensifies the state of irritability from which the
impulses to violence arise. The evil has been frequently dwelt
on in previous reports ; but it is proper that attention should
be again and again drawn to it, in the hope that steps may be
taken to apply a remedy. Ample elbow-room and greater
facilities for industrial occupation would undoubtedly be accompanied by a great improvement in the condition of most of the
male inmates."

In the report dated 10th July, 1880, it is stated that "six
men and two women were found mechanically restrained," and
it is added that " these numbers would be immediately reduced
if active out-door work were more abundant, and if the airing
courts were enlarged."

Considerable space is devoted in this report to the question
of exercise and recreation of patients in asylums, and it is a
pleasant reflection that a much greater amount of liberty is
now enjoyed by the unhappy victims of mental disease than
used to be the case. By the extension of the principle of
freedom as far as possible in Scotland three important improvements have been introduced into the mode of treating
patients, viz.: (1) the abolition of walled airing-courts; (2)
the disuse of locked doors; and (3) the extension of the
practice of giving liberty on parole. The Commissioners comment on each of these subjects separately. Under the second
heading they write; " It is year by year becoming more
clearly recognised that many advantages result from the working of the open-door system, and it has now been adopted to a
greater or less extent in most of the Scotch asylums. In the
Fife and Kinross Asylum, which contains about 330 inmates,
only two wards, one for 20 female patients and one for 30
male patients, are kept locked; and in the Barony Asylum at
Lenzie, which accommodates upwards of 500 patients, there is
free communication between all the wards, as well as free
egress from each of them to the general grounds of the estab'278 LUNACY IN SCOTLA.ND.
lishment." The advantages claimed for the system are many,
and chief among them may be mentioned the removal of any
cause for a patient to watch a chance of finding egress through
an incautiously opened door, and the consequent greater
quietude of his condition at all times. One effect of the removal
of physical restrictions is described as stimulation of efforts
to develop the industrial occupation of patients. The benefits
of healthy and moderate employment cannot be over-estimated
in many instances, and although the system is not applicable
in every class of cases, yet sufficient good is achieved by it to
render its general introduction of desirable attainment. We
cannot give space to a further account of the attempts being
made in this direction in Scotland; but a reference to the
pages of the Commissioners' report in which they are described
will be well repaid.

During 1880 167 private patients, or 27 below the average
for the preceding five years, were discharged recovered out of
the total number under treatment; and of paupers 941, or 80
above the average for the five years preceding. The following
table detailing the percentage of recoveries under each class is
instructive :

Classes of Establishments
Recoveries per Cent, of Admissions
1875 to 1879
1880
In royal and district asylums .
In private asylums .
In parochial asylums
In lunatic wards of poorhouses
36
40
33
11
44
44
36
10
M.
41
3644
4
41
38
37

It will be observed that in this statement private and
pauper patients are not distinguished from one another. It
would be necessary that this should be done, and also that the
effect of transfers should be eliminated from the calculations
before the results obtained in the different classes of establishments could be fully appreciated.
Excluding transfers, 145 private and 303 pauper patients
were discharged unrecovered; and the number removed on
probation was 87. Of these 28 have been finally discharged,
4 died, 7 remain in care of friends, 12 have been returned to
asylums, and 38 remain on probation.

This report is full of interesting information, and is in all
pertaining to the care and treatment of lunatics replete with
valuable suggestions. We regret that we are unable to devote
further space to an examination of its contents.
