A Practical Treatise on Nervous Exhaustion (Neurasthenia)
==========================================================

By George M. Beard, A.M., M.D., &c. New York :
William Wood and Company, 27 Great Jones Street,
1880.
According to Dr. Beard, nervous diseases, the result of nervous
exhaustion, have increased to a fearful extent of late years in
America. He has given especial attention to the subject, and
has included all the various forms of defective nervous power
under the term Neurasthenia. The symptoms of this malady,
judging from Dr. Beard's account of them, are of a most
complicated and protean character, and are attributed by him to
the effects of civilisation. He admits that they defy logical
order, but for the sake of convenience and for easy reference,
he arranges them as follows, beginning with the brain and
going downwards:?
" Tenderness of the Scalp (Cerebral Irritation).?This is a
phenomenon which is to the head what spinal irritation is to the
spine. As in spinal irritation, the whole spine may be tender
all the way from the first cervical vertebra to the coccyx; or
the tenderness may be confined to the middle dorsal and middle
lumbar vertebraB; so, in cerebral irritation, there may be
PART I. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES. H
98 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
tenderness over the entire scalp, or it may te confined to the
vertex, or to certain points in the forehead. Sometimes the
scalp is so tender that brushing the hair causes pain; even
touching the tips of the hair is disagreeable. At the vertex
the tenderness is sometimes accompanied by a feeling of heat
and burning, that may be somewhat relieved by firm pressure.
This cerebral tenderness, like spinal tenderness, is superficial
and peripheral, not deep-seated nor central, as some have supposed. It is, in many if not in all cases, tenderness of the
ramifications of the occipital and other nerves that supply the
scalp, just as spinal irritation is tenderness of the superficial
nerves of the bones of the spinal column.
" Dilated Pupils.?Dilatation of the pupils is so often seen
in neurasthenia that it may be considered as an important fact
to be noted in the study of a case.
'* Abnormal activity of the pupil?sudden and frequent
alternations between contraction and dilatation?is a sign of
neurasthenia, or, at least, of nervous irritability, of perhaps
more importance than mere dilatation, just as in organic
diseases of the cord, sluggishness of the pupils, slowness to
contiact or dilate, has been recently suggested as a better
diagnostic sign than mere contraction of one or both pupils.
Temporary inequality of the pupils?one being at times
more dilated than the other?I have seen in neurasthenia.
Permanent inequality of the pupils is a sign of organic disease;
but this neurasthenic inequality is inconstant, varying with the
general condition.
" Sick Headache and Various Forms of Head Pain.?
Sick headache is both a symptom and a safety-valve. If one
must be nervous, an occasional attack of sick headache, if it be
not too severe, is an excellent way for this nervousness to manifest itself, and, no doubt, saves other and worse affections.
When sick headaches suddenly and permanently leave us, there
may be reason to beware, though not probably in all cases.
Some years ago I had under my care, for a short time, a case of
shaking palsy that had followed a sudden and apparently causeless cessation of sick headache. When sick headache leaves us
as a result of improvement cf the nervous system through
treatment or hygiene, it is so far forth a good sign.
" Pain, Pressure and Heaviness in the back of the head
and over the vertex and through the whole head, very commonly
attend the neurasthenic state, especially when the brain is congested ; but may also appear where there is no evidence of an
excess of blood on the brain. Lightness of the head is also a
common complaint; also a symptom usually defined as ' I cannot tell how I feel.'
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 99
" Changes in the Expression of the Eye.?The mere expression of the eye is modified by disease in a way that it is hard
to analyse or describe. In chronic nervous exhaustion from any
cause or combination of causes, this expression of debility may
become chronic?a permanent state that is revealed at once on
neeting and addressing the sufferer. In the exhaustion that
precedes death, the eye, as has been observed, sometimes protrudes far more than is natural. It is believed that this
phenomenon takes place through the sympathetic.
" Congestion of the Conjunctiva.?One of the many ways
in which neurasthenia affects the eyes is, by congestion of the
conjunctiva. This passive congestion comes and goes, like all
the other symptoms, being very bad in the morning, and almost
disappearing by night, or perhaps in the course of an hour or
two.
" Disturbances of the Nerves of Special Sense.?A malady
of the eye is what I may call neurasthenic asthenopia, or the
irritable eye, from nervous exhaustion, not depending solely on
any muscular or accommodative trouble, but mainly symptomatic, revealing nothing very satisfactory to the ophthalmoscope
or other tests of modern ophthalmology, but none the less painful,
distressing, and sometimes exceedingly obstinate. This disease
of the eye, symptomatic of nervous exhaustion, I observed a
number of years ago, but could find no formal recognition of it
in the standard text-books of ophthalmology. Dr. Mathewson,
in conversation on the subject, tells me that this third form of
asthenopia is now, however, under various names, coming into
recognition in the journals and societies devoted to diseases of
the eye. For a time it was supposed that Donders had solved
all the problems of asthenopia; but it is now known that there
are many cases that cannot be cured by glasses. These cases
are common in this country, and, Dr. Roosa tells me, were first
observed by our ophthalmologists.
" Muscm Volitantes, or floating specks before the eyes,
often annoy even the slightly nervously exhausted ; in these
cases the ophthalmoscope is only of negative assistance. Under
exciting causes the specks suddenly appear and disappear. The
liability to them may be a habit of one's life. They come and
go like other nervous symptoms.
" Noises in the Ears in the shape of sudden explosions or
pulsations, to say nothing of other varieties of tinnitus aurium,
are quite common in cerebral exhaustion, especially when
attended with congestion. These explosions may come on without any warning, while one is sitting quite still, and there is no
apparent exciting cause. These symptoms may occur even
when there is no perceptible disease of the auditory apparatus,
ii 2
100 KEVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES
and may disappear as suddenly as they appear. A feeling of
fulness and oppression in the head sometimes attends these
symptoms. Subjective odours of various kinds?as of ozone or
phosphorus; also abnormal subjective tastes?bitter or sour,
with other fleeting symptoms of cerebral exhaustion, are
observed.
" Sometimes there is a pumping sound in one or both ears,
synchronous with the movements of the heart, worse usually
during or after exertion, as going up-stairs; and it may be very
annoying when one is very still, as when lying down in bed in
the night; it is apt to be worse when stooping, or when worried
or annoyed or flurried by any mental emotion. If this symptom
were a constant one, and were always associated with demonstrable disease of the drum or middle ear, it might not perhaps
be so great a mystery; but appearing, as it sometimes does, in
those whose hearing is clearly perfect, or nearly so, and coming
and going alternate with other symptoms of neurasthenia,
without oftentimes any exciting cause being traced, it is probably due to the hyperesthesia of the auditory nerve, and
analogous to that of the retina; and, like the retinal hyperesthesia, it is inconstant, variable, and capricious. My friend
Dr. Schell, of Philadelphia, tells me that he has seen a number
of cases where there were attacks of pain and aching in the
ear, analogous to the pain and aching of the neurasthenic
eye ; but to account for which no objective appearances can be
found.
" Atonic Voice.?When neurasthenia lays its hands on a
man, it is liable to leave its impress on every organ and function
of the body; from the crown to the toe there is not a fibre that
is safe from attack. If some parts escape in one individual, they
suffer in others. If at one stage of the malady certain regions are
unaffected, it may be only that they may be attacked with all
the greater violence at another stage. Thus the hair, the scalp,
the eyes, the ears,-the nasal and respiratory passages; the brain,
in whole or in part, the cranial nerves, the heart, the spinal
cord in any portion, the seiisory and motor nerves, the stomach
and bowels, the reproductive system, the skin, the nails, the
secretions, the excretions, the absorbents?are all objects of
assault.
u Deficient Mental Control.?Inability to concentrate the
intellect on any task, as in writing or thinking, is a notable
symptom. The mind wanders away in every direction, and
when brought back by an effort of the will, is liable to be soon
again lost in reverie.
" In some cases the exercise of concentration, or even slight
attention, is exceedingly irksome and painful, causing distress
REVIEWS AXD BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 101
sometimes in the head, sometimes in the back or extremities,
or other parts of the body.
"Inability to control the mind shows itself in various ways.
An individual may take up a newspaper or book and read over
a paragraph a halt-dozen times, without knowing anything about
that paragraph, without being able even in a general way to
tell what he has been reading. Sometimes, in discouragement,
they throw down the book ; in despair they may attempt to
write a letter, and find that they must give it up before a single
page is completed, the mind wanders in sort of a day dream as
far as possible from the subject to which they would direct their
thoughts; they find that their brains are masters, and not themselves. Such a person often finds himself absorbed in a kind
of dream, perhaps sitting quite still and forgetful of the work
to which he has directed himself. A clergyman who consulted
me in the past year for cerebrasthenia, or brain exhaustion, tells
me that, although he can read even profound treatises, and converse on different themes, yet if he should attempt even to
dictate and systematise a sermon he would be obliged to give
up; the very idea of sustained, directed thought at once takes
away all his power.
" Closely allied to this deficient mental control, and indeed
a part of it, is what a layman, Mr. Richard Grant White, calls
4 Heterophemy,' that is, saying one thing and meaning another,
saying oftentimes directly the opposite to what we meant to
say; saying precisely what we wish to avoid; the word we wish
slips in ahead of the one that we would bring to the front.
Persons in health are frequently guilty of this very interesting
blunder; but in disease of the brain it becomes a very bad,
sometimes very an,using as well as very annoying symptom.
One of my old patients (the wife of a patient just referred to),
who has both brain exhaustion and spine exhaustion, sometimes
is compelled to mention a number of different words before she
strikes the word she wishes. If, for example, she would have a
book, perhaps she would say chair or sofa. She was not troubled
in this way until she became neurasthenic, and since that time
she has been troubled constantly.
" Mental Irritability.?A man comes home at night specially
tired, and finds himself, or his friends find him, in a condition
to fret and worry and become irascible over trifles which, when
feeling well and calm, would have no influence upon him. The
flurries of domestic life, the cares of the house, disappointments
and vexations, the noise of play of children, become a source of
great distress, and he expresses this distress in his words and
actions.
" This behaviour may be either physiological or pathological
?the habit of a perfectly healthy man or a symptom of neuras102 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
thenia appearing in one previously good-tempered, and associated
with other neurasthenic symptoms it becomes of diagnostic value.
" Hopelessness.?When a patient is dying, in the last stages
of consumption or cancer, he is often, if not usually, hopeful;
and sometimes he does not abandon the expectation of recovery
even when on the edge of the grave. After friends have given
up utterly, and the physician only comes to relieve, the patient
himself is full of hope.
" The philosophy of this symptom of hopelessness appears
to be similar to that, of morbid fear?an instinctive consciousness of inadequacy for the task before us. We are hopeless
because our nerve force is so reduced that the mere holding on
to life seems to be a burden too heavy for us. A certain
amount of nerve strength is necessary to supply the courage
requisite for simple existence. Abstaining from dying demands
a degree of force just as the mere keeping in an erect position
?standing up without taking a single step?is only possible to
those who have a certain quantity of strength. Abstaining from
dying, like abstaining from falling, is in one respect a negation
only, but neither is possible without an expenditure of force.
" In our half-awakened moments at midnight, a slight
noise causes the heart to beat rapidly, for we are conscious of
not having full possession of our powers to meet any attack or
danger. The nervously-exhausted man is always in this state,
physically insolvent, and unequal to the task of living.
" The despair of sea-sickness well illustrates this phenomenon. In the short space of an hour, or lesss, one can be reduced
from a state of perfect bliss to perfect misery, simply from the
perturbations caused by the motion of the vessel.
" One time, when returning from England, our steamer
collided with a sailing vessel in such a way and under such
circumstances as to give just reason for the belief that we might
be in serious peril. In the height of the excitement and alarm
a sea-sick passenger came out from his room, where he had
been shut up ever since our departure, and inquired what the
trouble was all about. He was informed that our steamer was
leaking, and that we were fast sinking. ' If that's all, I'll
turn in again,' he replied, and went back to his berth, whence
he did not emerge until we all landed, in New York.
" Morbid Fear.?The emotion of fear is normal to the
human mind. It is as natural and necessary to be afraid as to
be courageous. Fear is, indeed, a part of the first law of nature,
self-existence. This emotion is, therefore, physiological, varying both in degree and kind, with race, sex, age, and the
individual. In neuropathology, especially in the pathology of
functional nervous diseases, the difference between health and
disease is of degree rather than of kind; the phenomena that
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 103
belong to what we call health passing, by indefinite and not
distinctly defined gradations, into the phenomena of what we
call disease ; pathology being, in truth, has as been said, but
the shady side of physiology.
" Westphal more recently has described a form of morbid
fear under the term agoraphobia, or fear of places. This
title, however, is quite inadequate to express the many varieties
of morbid fear which the expression fear of places covers. The
Greek word agora, from which Westphal derives his term,
means an open square?a market place, a public place where
assemblies were held?and as applied to the cases first described
by him, the term is practically, though not etymologically, a
correct one, for the fear of going across open squares or places,
at a distance from houses to shops, was the chief feature in all
of those cases.* This fear of open squares or places is, however,
but one of a large number of phases that the fear of places
assumes, as I have elsewhere described. In strictness, fear of
places should be described from the Greek word topos, place, a
generic term, while agora is a special kind of place ; agoraphobia would, therefore, be a species of topophobia, or a general
fear of places, which symptom seems to be capable of infinite
variety.
" A form of morbid fear that has long been known to the
profession, is pathophobia, or fear of diseases?more commonly
known as hypochondriasis. This form of morbid fear seldom
exists alone, but is found in company with other symptoms?
some real disorder of the nervous system. The pathophobia sufferer, with brain or stomach, or both, exhausted for some reason,
may fear disease of the heart, of the stomach, or of the brain, or of
the reproductive system, even when there is no sign of disease
except his fear. The mistake usually made in the study of
these cases is to assume that this fear of disease is the only
symptom which the patient has, and that it is the cause of the
disease; whereas, usually, it is the result of the disease of cerebral exhaustion, like the other forms of morbid fear, whatever
the cause may be; and as such it should be studied and treated.
" There is a manifestation of morbid fear which is not uncommon, and to which we might perhaps give the term pantaphobia, or fear of everything; all responsibility, every attempt
to make a change of movement being the result of dread and
alarm. The wife of one of my patients has a morbid fear in
reference to one of her sons, a lad of about fifteen years of age;
and so distressed is she by it that she cannot allow him to go out
of the house, or out of her sight, fearing lest he may be kid* In etymological strictness agoraphobia means fear of large assemblies of
human beings, and not of the place whore the people meet.
104 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
napped, or some harm may come to him,. as in the case of
Charlie Ross. The poor fellow is thus kept a prisoner most of
the time, and the whole family is disturbed and annoyed. He
must remain in the city during the summer, as she cannot
allow him to leave town ; and at no season can he go anywhere
unless accompanied by his tutor.
"For convenience of reference this classification of morbid
fears may be thus tabulated :
" Astraphobia?Fear of lightning.
" Topophobia?Fear of places ; a generic term, with these
subdivisions:
" Agoraphobia?Fear of open places.
" Claustrophobia?Fear of narrow, closed places.
" Anthropopiiobia?Fear of man ; a generic term including
fear of society.
" Gynephobia?Fear of woman.
" Monophobia?Fear of being alone.
"Pathophobia?Fear of disease, usually called hypochondriasis.
" Pantaphobia?Fear of everything.
" Phobophobia?Fear of being afraid.
" Mysophobia?Fear of contamination.
" Flushing and Fidgetiness.?Patients of this class oftentimes easily flush and easily faint; the inhibitory action of the
sympathetic is readily interfered with by any slight emotion.
Fidgetiness and nervousness, inability to keep still?a sensation
that amounts to pain?is sometimes unspeakably distressing.
Although it cannot be defined, it may be an accompaniment of
growing pains, and is one of the myriad results of spinal irritation. Sometimes in writing, the hand and arm become so
nervous and fidgety that to continue writing would be the
severest torture. When the legs feel this way, the sufferer
must get up and walk or run, even though he be debilitated
and is made worse by severe exercise. A gentleman once under
my care could not sit still in the chair long enough to take an
application of electricity.
" Frequent Blushing.?A very common effect of nervous
exhaustion, in both sexes, is frequent and severe blushing from
the slightest possible mental or physical causes, and extending
sometimes, not only over the face, forehead, and ears, but
down the neck, and apparently over other portions of the body.
Suddenly meeting anyone, a stranger or acquaintance, the
hearing of an unexpected noise, the taking of food or drink
into the stomach, especially when rapidly swallowed, any stooping, or straining, or any slight muscular or mental exertion,
may bring on this unpleasant, perplexing, and annoying sympREVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 105
torn. In some cases the symptom appears without any objective
cause whatever; the person may be sitting all alone, and the
face, under some thought, or fear, or anxiety, or feeling of
responsibility, may become as red as though suddenly entering
company.
" Insomnia.?The different phrases of insomnia in neurasthenic patients are exceeding interesting.
" One man finds no difficulty in getting to sleep on retiring
but soon wakes, and must remain awake for the rest of the night.
Another man rolls and tumbles for hours before he falls into
oblivious slumber, but when once asleep does not usually wake
until morning. I was recently consulted for a case of insomnia
of many years' duration, where there had never been any difficulty in sleeping after getting to sleep.
" Drowsiness is the opposite symptom, and is experienced
by persons whose symptoms in other respects are very much the
same as those of the sleepless.
" Tenderness of the Teeth and Gums.?Attacks of tenderness of all the teeth, accompanied by a whitish appearance of the
gums, I have noticed in nervous exhaustion. In these attacks,
which may result from over-work, or excess, all the teeth may
be very tender on pressure, although none of them are decayed.
Here, then, is another opportunity to study with the naked eye
the pathology of spinal irritation. In nervous exhaustion,
whether complicated with ansemia or not, there may be tender
ness of any part of the body or of the whole body. Tenderness
of the head is cerebral irritation; of the spine, spinal irritation;
of the tip of the spine, coccyodynia ; of the breast, irritable
mammae; of the ovaries, irritable ovaries ; of the teeth here
described, dental irritation; and so on of the womb; and the
pathology of any one of these symptoms is probably the pathology of all.
Nervous Dyspepsia (Dyspepsie Asthenique).?In cases?
not a few?nervous dyspepsia is the first noticeable symptom of
nervous exhaustion?the earliest sign that the body is giving
way ; and for years the stomach may be functionally disordered
before the brain, or spinal cord, or other parts or organs, show
signs of yielding. The true philosophy is, that nervous
dyspepsia is a symptom of the same general pathological condition as all the orders of symptoms here noted, and it may
follow or accompany, as well as lead this multitudinous army.
A literary gentleman whom I once met, gave a history of
nervous exhaustion from over-confinement, that after some
years broke out through the pneumogastric nerve, causing profound and obstinate dyspepsia, that for a long time made him a
complete invalid ; the symptoms were almost as bad as those ot
106 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
cancer of the stomach, and yet the disturbance was entirely
functional, and the patient improved. Flatulence with annoying
rumbling in the bowels these patients complain of very frequently ; also nausea and diarrhoea.
" Deficient Thirst, and Capacity for Assimilating Fluids
?Quite recently a physician who consulted me in regard to
himself, called my attention to the highly interesting fact that
he rarely drank water either at meals or between meals; and he
stated that the average quantity of liquid that he consumed was
far below the normal standard. Investigation of other cases of
neurasthenic has convinced me that this deficiency of thirst is
one of the symptoms of that state, and it would appear that it
is not an unusual symptom, but exists in not a few cases; there
are many who for years have a poor appetite for fluids, as they
have a poor appetite for solid food; they live on a small
quantity of liquid, and, perhaps, without suspecting it, until
their attention is directed to the fact. There are those who
find that, if they take much liquid, the stomach suffers, even
when little or no solid food is mingled with it. One advantage,
with some disadvantages, of the free use of beer with our
German friends is in the quantity of fluid that they thereby
imbibe?the water of the drink more than the alcohol. Drinking
milk has a similar advantage.
" Desire for Stimulants and Narcotics.?When the nervous system loses, through any cause, much of its nervous
force, so that it cannot stand upright with ease and comfort, it
leans on the nearest and most convenient artificial support that
is capable of temporarily propping up the enfeebled frame.
Anything that gives ease, sedation, oblivion, such as chloral,
chloroform, opium, or alcohol, may be resorted to at first as an
incident, and finally as a habit. Such is the philosophy of
man}'' cases of opium or alcohol inebriety. Not only for the
relief of pain, but for the relief of exhaustion, deeper and more
distressing than pain, do both men and women resort to the
drug shop. I count this as one of the great causes of the
recent increase of opium and alcohol inebriety among women.
Frequently an inherited tendency to inebriety is utterly latent,
and does not break out until affliction, or some form of worry
or distress, robs the brain of its nerve-force. Very many cases
illustrative of this have been published by my friend Dr. T. D.
Crothers, now superintendent of the Walnut Hill Asylum for
Inebriates, Hartfort, Ct.
" One sign of neurasthenia, especially of an acute attack, is
inability to bear certain kinds of stimulants and narcotics to
which patients have been accustomed; thus patients have told
me, that during illness of any kind, they were obliged to susREVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 107
pend smoking; they say that tobacco makes them sick. Thit
happens to those who have been accustomed to use large quantities both chewing and smoking. As they regain their strength,
they also regain their power of using stimulants.
" Abnormalities of the Secretions.?In nervous exhaustion,
the eyes may become moistened more readily than in health,
and under a very slight emotion of pleasure or pain. The
flood-gates seem, as it were, to stand ajar; and on trifling
agitation the tears flow forth. In grave cerebral disease, this
symptom is common enough, but in functional disease?simple
nervous exhaustion?it is even more common ; and ' softening of
the brain ' is feared.
" In nervous debility, also, the sebaceous glands may refuse
to do their duty; the hair and beard become dry and stiff, and
much pomade is needed. The hair then falls off or becomes
gray in patches.
" Abnormal Dryness of the Skin, Joints, and Mucous
Membranes.?In some cases of neurasthenia the skin of the
whole body is unnaturally dry; this is especially and most
readily noticed in the hands, but all parts of the surface may
present this peculiarity. A scaliness or scurfiness may accompany this dryness, as though there were a deficiency of fluids
and of sebaceous secretion. There would also appear to be a
relation between this condition and a disinclination to drink, oxuse fluids freely.
" Sweating Hands and Feet, with Redness (Palmar Hyperidrosis).?Sweating of the hands?of the palmar surface, or
of the entire hand?palmar hyperidrosis?is a symptom of
neurasthenia at once so interesting and so frequent that I
wonder that the literature of the subject is so meagre.
" This phenomenon?abnormal perspiration of the hands?
is certainly more common in males than in females, although
it occurs, as, indeed, all forms of hyperidrosis occur, in both
sexes. The milder phases are common enough, but there are
severe manifestations that this symptom may assume, which
seem well-nigh beyond belief. Thus, a yon rig man now under
my care is so distressed thereby that he threatens suicide unless
he is permanently cured. In his case there are various evidences of a bad inheritance, a poor constitution, although this
palmar sweating is just now the only very annoying expression
of the depraved diathesis. A young lady in the northern part
of the State is compelled to take a number of handkerchiefs
with her when she goes to school, and on her return they are
all saturated from the excessive perspiration of her hands.
My friend, Dr. M. Josiah Eoberts, of this city, tells me that in
a similar case, lately brought to his attention, there was clear
proof of uterine disease.
108 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
" Salivation.?Dryness of the month, through suppression
of the salivary secretion, is often noticed, both as an effect of
emotion and as an effect of nervous substitution ; the opposite
condition, salivation, is not so common.
" A year ago, an intelligent physician informed me that, at
one time, while in a neurasthenic state, he went to bed, and by
an effort of the will, as he expressed it, brought on free salivation. Subsequent nights the same effect occurred, contrary to
his wishes, and it was some time before he was restored to his
normal, original condition.
" Tenderness of the Spine (Spinal Irritation), and of the
ivhole Body {General Ilyperossthesid).?When the spine is so
tender as to become an important and permanent affliction,
and to over-shadow other symptoms of the neurasthenic state,
it is called spinal irritation; but, strictly, it is a symptom, like
cerebral irritation, not properly a disease as such, although, as
a matter of convenience, there can be no harm practically in
describing it as a disease. In regard to this symptom of nervous exhaustion, these points are noticeable : First, its great
frequency in the upper classes, especially among women. I
suppose if one should go through Fifth Avenue, of New York
City, and examine the spines of all the ladies between fifteen
and forty-five years of age, he would find, in quite a percentage
of cases, that, at times, there would be tenderness either of the
whole length of the spine, or more likely, at certain points, as
the nape of the neck, and between the shoulder-blades, and on
the middle lumbar vertebrae. Crawling, creeping, and burning
sensations often accompany this tenderness. This condition
would be found at times in those who do not call themselves
invalids, and who are not under medical treatment. It would
furthermore be found that, with some of these cases, there
would be tenderness of the scapula, or hip bones, of the breast
bone, and, indeed, of the whole surface of the body. This
general hyperesthesia, like the local hyperesthesia of the spine,
appears and disappears under any subjective or objective exciting
causes, and is attended usually by a feeling of debility, and
oftentimes, though not always, by backache, headache, insomnia,
and mental depression.
" The transient nature of this symptom of spinal and general
irritation is shown by the fact that it may disappear often after
a single application of electricity. Many women always have
spinal irritation during the period of menstruation. Spinal
irritation?tenderness on pressure?is not the only symptom of
spinal exhaustion; it is but one of many symptoms of that
state. In some cases of spinal exhaustion, also, there is no
tenderness of the spine on pressure.
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 109
" Coccyodynia.? A very common and sometimes most distressing form of spinal irritation is what is called coccyodynia
?that is, tenderness with pain, and sometimes severe neuralgia
at the tip of the spine, what is called the coccyx. This is far
more common with women than with men; indeed, in man it
very rarely occurs. It almost always accompanies irritations of
other portions of the spine.
" One of the symptoms of this form of spinal irritation is a
feeling as though the spine were too long; when sitting, this
feeling is a distressing one.
" Peculiarities of Pain in the Back.?In neurasthenia all
parts of the back may be the seat of pain, although certain
districts are more affected than others. There may be tenderness when there is no pain, and conversely pain, even severe
pain, when there is no tenderness. There may be much distress
in the loins and over the hips, when careful examination shows
no tenderness anywhere.
" This pain in the hips and loins is something quite different from ordinary neuralgia or sciatica ; it rather resembles
muscular rheumatism or a common cold, and is, indeed, often
confounded with one or both of these diseases, even by able
diagnosticians. The liability to confound irritation of the
upper part of the spine at the nape of the neck with rheumatism
is very great; the symptoms, indeed, are quite the samepains, stiffness, aching, inability to move the head without
discomfort. Sometimes this condition perfectly simulates wryneck, and is mistaken for it. One of the very ablest neurologists
in Germany, on being consulted by a case of irritation in the
upper part of the spine, made diagnosis of rheumatism, and
treated the patient accordingly. This back pain, and the tenderness that may or may not accompany it, fluctuates like all
these neurasthenic symptoms : to-day they are present in full
force, to-morrow they are all gone, but on any provocation are
liable to return. They fly about in every direction ; now just
below the shoulder-blade ; now in the centre of the spine ; and at
another time between the shoulder-blades, or in the middle
lumbar region ; sometimes with heat and burning, at others
with biting penetrating sensations, or a feeling as though ants
were crawling just under the skin.
' Heaviness of the Loins and Limbs.?One of the most
frequent complaints among the neurasthenic (myelasthenic form)
is heaviness and vague aching of the loins and limbs, and sometimes of the whole body. This is a symptom hard to define in
exact words, but it is very common, and it is a cause of great
distress. This symptom is quite apt to follow over physical
exertion, as in walking or standing, but may come on without
any apparent or special exciting causes. This feeling so closely
110 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
resembles rheumatism that it is often confounded with that
affection by those who are unfamiliar with neurasthenia, and
even one well acquainted with nervous exhaustion in all its
forms, might, on first being called to a patient, mistake this
heaviness and aching for a common cold, or for a rheumatic
attack.* I have lately been consulted by a gentleman suffering
from myelastlienia, where this aching of the lower part of the
back and loins is almost the only subjective symptom. In
sexual exhaustion, pains in the loins and limbs, not amounting
to neuralgia, but sufficient to be a severe annoyance, are frequent enough, but they are not restricted to the sexual variety
of neurasthenia.
" There would seem to be a degree of truth in the suggestion, which has often occurred to me in studying these cases of
pain in the back and loins and the lumbar region, that they
were to men what so-called spinal irritation is to women. It
may be said that this condition is to spinal irritation what
hypochondriasis is to hysteria.
" Shooting Fains simulating those of Ataxy.?If there be
any difference between the familiar shooting, lightning-like
pains in the extremities, that have so long been considered as
peculiar to ataxy, and the shooting pains of neurasthenia, I
have not been able as yet to find it out. Generally, these
neurasthenic pains are milder than those of ataxy, but this
average fact does not interfere with the fact of observation, that
this difference in degree is not of itself sufficient to make it
possible to establish the differential diagnosis ; for the shooting
pains of ataxy are by no means always severe, and in many
cases 5f the disease do not exist at all. The mistake of writers
in so strenuously insisting on the diagnostic importance of these
shooting pains has been, and is, the source of terrible annoyance
to physicians, especially who happen to be themselves sufferers
from these neurasthenic symptoms.
" The same remark applies to fibrillary contractions, which
have been looked upon as indicating muscular atrophy, but
which, as I have elsewhere stated, may exist as one of the many
symptoms of neurasthenia.
" Podalgia {Pain in the Feet).?One of the symptoms of
ataxy in the early stages is a feeling of numbness of the
feet.
Sometimes there is a feeling as though straw were at the
bottom of their feet, or as of walking cn velvet, or rubber, or
wool. A feeling of heat and burning it also noticed; and both
in neurasthenia and in ataxia, it comes from the spine. It has,
* How the symptoms of at'ixy have been, and are, mistaken for rheumatism is
well known to the physician.
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. Ill
however, a very different significance ; in one case it means an
organic, and in the others a nervous, functional disease.
" In some cases there are painful spots on the feet, either on
the sides or at the bottoms. These spots are more painful from
pressure of the boot or shoe ; they are felt even when in bare
feet or in slippers.
" Pains of the feet may be observed in persons not specially
nervous, but they are to be found also as symptoms and results
of neurasthenia.
" There is little question but that in some cases they are
reflected from the stomach or genital apparatus.
" Tremulous and Variable Pulse and Palpitation of the
Heart (Irritable Heart).?In the nervous, the rapidity and
quality of the pulse-beats may vary in many ways during the
process of counting. Frequently the pulse of the nervously
exhausted is compressible, and almost always it is more rapid
than normal, ranging between 75 and 90, frequently going up to
95, 100, or 110 and more. In exceptional instances nervous
exhaustion has a very slow pulse, in the neighbourhood of 40
or less, or there may be alternations between a very high and a
very low pulse.
" Local Spasms of Muscles {Tremors).?What are called
' fibrillary contractions,' and which sometimes occur in progressive muscular atrophy, are also noticed in the various shades of
nervous exhaustion. An individual muscle or part of a muscle
may twitch occasionally or frequently, so as to cause considerable annoj^ance, and, in some cases, unnecessary anxiety. As
these vibrations occur in the orbicularis, and other muscles of
the face, these spasms are very familiar; they come and leave
without warning, and suddenly, lasting all the way from a few minutes to hours, or even days. They are not very bad, sometimes,
nor especially troublesome, except when they become chronic,
and the twitching extends to other muscles of the face. This
result is exceptional; and so far as I have observed, chronic
facial spasm does not occur in those who have nervous exhaustion. I was once conversing on nervous diseases with a wellknown physician, when, all at once, the orbicularis of one of his
eyes began to twitch vigorously; he said it was the first time in
his lire that he had experienced anything of the kind: he
regarded the use of tobacco as the probable cause.
" The stomach, in nervous dyspepsia, may be the seat of
similar spasms, which may follow any excitement or emotion,
as of fear or responsibility. A sensation like that of a reverse
aura seems to go downward to the pit of the stomach from the
nerve centres, and excites spasms, apparently, of the muscles
of the stomach itself.
112 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
"Dysphagia (Difficulty of Swallowing).?Dysphagia is
sometimes a result of neurasthenia. I have seen it in severe
cases of liay-fever. where there is great prostration. I have
seen it also as a chronic condition in persons who are exceedingly nervous?coming and going?made better or worse,
apparently, by no objective cause that can be ascertained.
" Convulsive Movements, especially on going to Sleep.?
Nervous sufferers, just as they are dropping off to sleep, are
sometimes suddenly and painfully awakened by a violent, spasmodic movement of an arm, or leg, or of the whole body. This
appears without any warning, and is most likely to occur when
preceded by unusual excitement or fatigue. In some cases
there will be a recurrence of these spasms, so that much difficulty is experienced in getting to sleep. I have known instances
where the whole body seemed to be thrown off the bed, or
rather the sensation was as though the body were projected
upward. This symptom is not so alarming as some of those
who experience it believe. It indicates an exhausted, a worn
condition of the nervous system; but it is not as ominous for
evil as many other phenomena that belong to the nervously
exhausted state. A friend of mine?a public speaker, constantly
before audiences, and always at work?with a frame of unusual
size and an extraordinary capacity for enduring mental excitement and toil?tells me that, with all his vigour, he has been
annoyed by these jerkings on fulling to sleep, although he has
no other evidence of neurasthenia.
" Cramps.?One of the symptoms of certain phases of
neurasthenia is the occurrence of cramps; usually in the calf of
the leg and more frequent at night. Sometimes these pains are
so severe as to awaken the patient out of a sound slumber, and
are only relieved by severe rubbing, or by energetic movements.
" In some cases these cramps are felt as soon as one gets
fairly in bed and asleep.
" Special Idiosyncrasies in regard to. Food, Medicine, and
External Irritants.- When the nervous system becomes exhausted, it is apt to develop various idiosyncrasies not before
observed; some of them are of.high interest. Opium, for
example, is likely to aggravate insomnia in many neurasthenic
patients, instead of putting them to sleep, unless, indeed, very
large doses are used. Formerly opium was our chief?almost
our only?dependence when we wished to put one asleep. Now
we scarcely think of using it for that purpose in the treatment
of the nervous, except when there is severe pain to be relieved.
Opium for the nervously exhausted prevents sleep almost as much
as coffee. So frequent is this idiosyncrasy that, were it not for
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 113
the bromides and cannabis indica and electricity, we should be
utterly disarmed in the presence of these cases.
" Incidentally, I will remark that the development of
idiosyncrasies, through nervous sensitiveness, acquired or
inherited, is the real philosophy of hay-fever?a malady which,
as I have shown in my work on that subject, has increased as
culture and civilisation have increased, and which is found
usually in those who have had some other nervous symptoms.
As an effect' of this inherited or acquired nerve-sensitiveness,
there appears in one person an idiosyncrasy against bright sunlight, so that exposure to it brings on the symptoms of hay-fever ;
in another, a similar idiosyncrasy as to dust?the most common
of all the excitants of this disease; in another, against fresh
hay; in another, against ipecac or other drugs; in another,
against old hay ; in another, against the odour of roses, or other
flowers; in another, against the pollen of corn, or of some of
the grasses, or of certain weeds, as Roman wormwood, or golden
rod ; in another, against some of the common fruits?as grapes,
apples, pears, or peaches, or strawberries, or raspberries, or
watermelons, and so on infinitely?new developments appearing
every year. On this theory I based the nerve treatment of hay
fever, and predicted that by electricity, strychnine, belladonna,
camphor, arsenic, zinc, and other sedative and tonic remedies,
we should be able to greatly relieve and break up the attacks
of this distressing disorder. For several years this prediction
has been fulfilled, not only in my own practice, but also in that
of other physicians.
" Another idiosyncrasy developed by nervous exhaustion is
sensitiveness to cold or. hot water. A patient of mine could
never bear to even dip his hands in hot water, so disagreeable
were the sensations it produced; the same patient was abnormally ticklish and timid.
" Sensitiveness to Changes in the Weather is a very often
observed symptom of nervous debility; depression of the nerves
makes the body a good barometer. For twenty-four hours and
more before a storm comes on, the aching and worn nerves foretell in every part of the physical organism what is coming. The
sky may be clear, but the spirits are cloudy. The tenderness
of bunions and corns, the aching and stiffness of rheumatic and
neuralgic sufferers, the general gloominess and misery of the
exhausted before and during bad weather, are not imaginations,
but realities as truly as small-pox or the measles, and quite as
much worthy of professional study and consideration.
" Localised Peripheral Numbness and Hyperesthesia.?In
any portion of the periphery?the face, the arms, the ends of
the fingers, the thighs, the legs, and the toes ? there may be, in
PART I. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES. I
114 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
nervously exhausted patients, persistent numbness of a definitely localised character, or excessive sensibility, similarly
localised. In some cases this local peripheral hyperesthesia
amounts to a very distressing disease.
"A Feeling of Profound Exhaustion Unaccompanied by
Positive Pain.?Attacks of a sensation of absolute exhaustion,
as though the body had not strength to hold together, comes
on very often in the nervously exhausted. This feeling of
exhaustion, though not exactly pain in the usual sense of the
word, is yet, in many cases, far worse than pain. These attacks
may come on suddenly without warning, and may suddenly
disappear. In the morning one may be able, or feel able, to
run on a wager; in the afternoon of the same day, sitting
quietly in a chair seems to be an exhausting effort to which
every nerve and bone and muscle is unequal. The going-to-die
feeling is quite common in these cases, and at first causes alarm.
It may be experienced either in the day or at night, on going
to sleep, or on awaking from sleep. This symptom, like many
of these symptoms, appears at puberty and at the change of
life; it indicates that the system is straining under the burden
placed upon it.
" TicJclishness.?Nearly all persons are susceptible to the
form of irritation that we call tickling; but in nervous exhaustion this susceptibility may become a severe annoyance. A
gentleman once under my treatment for many of the symptoms
described in this paper?spinal irritation being prominent?
was so ticklish on the breast, stomach, and abdomen, that it
was very difficult?indeed quite impossible?to apply electricity
to those parts with any satisfaction.
" Vague Pains and Flying Neuralgias.?The so-called
" growing pains " in the young are of this class ; the force in
the system is insufficient to maintain. growth without suffering
a degree of impoverishment which expresses itself by a subdued
growl of pain.
Waving, beating, rolling sensations are often felt by the
neurasthenic, even when not exactly hysterical. Shooting
neuralgic pains in the limbs, or nearly all parts of the body,
cause much suffering with this class of patients.
" General or Local Itching (Pruritus).?Itching occurring
without any visible change in the appearance of the skin, is a
common experience ; but is not regarded as pathological unless
it be quite severe and persistent. In certain nervous states it
becomes an element of positive distress. Itching of the scalp
sometimes immediately follows any prolonged and exhausting
intellectual exertion.
General and Local Chills and Flashes of Heat.?DisturREVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 115
bance of circulation both follows and accompanies disturbance
of innervation. Creeping chills up and down the spine are
commonplace; but there are symptoms allied to this not so
familiar.
" Gold Feet and Hands are symptoms that the neurasthenic
complain of in at least half the cases.
fi Nervous Chills.?Attacks of chills, in many respects resembling chills and fever, especially the dumb ague, are often
experienced by a certain class of neurasthenic sufferers.
" Sudden Giving Way of General or Special Functions.?
The treacherousness of nervous exhaustion is one of its most
constant characteristics; its symptoms lurk in ambush and
burst upon us when least looked for, when we fancy ourselves
utterly and for ever delivered from their presence. The neurasthenic patient cannot, therefore, trust himself a half-hour or
even a moment in advance. In the morning he may be, or
feel, able to walk five miles; in the afternoon, from no traceable
cause, it may be a task to cross the street. Even in the midst
of any labour?mental or muscular?his strength gives out as
suddenly as if he were struck by lightning. I knew a man
prostrated for two years with profound neurasthenia, who,
if he rose and crossed the room, might become absolutely
aphonic. Two ladies have been under my care who could walk
readily for perhaps a block or more, when instantly, and without warning, their limbs would give way beneath them.
" Temporary Paralysis.?Temporary functional paralysis
of certain muscles on arm or leg, or of the muscles of the
larynx, are sometimes noticed in cases of neurasthenia.
" In one of my cases, paralysis of an arm, lasting but a
short time, was the first noteworthy phenomenon of the disease.
" There is no evidence that paralysis of this kind depends
on any structural disturbance of the nerve-centres.
"Diseases of Men (Involuntary emissions, partial or complete impotence, irritability of the prostatic urethra).?Occasional seminal emissions in the healthy and unmarried are
physiological?that is, they are not symptoms of disease. Such
involuntary discharges, when excessively frequent, may be both
results and causes of disease, indicating an abnormal, usually an
exhausted state of the nervous system, and in turn reacting on
the nervous system, increasing the very exhaustion that causes
it. Such, in general, is the philosophy of all, or nearly all,
cases of frequent involuntary seminal emissions.
" Diseases of Women.?Many of the diseases belonging to
woman, as woman, may be either the causes or effects of neurasthenia.
" It has been the custom to regard the various nervous
x 2
116 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
symptoms with which women suffer as the results of any uterine
disease with which they may have been afflicted ; but the wiser
gynaecologists of the present are aware that, with women as
with men, disease of the reproductive organs may be a result
of exhaustion.
"The various congestions, and displacements, and inflammations, and especially uterine and ovarian irritability, may,
and do, come from mal-nutrition, which mal-nutrition is a
result and part of general mal-nutrition of the whole system.
Irritability of these organs, of the ovaries, of the uterus, is
sometimes analogous to the condition of the brain which we
call cerebral irritation, or of the spine, which we call spinal
irritation, and will not yield to purely local treatment. Cases
of this kind are sometimes treated for a long time without any
satisfaction, simply because the general constitutional treatment
is neglected. Constitutional treatment alone, if judiciously
and faithfully carried out, may sometimes cure these cases without any local.application, or with but little, as has been lately
shown by one of our prominent gynaecologists, Dr. Groodell.
" Oxalates, Urates, Phosphates, and Spermatozoa in the
Urine.?The relation of oxalate of lime to various nervous
symptoms was long ago pointed out by G-olding Bird, and the
importance of examining the urine for the deposits of the
oxalates was strenuously insisted on by him; but the true relation of such deposits to the nervous system seems not to have
been fully understood either by him or by those who have since
written on the subject.
" Excessive Gaping ancl Yawning.?As evidences of temporary fatigue, gaping and yawning are familiar enough, even
though their physiology may be obscure. In organic disease
of the brain, also, frequent and prolonged gaping has been
noticed.
" In one case of glosso-labial paralysis that I saw a number
of years ago, this symptom of gaping was so frequent, and the
act so prolonged, as to be ludicrous.
" Appearance of Youth.?Persons afflicted with neurasthenia very often, and, I think, in the majority of cases, where
the condition is long-standing, look younger than their years ;
they bear the weight of time more easily than the phlegmatic
and the strong; and when between, say, thirty-five and fortyfive, will pass for five or ten years below their actual age. I
have reached this generalisation not hastily, but after much
observation and reflection. Constantly I find myself astonished
when a new patient, whom I have never before seen, tells me
his age. I observe that those who have had a long battle with
their morbid feelings, who have been, perhaps, disabled, crippled.
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 117
exiled by nervous incapacity, look ten years younger than their
vigorous friends. The neurasthenic are, as a rule, less
wrinkled and worn; they have less fat and muscle that
furnish the materials for flabbiness and coarseness of feature.
Their skins are thinner and softer, and show the blood more
readily. They are also less likely to be attacked with those
degenerative changes in the blood-vessels and the skin that are
the signs and results of age. In a word, they look young for
the same reason that they live long.
" Rapid Decay and Irregularities of the Teeth.?The rapid
decay of the teeth is one of the symptoms of nervous exhaustion. Although a nervous person may have an excellent set of
teeth, providing they are well taken care of and properly filled
every time a cavity appears, yet early decay of teeth in the
nervous is to be ranked as one of the results of an impoverished
state of the nervous system.
" That premature decay of teeth is a result of civilisation
is an undeniable fact; and in those whose constitutions are
depleted of force the teeth are rarely good, and they are only
kept in fair working order by the great skill of modern dentistry.
Dentists.are the barometers of civilisation, their rise and prosperity is one of the most instructive facts in ?modern sociology.
American dentists are the best in the world, because American
teeth are the poorest in the world.
" Hemi-Neurasthenia.?I have discovered that neurasthenia
sometimes affects one part of the body more than the other; to
this difference I have applied the term hemi-neurasthenia.
Thus there may be a special degree of pain on the left side of
the head, the eye on the same side may be weaker, more painful
on over use, more severely photophobic, the lid may drop lower,
suggesting general paresis, the eye not open so fully and freely;
the arm and the leg on the same side may be much weaker than
on the other side ; likewise there may be a disposition to tremor
in both of the extremities and the muscles of the face on one
side. The noises in the ears, which I have described as one of
the symptons of neurasthenia, may be restricted entirely to the
right or the left side, even when there is no demonstrable
disease of the ears.
" Likewise muscse volitantes, or specks before the eyes, may
be, and indeed often are, confined to one eye, or are very much
more marked in one eye than the other. The symptom of sick
headache is, as a rule, far more common on the left than on the
right side, although it may appear on both sides in the same
individual; likewise the symptoms of chilliness, of creeping,
crawling, of muscular spasms, fibrillary contractions, localised
heat and cold, may be especially observed on one or the other
118 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
side of the body. The pains in the calf of the leg and cramps
may be restricted to the right or the left side, or may be far more
decided on the one side than on the other. One leg or one foot,
or one arm or hand, may be cold for several hours or days, while
the limbs on the other side are of normal temperature. One
ear may be red and hot, the other may be of normal colour and
temperature.
" Hemi-ansesthesia of one side of the body is quite a familiar
symptom, especially in hysteria ; but very many other phases of
nervous debility may be likewise confined to one side of the
body."
We have felt bound to give copious extracts from this long
and formidable category of the symptoms of neurasthenia, in
order to do justice to Dr. Beard's minute and careful analysis.
Fortunately, for this country, the neuroses are not so rife here,
as on the other side of the Atlantic. It is to be hoped that the
love of athletic sports, now so fashionable, will materially tend
to counteract that morbid sensibility, the result of high civilisation, and which, according to Dr. Beard, is now so prevalent
in the United States.
No doubt many of the forms of neurasthenic diseases owe
their origin to constitutional taint, and Dr. Beard admits they
are often hereditary.
Dr. Beard gives many valuable suggestions as to the treatment of neurasthenia. We have not space to do more than
refer to them, and must content ourselves with recommending
the work itself to our readers.
