Legal Medicine In France
=========================

242 Art. IX.?
Tee following are interesting as fair typical examples of the
manner in which reports are furnished by medical men in
France regarding the mental condition of individuals placed
under their observation ; and they will be found, upon examination, to leave very little to be desired. The cases in question
happen to be of particular interest, and we bring them before
our readers as an introduction to the third, and more important
article, a medico-legal review of the numerous cases judged
and dealt with by the French Courts of Assizes (during 1877),
which have reference to mental alienation or nervous disorders.
The suggestive nature of the latter article will be increased by
consideration, in connection with it, of the present state of legal
medicine in this country.
Article I.?Report on the Mental state of Dominique Watrin,
accused of an attempt to murder. Irresponsibility.
Order for Ids discharge. By Drs. Giraud and Christian.
"We, the undersigned, Dr. Jules Giraud, director of the asylum
of Mareville, and Dr. Jules Christian, chief medical officer,
requested by the Judge of the tribunal at ISaDcy to examine
the mental state of the above-named Watrin, accused of an
attempt to murder, have upon oath, soul, and conscience, written
out the following report, after having investigated all the
details of the procedure, and examined the delinquent:
The Fact.?Memoranda.?On November 6, 1877, Dominique
Cure, carrier at Saizerais, had come to Pont-a-Mousson, about
half-past seven in the morning. After having completed his
business he had started again about ten o'clock. Cure was in a
cart, which he drove himself; he was accompanied by his
daughter, aged fifteen, and by Levy, a young man of seventeen,
from whom he had bought a horse. When they had arrived at
the forges of Pont-a-Mousson they saw an individual on the
road who was armed with an iron spade, and who called out to
them to stop : " If you don't stop you will be killed," he said.
They paid no heed to these words, thinking they had to do
with a drunkard, and continued on their way.
The individual, however, began to run after the cart, which
he reached again by the match factory. He first of all appeared
LEGAL MEDICINE IN" FRANCE. 243
at the horse's head, but then ran to the back of the cart,
climbed upon it, and, after having1 taken Cure's cap off, struck
him five or six blows upon the head with his iron spade. Cure
fell down bathed in blood. The young girl, who tried to
defend her father, screamed, and some workmen ran to help;
she was, however, also wounded in the struggle. The murderer
was then arrested, without making the least resistance. But
when his victim had already fallen to the ground senseless,
tlie criminal dealt him two further blows. When Watrin was
arrested he had 160 francs and a gold watch and chain upon him.
Such are the circumstances of the crime, as related in the
depositions which the daughter of the victim and the persons who
ran to her assistance made before the gensdarmes, and before the
Judge of the Peace of Pont-a-Mousson. Watrin did not in the
least try to defend himself, nor to deny or excuse his crime.
To the judge he replied, " I own that I struck blows with
the spade upon the head of the individual who was in the cart
with his daughter; it is possible I may also have touched the
latter. I know nothing about it."
And, when the magistrate asked him the motive for this
brutal assault, he said : " I did not ask his permission to ride
in the cart, I told him to stop his horse. I struck him because
he would not obey my order to stop. I don't know the victim,
1 have never seen him."
The interrogation continuing, the culprit began to make
departures from the subject, and to speak incoherently.
The next day, November 7, he appeared before the Judge
of the Criminal Court, but in spite of the Judge's questions the
culprit remained in absolute silence and immobility, so that
the Judge was compelled to give up the examination.
The singular attitude and the strange manners of the
culprit caused a suspicion immediately that his mental faculties
were impaired, and the investigations made by the legal
authorities have all confirmed this supposition. From the
inquiry made by the authorities at Metz, it appears that
Dominique Watrin was born at Noisseville on January 24, 1838 ;
that he remained unmarried, and lived with his sister. The
two possessed a house, some fields and vineyards, worth altogether about 15,000 francs (?600). Besides, he was said to
have deposited some 3,000 or 4,000 francs at a notary's.
Mentally diseased for more than two years, he had never
been dangerous. For the last three months, however, in his
disease a bad change occurred. In July, and also in November
he entered into the church with a hayfork to kill the curate.
He had recently also behaved very violently towards other
inhabitants of the parish.
244 LEGAL MEDICINE IN FRANCE.
The mental disease of Watrin had become so evident that
his sister was obliged to have him watched and to keep her own
eyes upon him as much as possible. Upon several occasions,
however, Watrin had successfully deceived those who watched
and had started across the frontier into France. Two of these
escapades are related in a a " proces-verbal " taken down by a
special police commissaire of the station at Pagny sur Moselle.
About two months before the crime, Watrin had arrived at
Pagny from Metz, by the train at 2 P.M., with a ticket for
Nancy. The commissaire, who, through the strange replies he
gave, concluded that his intellectual faculties were troubled,
handed him over to the care of a gendarme, with the intention
of sending him back to Metz by the first train. Watrin managed to escape and ran after the train for Nancy, at the risk of
being crushed by an engine, then just passing through the
station. The gendarme tried to recapture him, when Watrin
made an attempt to snatch the gendarme's sword away from
him, and he had to be thrown to the ground before he could
be entirely mastered. He Avas by force placed in the train
which left for Metz. At the moment of starting Watrin threw
011 the line all the money he had in his pockets, and screamed
out that it was Prussian money and that he did not want it.
There was just time to pick up what he had thrown away, and
it was handed back to him.
During the night from December 5 to December 6 he came
back to the Pagny station, and again a police inspector, finding
that he had to do with a madman, led him on the road to
Noveant, asking him to return home. This time again Watrin
wanted to go to Nancy, where he hoped to obtain the post of
" director of the Post Office."
Watrin went along the road which was pointed out to him,
but a few hours afterwards he came back, and then went in the
direction of Pont-ji-Mousson. It is probable that he passed the
rest of the night wandering on the road. However, he entered
a builder's yard and there took the iron spade with which he
struck his victim.
At the judicial inquiry the depositions of all the witnesses
agree perfectly. Watrin is mentally deranged; he has been
known and looked upon as such for a long time in his own
parish and by all that had to do with him. Nay more, for the
last three months his condition has become dangerous ; he had
threatened several people most gravely, he had committed acts
of violence, and his sister had to have him watched. How is it
to be understood that the authorities of the parish should not
have intervened, that nobody should have thought of having
the patient shut up, that he should have enjoyed perfect liberty
LEGAL MEDICINE IN FRANCE. 245
lip to the very day when he committed an irreparable crime ?
It does not lie outside of our duties as experts to deeply deplore
this culpable negligence.
Direct Examination.?The direct examination of the culprit, which we continued for some time, has confirmed in every
respect the results of investigations which we stated above ; we
were not in doubt for a moment that we had to do with a
person really demented.
Watrin is a short, thin, wrinkled man, with a sly and cunning expression in his face. Since his entrance into the asylum
his behaviour has been invariably the same. Concentrated
within himself, not speaking to anybody, not seeming to heed
in the least the other patients who surround him, he generally
walks about with his arms crossed, making strange gestures,
posing himself into various attitudes, and very often murmuring
in an undertone some unintelligible pbrases.
When he is under examination, he replies willingly, and his
replies at first are tolerably correct. But as soon as the conversation is prolonged, or perhaps because it does not turn upon
those points which preoccupy his mind most, he loses himself
in interminable deviations and becomes incoherent.
Of this we have proof in the numerous conversations which
we have had with him.
December 3, 1877.
He replies correctly to the questions with regard to his age,
his birthplace, &c. We ask him whether he is married ; without hesitation he replies : Yes.
Q. What is your wife's name ?
A. Madelaine St. Paul.
Q. Is she from Noisseville.
A. Yes.
Q. Have you any children ?
A. No.
Q. Is your wife still alive ?
A. I don't know whether she is still alive, but when I left
Noisseville, a month ago, she was still alive.
Q. Did you live happily together ?
A. She has chosen other men; she eats and drinks with
other men. I have seen her working with them in the fields.
Q. And you permitted her to do this ?
A. I gave her my permission ? Yes, to work with other men
as she pleases.
Q. And you think this in order ?
A. She goes her way, and I go mine.
With regard to his marriage his replies are always the same,
and equally senseless.
246 LEGAL MEDICINE IN FRANCE.
January 15, 1878.
Q. Are you married ?
A. Yes,with Madelaine St. Paul; my wife is down there.
Q. Since when ?
A. Since January 12, 1872.
Q. Did you live with your wife ?
A. Our possessions have never been mixed, and my wife has
never come to live in the house; 1 have, never slept with my
wife.
Q. Why not ?
A. It is her religion to work with others, be it in the fields
or in the house.
The truth is that Watrin is not married, and that he has
never been married. Madelaine St. Paul is the name of his
mother, and we may be allowed to suppose that a whole series
ot erroneous ideas are connected with this illusion about his
marriage. A proof of this is that on the day when Watrin was
arrested at the Pagny station he let drop from his pocket a
paper which is before us, and upon which the following is
written in the writing of the accused, in unshapely letters:
Je soussigne
Dominique Watrin,
Demeurant a Koisseville,
Departement de la
Moselle, canton de
Vigy, ne le 24 janvier 1838
et marie le 12 janvier 1872 el valeur d'un bien de 8000
francs meuble (word scratched out) transports en chemin de
fer jusqu'a temps your avoir sujfjfijusque la mort.
Jules Watrin.
It will be noticed that in this piece of writing, which is
incoherent, both the idea and the date of the marriage, as
having taken place on January 12, 1872, occur again, just as he
gave them during the direct examinat ions. This is the evident
proof that this idea pre-occupied him, that it had with him
assumed the character of a fixed idea.
Another series of ideas dominates him equally.
December 3.
Q. Why did you leave Noisseville ?
A. Ah ! that's for a reason; because the territory is overrun
by the Prussians; because this cannot be arranged with the
French power ; because there is war ; because the two powers
cannot arrange matters; because there is a part, separation.
Q. But the war has been over a long time ?
A. Ah! I believe in 1869, down there, in the month of
August, or September, I am not quite sure.
LEGAL MEDICINE IN FRANCE. 247
Q. Were you not in the war ?
A. No; I was at Metz during the time of the siege.
Without cessation he returns to this war of 1870, and,
although whatever he says about it is confused and unconnected,
yet it is easily seen that it constantly preoccupies him.
He imagines that it is his business to arrange the line of
demarcation between the two States, and that is the cause, he
says, why he struck the carrier.
December 3.
Q. Why did the gensdarmes arrest you?
A. Ah ! that was because I have stopped a man with a cart.
He would not stop; then when I saw that I struck him some
blows with a spade, and I left him three-quarters and a half
dead. Some people came, and they seized me, and fastened
me, and fetched the gensdarmes.
Q. What had that poor man done to you ?
A. He had not obeyed my commands.
Q. Had you then the right to command him ?
A. Yes, because I am upon my French territory and he was
a Prussian. He would not obey; it is to establish laws, so that
railways, commerce, everything may go on between the Prussian power and the French power.
On January 15 his replies are almost identically the
same: ?
Q. You know what you have done ?
A. Yes, I have dealt some blows with a spade to a poor
man on the road from Pont-a-Mousson to Nancy. Poor man !
I nearly killed him three-quarters and a half.
Q. What had this man done to you ?
A. He had not done me any harm. It was, as I told you,
to create laws between Prussia and France.
Q. You know that you run the risk of being sent to the
galleys ?
A. Yes, Monsieur le Medecin: the galleys, be shot or
guillotined for having struck this poor man. You are the
master. You hold my judgment.
Q. You do not feel sorry?
A. Yes, M. le Medecin, yes. But, que voulez-vous ? France
has to make an arrangement with Prussia, and every day the
wine or corn vans would be broken.
In all our conversations, and hardly any days have passed
without our speaking to him at the time of our visit, Watrin gave
us the same identical answers. In a letter which he wrote to
his sister upon the occasion of New Year's Day?a letter which
we asked him to write?it is again the idea of the role of
arbiter which he is to play, which reoccurs:
24S LEGAL MEDICINE IX FRANCE.
Noisseville : le 7 Janvier 1878,
Chere Parente,
Cest pour vous annoncer de mes nouvelles, que j\ii
partit de i\ oisseville et sur la route de Pont-a-Mousson a
Nancy, fai meuru un homme et je Vai tue a 374 et demi et
de la est on rn'est conduit en prison ou fai souffert la fairn,
et si vous pouviez faire mon changement et me creer un
demeure meuble et immeuble pour travailler jusque le bout
et c'est pour separer la France d'avec la Prusse et je vous
souhaite touts et toutes une bonne annee.
Discussion.?After all that we have said, a few words will
suffice to characterise the mental state of the culprit. It seems
to us indisputable that Watrin is really demented, and we have
the evident proofs of this in his words, his writings, his action,
in the whole of his manners and ways for more than two years.
It seems to us even extremely probable that Watrin is under
the influence of a hereditary predisposition to mania, and that
all his life he must have behaved singularly and strangety.
But this is only a supposition on our part. What seems to us
more certain is that the outbreak of the mania dates back more
than two years, and if this outbreak has not been directly
brought about by the events of the war, it cannot be denied
that these have deeply shaken Watrin's intellect, and have
given its true character to his delirium. All the delirious ideas
of Watrin relate to the war or the consequences of the war, the
annexation of his country to Prussia, and its separation from
France; although we must own that these ideas have to-day
not that amount of distinctness which they no doubt possessed
at first. Watrin has arrived at the chronical period of his
mental disorder; he tends towards incurability; the ideas,
instead of being enchained in a logical manner, are dissociated,
incoherent; the pre-occupation which he shows with regard to his fortune is mixed up with ideas of his marriage
and with those which are suggested to him by the eminent role
he believes himself to be destined to play. These latter ideas yet
dominate the delirium, inspire his actions, and direct his conduct.
We must remember this disposition of mind if we wish to
explain the crime committed by Watrin. He leaves his village
upon several occasions to come to France: at last he succeeds
in the night from November 5 to November 6. There he has
accomplished his object; now he is going, as he says, to establish laws between France and Prussia, and to try to have them
executed. Armed with a spade which he has taken from a
timber yard, he places himself upon watch on that road to
Pont-a-Mousson, under the idea that he will see enemies arrive,
and that he must needs make them do his bidding by force.
LEGAL MEDICINE IX FRANCE. 249
He speaks to the first passer-by. It is the unfortunate Cure.
He commands him to stop. Why? Because he takes him to
be a Prussian, because he will not have him drive about on a
road where he thinks himself alone master.
The rest is known. Watrin shows no sorrow for the crime
he committed ; he cannot be made to understand that he had
no right whatever to give any commands at all to Cure. On
the other hand, he owns quite naively that he has never seen
his victim, that he does not know him, that he could not be
angry for what lie had done to him; but he does not hesitate to
add that he was in his good right, and that Cure ought to have
stopped at his first word of command. And certainly Watrin
would have acted in exactly the same manner towards any
other person whom accident might have led into his presence. Without hate, without rage, without any provocation, he
strikes the first comer, simply because he does not obey his
words. This is the act of a madman which it avails nothing to
deplore to-da}T, but which would have been very easily prevented
if, according to the rules of the commonest prudence, Watrin
has been placed in an asylum from the moment of the outbreak of his disease, or at least from the moment he began to
commit acts of violence.
We conclude :
1. Watrin is insane.
2. His mania dates several years back ; it makes him quite
irresponsible with regard to the crime which he committed on
November 6, 1877, upon the person of Cure.
3. Watrin is a dangerous patient. It is important, with
regard to public order and the safaty of the public, that he
should be detained in an asylum for the insane.
(Signed)
J. G-iraud. J. Christian,
Reporter.
Mareville, Feb. 2, 1878.
These conclusions being adopted, Watrin was placed at the
disposition of the administrative authorities, and by an order
dated March 1 was sequestered at Mareville.
Article II.?Report on the Mental Condition of L (PierreMarie), accused of striking and wounding his father.
Chronic Alcoholism. Order for his discharge. By Drs.
Delacour, Brute, and Laffitte.
We, the undersigned, Delacour, Director of the Medical School
of Rennes ; Brute, Physician to the House of Detention ; and
Laffitte, Medical Director of the Asvlum for the Insane of
250 LEGAL MEDICINE IX FRANCE.
Rennes, have been requested by the Judge of the Civil Tribunal of
liennes, on the 15th May, 1875, to examine the mental state of
the above L (Pierre-Marie), accused of striking his father
and inflicting wounds on him. Having been duly sworn, having
requested communications on, and taken notice of all the documents relating to, the case, we have examined the delinquent upon
several occasions, sometimes together and sometimes separately ;
and have made all possible inquiries and collected such information as could by its character bear upon the subject, and we
have written out the following report:
On the 30th March last, about two o'clock in the afternoon,
the said L (Pierre-Marie), who lived with his parents at
Thorigne, went into a field where his father and his sister were
already at work. When he got there he made some observations with regard to the work in a tone of bad humour; but
as his father left him entirely to do as he pleased with regard to
it, lie began to work in the same way as his father. Hardly
ten minutes had elapsed when suddenly, without a single word
having passed between them, L , who was standing behind
his father, struck him violently on the head with the tool he
held in his hand, and while the sister and a servant, who was
near by,-assisted the wounded man and led him home, L
ran quickly away. Nevertheless, he returned the next morning
to his parents to fetch his bootmaker's tools, and approached his
father at the moment when the latter was dressing the wound lie
had received on his head. Somebody having remonstrated with
him regarding his act of violence, L replied calmly : " It's
not worth while talking about so little." Then he left the
house and proceeded to Cigne, where two days later he was
arrested in a coffee-house.
The behaviour of the delinquent in prison, and the information which has been gathered on his account were such as to
cause a suspicion regarding the integrity of his faculties; we
were therefore deputed to visit the culprit and to give our
opinion regarding his mental condition and respecting the
degree of responsibility which may be attributed to him. Here
is the result of our examination :
L is twenty-seven years of age, of tolerably good constitution, and of nervous temperament; he has nevertheless a pale
complexion ; on the whole he seems to be in good health. His
head seems to be well shaped, without any appreciable
deformity ; the expression of his countenance presents nothing
particularly remarkable, although his look is a little vague ; yet
it betrays no embarrassment when he is being looked at
fixedly.
If he is made to hold out his arms horizontally, the fingers
LEGAL MEDICINE IN FRANCE. 251
show a fibrillons trembling, which is easily noticed; if liis
tongue is examined it appears likewise that it is the seat of
fibrillous oscillations, which, however, are very much less
marked, and are, so to speak, intermittent; on the whole surface of his skin analgesia exists; he may be pinched or pricked
without experiencing the least sensation of pain.
This young man appears before us without being either
embarrassed or inconvenienced; he replies to the different
questions which are put to him with regard to his name, his
age, his profession, or about the various incidents in his life
before the war of 1870. The majority of his replies on these
points are not precise, the dates are only approximate. We
cannot get positive and precise information from him with
regard to the period when he left military service during the
war, nor respecting the motives of his leaving the service ;
neither can we get from him any clear account or reason for his
frequent changes of residence before the war, when he worked
as a shoemaker. He then tells us, without being able to give
the exact date, the circumstance for which he was imprisoned.
His father having insulted him, he struck him, not with
the hoe, but with his fist. "When we express our astonishment
to him that a son should thus strike his father, and try to make
him understand the gravity of his offence and the punishment to
which he might be condemned, he showed himself not moved in
the least, and replies invariably and with perfect calmness, " He
should not have insulted me?I would not have done anything
to him," absolutely as if he considered the act of violence committed upon his father a perfectly natural one.
All these replies, however, are given with great indifference,
as if he were not at all aware of the gravity of his situation.
While he replies he scratches his head, raises his arms, and
yawns. On one occasion he interrupted himself, without any
affectation, to ask the keeper to change his clothes; another time
he asked leave to go away. Recently he wrote a letter to his
father, and, without even mentioning the misfortune which had
befallen him, he asked him for money to buy nourishment and
cider.
The results of the examination are therefore :
1. That L , from a physical point of view, shows a
fibrillous trembling of the muscles of the fingers and the
tongue, and analgesia of the skin, disorders of mobility and
sensibility which, considering his antecedents, are sufficient tc
characterise an alcoholic intoxication, consequent upon former
drinking habits.
2. That L , from an intellectual point of view, and as
regards moral sensibility, shows by a sort of depression of
252 LEGAL MEDICINE IN FRANCE.
faculties apparent in the weakening of bis memory, of his
judgment, and in the slowness of his understanding, the almost
complete loss of affective sensibility, besides manifesting absolute indifference and unconsciousness of his situation. In fact,
L- behaves in prison just as if he were at home, and as if
he were not under the weight of a grave condemnation.
In this situation certainly, to speak only of the actual
moment, we do not hesitate to consider him irresponsible, but
this is not sufficient; it is necessary to examine the mental
condition of the culprit before the perpetration of the criminal
act, and at the moment when he committed the crime.
Of numerous statements collected in the documents relating
to this case?statements which, by the way, all agree in describing L  as a drunkard and as a dangerous and wicked
lunatic?we shall only retain one, which is found in the
proces verbal, taken down by the gendarmerie on May 10.
The facts which are stated there are so characteristic that they
suffice by themselves to fix in the most definite manner our
opinion with regard to the mental state of L  before and
during his criminal attempt.
The proces verbal states: " One evening last winter, about
8 o'clock, L was seized with a fit of mania at his parents'
house. He thought he saw fantastic beings under the furniture ; he armed himself with a long perch, which he began
pushing under the beds, chairs, and tables ; at last he took a
lighted candle and went up into the hay-loft to chase away
some imaginary animal."
This was certainly a sharp attack of well characterised
alcoholic fever; in fact, patients attacked by this form of
insanity see themselves surrounded by animals of fantastic
forms, monsters, or serpents, which crawl on the walls or on
their bedclothes, making grimaces at them ; and sometimes
they imagine themselves persecuted by enemies who want to
kill them, &c. &c.: in one word, whether its seat is sight, hearing, or touch, the hallucination, in alcoholic mania, has always
that characteristic of being of such a nature as to endanger the
physical or moral safety of the person attacked by it, and to
appear principally at night.
The delirium of L certainly presents all the symptoms
we have just described.
' The drinking habits of L being well known and proved,
it can be affirmed that this is not one of those passing attacks
of mania which sometimes occur as the result of alcoholic excesses
in individuals who are not accustomed to hard drinking, but that
it is indeed a case of alcoholic madness which occurs in habitual
drunkards, who already show every symptom of chronic alcoLEGAL MEDICINE IN FRANCE. 253
holism, when they give way to more abundant intoxication than
usual; and this is proved in a perfectly undeniable way, since
at the moment of our examination, more than five months after
the attack, when he has already been in prison for more than
two months and deprived of nearly all alcoholic drink, he still
presents, as we have shown, disorders of mobility and of the
intellect sufficiently great to characterise alcoholic intoxication.
Conclusion.
We may, therefore, conclude, remaining always on the
standpoint of clinical observation, that the disease from which
L suffers was continuous and constant in its existence, and
that it dates back at least as far as that day when the violent
attack of insanity came on, viz., last winter, and that consequently he was not in the possession of all his mental faculties
at the moment when he committed the criminal act.
Eennes, June 6, 1875.
(Signed) Delacour,
Brut^,
Laffitte,
Reporters.
In accordance with these conclusions, an order for his discharge has been issued by the Judge of the Criminal Court, and
L , placed at the disposal of the administrative authorities,
was removed to the asylum of Eennes.
Article III.?Medico-legal Review of 1877. By Dr. E.
Marandon de Montyel, Adjunct Physician to the Public
Lunatic Asylum of Toulouse.
The law journals as well as the great political papers are
generally full of crimes and offences committed by insane persons at large, whose insanity has been recognised and accepted
by the magistrates. We shall not take note of all those facts,
the medico-legal importance of which is relatively small, and we
shall report only those which have resulted in some legal decision
or judgment quite contradictory to the debates. Through the
doubts which they have raised or the errors to which they have
led, they are in reality more particularly worthy the attention of
the student of legal medicine.
We believe we need not point out in detail the utility of a
review of this kind. How important will it not be for the
specialist in mental diseases to find collected in a widely
circulated periodical all the litigated cases relating to
his speciality, which have played before the Courts of
Assizes and tribunals of France ? As every year brings its new
PART II. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES. T
254: LEGAL MEDICINE IN FRANCE.
contingent, we shall soon have a rich collection of interesting
facts, which will much facilitate the labours of experts in future.
The first idea of this work is not our own ; it is that of M.
Moreau, of Tours, who began it here as far back as 1844, and
continued it for several years. Although we do not possess the
immense talent of the physician of Bicetre, we shall yet give all
possible care to this work, and hope not to appear too unworthy
by the side of so great a master.
lsi Trimestre of 1877.
I.?Ambitious Lypemania.?Murder.?On February 2,
1876, a man named Cadillac murdered the Abbe Puech, in the
district of Aveyron. When arrested he admitted his crime, and
declared he had committed it out of revenge. The niece of the
Abbe had refused to marry him, and he accused the Abbe of
having opposed the union desired by him. As Cadillac, in
addition to these positive explanations, had made a number of
other and very incoherent statements, the counsel for the defence
at the June Assizes had, in spite of the indignant protestations of
the culprit, asked for a medico-legal examination of his client.
The court requested Messrs. Lala, Bonnefous, and Faucher,
medical director of the public asylum of Rodez, to investigate
the mental condition of the accused at the time of the crime,
and to ascertain whether he was responsible for it or not. These
experts arrived at the conclusion that he was irresponsible, and
according to their depositions at the December Assizes we
believe that Cadillac was really suffering from ambitious lypemania. They declared at the same time that he could not
defend himself in a criminal accusation. According to the con?
elusions arrived at by the Secretary of State, the court declared
that the proceedings in this case must be suspended until such
a day, when at the request of whom it shall concern, documents
can be produced proving that Cadillac is in such a mental condition that he can reasonably attend to his defence, discuss
the charges brought against him, and adduce such witnesses as
might seem to him to be of use in his defence. Cadillac was
therefore provisionally placed at the disposal of the administrative authorities.
We have transcribed the declaration of the court in its
integrity, as it seems to us to be of extreme gravity. It would
be very regrettable if in cases of this nature, which are very
numerous, the magistrates should get into the habit of first
waiting for the recovery of patients instead of calling at once
upon the jury to give their verdict, because indeed this recovery
may not take place until after a very long time, if it take place
at all, and during all that time the patient would remain under
LEGAL MEDICINE IN FRANCE. 255
the bane of a grave accusation and in the state of prisoner.
Is this right? This course of action might be pursued if a
culprit were to lose his reason during his examination, as long
as he was in full possession of all his mental faculties at the
moment of perpetration of the crime ; such a course would, we
believe, be indeed pursued in a case of that kind ; but if as in
the present case, the fact is established with perfect certainty
that the accused was demented at the moment of the crime,
what possible use can there be in waiting until his mental state
may change for the better, and until he may be able to attend
to his defence ? What new elements bearing upon the case
can by this be brought to light ? Indeed we know of none.
II. Drunkenness. Seditious cities. A lleged insanity.?A
man named Tissier had celebrated Christmas by copious
drinking; he entered the Church of St. Koch during Mass, and
suddenly he began moving his hat about in the air and shouting:
" Vive TEmpereur." He was taken to the police station, where
he showed intentions of committing suicide. His necktie having
been taken away from him, he attempted to strangle himself
with his shirt sleeve, but was fortunately prevented from doing so.
Then he declared that he was not in his right mind, and that
in 1871 he was for six months a patient at Dr. Voisin's asylum.
He explained his insanity through a loss of 40,000 francs which
had just befallen him. He was placed under the examination
of M. Legrand du Saulle, who declared that for the moment he
was not deranged any more than could be explained by his
being intoxicated. These conclusions were accepted by the
tribunal.
III. Detention of an epileptic imbecile.?If there are countries where imbeciles and idiots are looked upon as special gifts
from Heaven and receive every care and attention, then there
are also others where they are deemed no better than so many
useless food consumers, beings which one cannot get rid of
soon enough. A country of the latter description must be Normandy, if we believe a correspondent of the Droit. Whatever
may be the general opinion, it is certain that on December 8
and 9, 1876, the following sad case was brought to light at the
Assize Court of la Mnnche. Celestine Onfroy was a young
imbecile and subject to epileptic tits, but according to the
statements of all the neighbours she had never been malicious
and was very fond of work. A rumour which got abroad
regarding the bad treatment she received at the hands of her
relations caused a judicial inquiry to be made. When the
commissaires visited the spot it was found that the poor girl
had been kept locked up for more than two years by her brother,
his wife, and their daughter. The place where she was shut up
25G legal medicine in France.
was a sort of old bakehouse, with hardly a roof upon it, so that
wind and rain could easily penetrate. The bed upon which she
slept was far too short for her. She was covered with vermin
and her clothing consisted only of a few rags. The inquiry
further proved that the poor creature had the marks of blows
upon her; that she had not received sufficient nourishment and
had, at the same time, been forced to do the hardest work.
The medical officer who examined her found her to be in a
state of great prostration. Thus this poor creature was tormented to hasten her death, so that her part of an inheritance
might be seized. The two women were set free and only the
brother was condemned to seven years' penal servitude.
IV. Drunkenness. Murder.?Drunkenness has its surprises,
and an honest man with a mild disposition who gets intoxicated
may, when he recovers reason, find himself a criminal. Bellenger, who appeared before the Assizes of Angers, in December
1876, learned this to his cost. This man, 34 years of age,
carrier by trade, had irreproachable antecedents, except that,
without being given to drinking, he liked to celebrate festivals
at the wine shop. One night, coming drunk from the inn, he
quarrelled with three of his companions and, drawing his
knife, struck one of them several blows with it. He then ran
away, while the others removed the wounded man; but after a
while he stopped and waited for them at the corner of a street.
There he again threw himself upon them and mortally wounded
a second one. The excuse of drunkenness which the culprit gave
to the jury was only partly admitted by the latter.
V. Kleptomania. Theft.?The case which we describe in
the following lines proves that magistrates are still reluctant
to believe in the existence of impulsive monomania, and that
they still doubt the possibility of persons being almost against
their will pushed towards dishonourable or criminal actions
which they even know to be such ; in this case everything
was present that should have created doubt in the minds of
the judges, and should have caused them, if not to order the
complete discharge of the defendant, yet at least to direct a
medico-legal examination. Madame de Kouvitchinski, who appeared before the judges of a police court in Paris, on January
27, 1877, belongs to a family of a certain eminence in Russia.
Her income was 24,000 francs per year, and she was in the
habit of purchasing goods in shops to the extent of 300 or
400 francs for which she paid in cash, and at the same time of
taking objects without particular value and of which she had
no need. Dr. Kortsakoff, who came expressly from St. Petersburg, declared that the lady belonged to one of the best
families of that city, that she entered the best society, and that
LEGAL MEDICINE IN FRANCE. 257
never had the least unfavourable suspicion fallen upon her. He
added that she was of a constitution which predisposed her
strongly to certain pathological affections of the nervous system;
that insanity was in her family and that her sister was at that
moment under treatment for mental disease. Besides this
statement the counsel for the defence read before the court a
certificate from the pen of the celebrated Russian specialist for
insanity, Dr. Frabenius.
Do not the particulars of this case seem to indicate that
Madame de Kouvitchinski acted under the influence of an
unhealthy impulse ? Her system of defence consisted in
putting the thefts upon the shoulders of her little girl, aged 6
years ; but this surely proves nothing against her madness,
because it is most frequent that the insane persons are perfectly
well aware of the gravity of the offence thus committed by
them, and that they try to push them over to others or to
excuse them. We are daily witnesses of occurrences of this
kind in our asylums.
The tribunal condemned Madame de Kouvitchinski to three
months' imprisonment and 300 francs' fine.
VI. Alcoholism. Attempt to Murder.?The following case,
which was judged by the jury of the Yonne, on December 16,
1876, happened under circumstances which were well calculated to throw doubt upon the real mental state of the culprit.
Durville is an officer of the magisterial court and given to
drinking strong liquors. Of a violent character, he has sworn
to hate to the death the maire of the village, who in his proces
verbaux had found some of his statements to be contrary
to truth. He goes about everywhere and openly talks of his
hate against this magistrate, and saying that after he has
killed him he will kill himself, because he does not care for
life. On November 9 he met the maire at the inn, surrounded
by several of his friends. Under the influence of visible overexcitement he mixed himself up in the conversation with expressions of a nature to cause the others to ask him to retire. He
replied by insults, and the magistrate thus outraged seized him
by the arm and pushed him out of the door. Durville then
proceeded to the coffee house next door and spoke in violent
terms against the maire. At last he went away shouting that
they would hear of him. ]Je returned to his home, took his gun
and said to his neighbour: " Ah, your maire ! I shall settle him
now." Then he returned to the inn, hid in a window niche,
and, waiting for a propitious moment, fired upon the maire.
If we remember the old drinking habits of the delinquent;
if we remark that instead of hating the maire, Durville ought
in reality to have been grateful to this gentleman, who, finding
258 LEGAL MEDICINE IN FRANCE.
out some untrue statements of his in the procea verbaux, simply
points them out to him when he could have had him punished;
if we take into account the incessant threats which he made
before everybody, thus revealing the object he had in view;
also the ideas of suicide which he had pronounced and the state
of over-excitement in which he was found, then we must indeed
ask ourselves whether the alcohol had not caused cerebral
lesions in this man, and whether he had not arrived at that
point where one ceases to be a drunkard to become an alcoholic
maniac. The jury understood that this attempt at assassination
was made under peculiar circumstances, for they rejected the
idea of premeditation, and admitted extenuating circumstances.
Durville was condemned to ten years' hard labour at the House
of Correction, and ten years of supervision by the police.
VII. Delirium of Persecution. Murder and attempt to
murder.?In this case the three medical men charged with the
examination of the mental state of the accused could not agree,
and unfortunately the opinion which prevailed in the end was
not what we consider to have been in accordance with the true
state of things. The importance of the case, and the divergence
of the opinions which were formed by the experts, justify the
quotations which we think it our duty to make. The following
is the account of the two crimes according to the documents of
the accusation:?"On September 19, 1876, Zoe Moulinos returned home about seven o'clock in the evening, coming from
the fields. Hearing hasty footsteps behind her, she turned round
and found herself face to face with her cousin Joseph Bernard,
who at the same moment fired a gun at her almost at arms'
length. Thence Bernard ran in all haste towards a barn close
by, belonging to his aunt, the widow Moulinos. The accused
opened the barn door violently, aimed at his aunt, fired, and then
fled. He left the country immediately, and was apprehended only
some time afterwards." Bernard owned his double crime, and
declared that he had obeyed to a thought of revenge?being
tormented and persecuted by his aunt and cousin?and that he
had fled from the country, not to escape the hand of justice, but
to get awav from all the hate which the two women had borne him.
The following is a part of his examination, which can leave
no doubt as to the real condition of his mind:
Q. What was the opinion which you said you believed your
aunt and your cousin had of you ?
A. They wanted to force me to sell my house, and they set
Mr. M  and his wife up against me. When I was condemned to pay an indemnity of 2,000 francs to these, I heard
them say, " He will be obliged to leave the country ; he is ruined,
he will be put in prison."
LEGAL MEDICINE IN FRANCE. 259
Q. But, before she died, your aunt said that she could not
understand the motive which could have influenced you, and
your cousin declares that they have never even spoken about
you?
A. Yet I have heard thera very well. Moreover, when I
had bought ray gun, they said that I had not paid for it, and that
it would be taken away from me. The gensdarmes came and
searched my house.
Q. Yes, of course, they came and looked for you after the
crime ?
A. No; I was the object of their searching visits before,
and I was persecuted by the gensdarmes and the gardes.
Q. You speak of what happened after the crime as if it had
happened before?
A. Not at all; because it was since my affair of the Thar
that I was persecuted.
Q. What then was this affair of the Thar ?
A. I had gone to the Thar to visit my sister, and before I
went to her house I went to the notary whom I had known at
college, to get a legal document for my wife, and I heard him
distinctly say to his clerk: " Go and fetch the garde, and I will
retain him here."
Q. The notary denies energetically having said anything of
the kind.
A. I heard him perfectly well.
Q. You told him then that you were going to see your
sister, and that you would return after a moment, and you did
not return.
A. No ; after what the notary had said I left. When I got
to the island, as I heard them say behind me that the gensdarmes
were following me, I got across the river Sorgues as well as I
could. When I reached the other bank I saw a gendarme near
the river's edge, and so I crossed it again. Further on I heard
them say that the roads were guarded by the gensdarmes and
that I would be arrested. A woman said to a labourer: " That
is the man from Venasque, whom the gensdarmes are looking for;
tell them that he came this way."
Q. You tell this story now, and you place before the crime
what really happened afterwards.
A. I repeat that I do not.
This language is characteristic; such things are not invented
unless one is well versed in the observation of the insane, and
the learned doctor of Montdevergue was right in affirming that
the culprit suffered from hallucinations of the sight and hearing,
with monomania of persecutions. Of the .two other experts,
one followed Dr. Campagne, while the third one declared that
260 LEGAL MEDICINE IN FRANCE.
Bernard was not insane and must be held responsible for his
double crime. The jury unfortunately embraced this latter
opinion, which then prevailed, and the accused was condemned
to penal servitude for life.
VIII. Drunkenness. Murder.?Individuals given to drinking strong liquors are, at a certain period of alcoholic intoxication, not only subject to an extreme irritability which is aroused
by a mere nothing, but they even often do not become aware of
this irritability, and let themselves be carried to violent actions
of which they do not see the consequences. The following is
a case in point. The woman, Pauline Prudhomme, kept up
intimate relations with the man Paulmier during the month of
November, 1876. Both gave way to drinking, and hence had a
great many quarrels. On November 17, Pauline went to the
wine shop at 6 o'clock in the morning, where she met her lover.
A dispute arose on a question of money, and Paulmier, striking
his mistress, knocked her down to the ground and then kicked
her with his foot. She returned home, but the drunkard
followed her and continued to beat her until the neighbours,
who were attracted by the woman's screams, interfered and
stopped him. Paulmier then returned to the inn and said that
he had just administered "a good hiding" to the woman
Prudhomme, and that he had caused some swellings on her
forehead which would prevent her from going out ail that day ;
then, without showing the least emotion, he went to his work,
perfectly unaware of having committed a murder. In fact, a
few moments after he had left her Pauline died, and the medical
man who made the autopsy declared that she had died from
strangulation. Paulmier appeared before the Assize Court of
the Seine accused of the crime of murder, and was acquitted
on January 24, 1877.
IX. Megalomania. Theft.? During the last days of
January, the Correctional Tribunal of Paris condemned to
thirteen months' imprisonment, in spite of the defence requesting a medico-legal examination, the man Bertin, aged
21 years and married. This man, who cried like a child
during the proceedings, had already been condemned for thefts,
a first time to a month, and a second time to two months'
imprisonment. Bertin seemed not to be in full possession of
all his faculties. He told his wife that he was professor at a large
college, and left every morning with a book under his arm to
wander about in the fields all day long. The theft which
brought him on the benches of the police court for the third
time had been committed at the house of his father, a doorkeeper at Paris. He had gone to him on January 16, the
day of the term, and had taken away a roll of money containing
LEGAL MEDICINE IN FRANCE. 261
more than 3,000 fr. He threw away this money in the most
senseless manner : thus, he invited the cabman who drove him
to the station to dinner, and gave him 5 fr. as a pourboire;
to the man who took care of his portmanteau he gave a pourboire of 10 fr. He invited to dinner everybody he met or that
would accept, and paid for them all. If we add to these symptoms that during pregnancy Mdme. Bertin had a great grief,
which endangered her life and that of her child, then we have
a complete account of the mental state of the accused which
cannot leave many doubts in our mind regarding its true nature.
Were he not so young we would suspect in him the commencement of paralytic insanity. His actions indeed reveal a diffuse
ambitious delirium, which has certainly the character of paralytic delirium; moreover we find in him the tendency to steal
and a great weakness of character. Whatever the case may be
the defence, in our opinion, was very well advised to demand
from the tribunal a medico-legal examination.
X. Delirium of Inventors. Poisoning with Prussic Acid
in a railway car.?This is the case of De Bouyn, who was tried
in February 1877, by the Assize Court of the Bouches du Khone,
and was condemned to twenty years' hard labour. In our opinion
I)e Bouyn was demented, and we hope that from this analysis it
will be seen that this accused suffered from that variety of megalomania known under the name of " Delirium of Inventors."
In the case of De Bouyn there were hereditary antecedents
of a pronounced character: two aunts and an uncle were insane.
After having passed through all bis classes, De Bouyn began
studying mechanics and chemistry. He was not long before he
thought himself called upon to make great discoveries, and
eventually believed that he had invented a railroad with
movable rails; a flying machine which was to entirely transform
the art of warfare ; a peculiar chemical composition which, when
projected from the holes of a shield invented by him, would
admit of suffocating at a distance, and without danger to himself, thousands of human beings. To all these splendid inventions he added the one not less beautiful?viz. that of making
natural diamonds by a new process of crystallisation. Entirely
absorbed by his discoveries, he occupied himself with them day
and night, and would not give up his researches to procure for
himself the means of subsistence. Without fortune, he lived at
the expense of a widow, his mistress, who was very much taken
with him and submitted to all his caprices. His rage for invention and experimentation was so great that he made this
woman sit upon eggs in a room kept at a temperature of 25?,
and did not permit her to leave them until they were hatched.
This person states that he was often ill, of a very mild tempera262 LEGAL MEDICINE IX FRANCE.
ment, except when he was opposed in anything relating to his
machines. He passed all his time making them and corresponding about them. He often got out of bed at night and
said strange things. In 1873 he committed a theft, with housebreaking, at a factory. He was examined by two doctors: by
Dr. Castellon, who considered his responsibility to be mitigated;
and by Dr. Pontier, who declared him irresponsible. This last
opinion was accepted by the jury, and De Bouyn was acquitted.
Such was the man who, finding himself alone in a railway compartment with a companion, killed the latter with prussic acid
while the train was passing through a tunnel, and then robbed
him of his purse and various objects. During the progress of
the case and the cross-examination, De Bouyn has given
numerous versions of his crime. It is perfectly well established
that the poisoning was committed by the accused, but we are
equally sure that it was only the outcome of his insanity. He
may have killed his travelling companion to experiment upon a
man with regard to the effect of his destructive machines, or to
rob him of the money necessary for the perfecting of his
machines; he has acted under the influence of delirious conceptions, communicated to him by heredity. The doctors
Lachaux and Rainpal, charged with the examination of his
mental condition, have agreed upon a limited responsibility, as
a consequence, as they said, of his temperament and his hereditary antecedents. We regret this, because we believe that in
1873 Dr. Pontier was right, when he declared De Bouyn demented and irresponsible; and it is to be regretted that after
his acquittal he should not have been placed at the disposal of
the administrative authorities.
XI. Perversion of affective sentiments. Murder of a child
by its mother.?Is there a form of mental alienation in which
the most prominent symptom?the only one which strikes those
who are not accustomed to the observation of the insane?is the
perversion of affective sentiments ? Certainly yes. No doubt
a specialist, who could study the patient closely, follow him
about all day, would succeed at last in finding out wrong ideas,
intellectual oppression, and, from time to time, real paroxysms
of agitation which, as they are often short, would require an
experienced eye for their detection; but all these pathological
peculiarities would be passed unnoticed by persons inexperienced in psychiatric studies, and what would strike them would
be that they would think themselves not in the presence of an
insane person, but of a monster: this would be the effect of
the perversion of affective sentiments. Was Madame Vilmont,
who appeared before the Court of Assizes at Tours, on March 9,
1877, an insane person of this category? We cannot be quite
LEGAL MEDICINE IN FRANCE. 2fi3
certain about it, for the information which we have gained from
the law journals does not seem to us to be sufficient to form a
positive opinion. Anyhow, the crime this lady committed upon
her only child was perpetrated under such odious conditions,
and the character of the accused is so extremely opposite to all
that is natural, that it would perhaps have been prudent to
have her examined by specialists.
In the night from January 21 to 22, Alexandre Vilmont,
aged four years and a half, succumbed to the bad treatment he
had received at the hands of his mother for the last six months.
Up to the age of four he had been brought up by his grandmother on his mother's side. Every day his mother beat him,
now with a stick, now with a rod, and with his father's bootjack. The poor child had at last got so far that when his
mother asked him whether he had had enough he replied : " Yes,
mamma," and thanked her. He was almost continually locked
up and left alone when his parents left their home, even for
many long hours together; and if it happened that he dirtied
himself under such circumstances, his mother would, in midwinter, plunge him into cold water and brush him with a scrubbing brush. On one day she even put excrements into his
mouth and asked him whether he liked it. The body of the
deceased child was full of contusions. It was submitted to the
examination of Dr. Danner, who counted more than one hundred
wounds; one side was broken, on one of the toes an ulcer
admitted of the bare bone being seen, yet, in spite of this painful wound, the mother obliged the child to walk for several
hours every Sunday. At last death, which so many sufferings
would necessarily have induced in a short time, had been
brought about by a congestion produced in consequence of a
blow on the head with a stick.
The mother who thus killed her only son by a cruel martyrdom of six months, had no serious motive for doing so ; but
ever since the age of puberty she had presented signs of a profound perversion of the affective sentiments. An orphan, she
had been tenderly brought up by her grandmother, and she
took a delight in tormenting her to such a degree that in the
district a rumour got about that by her caprices and brutality
she had shortened her days. Married, she tortured her husband,
who was several times obliged to leave her, and at the age of
hardly twenty-six years, she murdered her child in the manner
described. Would a well-conducted medico-legal examination
not have cleared up this mystery ?
The jury shrank from the odious nature of such conduct.
They admitted extenuating circumstances, and Madame Vilmont
was sentenced to hard labour for life.
264 LEGAL MEDICINE IN FRANCE.
A careful consideration of all the cases cited in the preceding article will indubitably suggest the propriety of entirely
recasting the laws under which irresponsible criminals are
wont to be treated. In France, more commonly than in
England, all the factors tending to the commission of crime
are attentively weighed, and, as a result, to the credit,
be it said, of French humanity, it frequently follows that
certain penalties are not inflicted on the unhappy victims of
diseased imaginations. In this country increasing importance
is being attached to the question opened up in the foregoing
pages, and especially is this due to the publication of Dr.
Gruy's instructive and valuable work " The Factors of the
Unsound Mind." At the present time space forbids our further
considering the subject, but we shall return to it again in as
complete and exhaustive a manner as possible. [Ed. J. P. M.]
