Aspiration in Abscess of the Liver in Hypochondriacal Melanciiolics
====================================================================

89 EPITOMISED TRANSLATIONS.

It is stated that Dr Hammond has communicated to the
Neurological Society of America that in his private practice
during- about a year, he has observed five cases of patients
labouring under Hypochondriacal Melancholia, in which there
was present abscess of the liver. In these five cases his suspicion
was confirmed by a puncture of the skin, followed by Aspiration
which withdrew a more or less quantity of pus. The results
were that no physical disturbance or determent followed, and
that there was considerable alleviation of the mental symptoms.
He adds that in all cases of melancholia with hypochondriasis,
the region of the liver ought to be carefully explored, and that the
simple and perfectly safe operation of aspiration should be resorted
to even when no trace of fluctuation indicating the presence of
abscess can be detected. The recorders of this experience, Dr.
Henocque, in the Gazette Ilebdomadaire and the editor of th?
Anal. Med. Psy. concur with Dr Hammond only so far that
attention and careful examination should be directed to the
hepatic region in patients suffering from hypochondriacal
melancholia, but that no operation should be ventured upon
unless or until distinct evidence of the presence of an abscess
can be obtained.
Exploration of Cerebral Temperature.
The first attempt to attain information as to the temperature of the brain, or rather of the head, was made by Albers, of
Bonn, in 1861, and repeated some years afterwards by Dr.
Costa Alverenga, but it was only in 1877 that the interest of
scientific men was excited in the Thermic Examination of the
Encephalon, when M. Broca made a communication on the
subject at the session of the French Association for the Advancement of Science, which had met at Havre. Various works in
the development of the inquiry have since appeared both in
France and in other countries, and M. Voisin has likewise made
contributions to our knowledge by the facts collected by him in
connection with the General Paralysis of the insane. But the
most important and comprehensive researches upon the subject
are those of MM. les Drs. Maragliano and Seppillis.
90 EPITOMISED TRANSLATIONS.
In different works which have recently appeared there will
be found detailed instructions and cautions as to the care to be
taken by the experimenter in the selection of suitable thermometers and the other instruments employed, the region
selected for examination, the due appreciation of the apartment, the season, the hour in which the experiment is made,
and the physical and mental condition of the individual to be
examined.
But even were all sources of uncertainty as to the mode
and surrounding circumstances in the act of exploration removed,
it becomes very questionable whether the differences indicated
by the thermometer should be localised with the cerebral region
under experiment, or should be interpreted as due to the subjacent tissues, the integuments and cranial walls. Moreover,
such sources of fallacy, numerous as they may be when the
subjects examined labour under cerebral lesions, become more
numerous and complicated when the investigation is extended,
as has been done by M. Amidon of New York, to healthy
subjects, for the purpose of determining the precise site and
influence of motor centres over the contraction of this or that
muscle.
Restraint and Non-Restraint.
It would appear that an animated, almost a bellicose, discussion bas been and is going on in France, Germany, and
England, as to the expediency or humanity of non-restraint in
the management of the insane. A certain number of the most
celebrated of the disputants contend that, in a small number of
dangerous patients, the application of a properly constructed
camisole is preferable to the strife and struggles which ensue
when the manual and muscular forces of attendants are substi
tuted, or to the employment of narcotics in excessive doses, or
to their being consigned to seclusion and solitude in a cell,
whether that be padded or not. At a meeting of the Medico
Psychological Society of Paris in October last, at which almost
every expert, distinguished or unknown, connected with the
care and custody of the insane, were present, M. Christian read
a paper on this much-controverted subject. His conclusions may
be briefly stated as that the emancipation of the lunatic from
bonds was introduced by Pinel and not by Conolly; that non-restraint is an error in practice, compromising the health, safety,
and restoration of the insane, and that the camisole cannot and
should not be disused. In these conclusions every individual
present, with the exception of M. Magnan, emphatically, several
enthusiastically, concurred. M. Christian affirmed that nonEPITOMISED TRANSLATIONS. 91
restraint was no longer practised in France, Germany, or
Switzerland. In the United States, where a similar controversy
has been waged during the past two years, but where the matter
agitated is rather the use of the crib or conservative bed than
the strait waistcoat, the contest became so violent as to attract
the attention of the Government, and three commissioners,
appointed for the purpose, are now engaged in taking evidence
and in visiting different asylums, so that they may be enabled to
report on the merits of the propositions and experience bearing
upon the whole question at issue.
The bed, which forms the gravamen of this national dispute,
was constructed not so much for the purposes of coercion as to
economise the strength of the feeble and the aged, and to
protect these and other classes of patients from accidents and
the effects of self-inflicted bruises and wounds during excitement
and restlessness. It consists of what was formerly-designated a
box bed, the sides of which are lined with soft padding or
mattresses of wool, the bottom being a network formed by
girths, which bear the necessary complement of bedding and of
air and water cushions, should such be required, while the lid
is likewise formed of a network of girths, the interspaces being
so small as to prevent the passage of the head &c., but so large
as to admit an ample supply of air and light, so that the medical
captive may read and suffer but little inconvenience in his
novel position. The lid, or cover, is in urgent cases locked
to either of the sides.
The invention is claimed by M. Aubanel, of Marseilles,
where, however, it is now not regarded with favour. The
arrangement was described some years ago by the late Dr W.
Lauder Lindsay, of Murray's Asylum, Perth, in the Edinburgh
Medical and Surgical Journal, and is believed to be still in
use in Scotland.
Hallucinations in Delirium of Persecution.
M. Falret has advanced the opinion, founded upon his
experience, in describing the evolution of the Delirium of Persecution, that this neurosis is almost invariably accompanied by
hallucinations of the sense of hearing, while M. Mabille holds
that the affection may be complicated with hallucinations of
sight. Professor Laseque, who confirms M. Falret's opinion,
has constructed a table illustrative of what he conceives to be
the pure type of the disease. It is somewhat doubtful that
such a type can be established, and we are inclined to believe
that should the inquiry extend to chronic cases it might be
possible to reconcile these conflicting views.
92 EPITOMISED TRANSLATIONS.
Compulsory Alimentation.
M. De Regis, in reopening the discussion upon Compulsory
Alimentation in patients affected with sitophobia, has discussed
the three following practical propositions :?
1. That the washing out or ablution of the stomach by
alkaline solutions, or, what is better, the waters of Vichy, may
be indicated in such cases of abstinence as may be supposed to
depend upon physical disease of the stomach. This expedient,
introduced from Germany, has been resorted to in various of
the Parisian hospitals.
2. He suggests that where artificial feeding is practised for
a long time it would be prudent that the aliments thus conveyed
should contain doses of pepsine, in order to secure the absorption of sufficient quantities of albumen.
3. That in the mechanical process of introducing food, the
tube should be so constructed as to expand itself laterally, so as
to occupy the whole of the passage into which it may have
entered, and thus to announce that the passage entered is or is
not the larynx.
The Chronicle commenced in the Annates Medico Psychologiques for January 1881, is to be continued for the purpose of
epitomising and recording all facts relative to the clinical and
theoretic study of mental maladies.
Albuminous Uiiine in Epileptics.
The first recherches on this subject seem to have been made
by Drs. Sutherland and Rigby in Britain and Michea in France.
The Physicians of St. Luke's investigated the cases of 192
insane patients, and found albumen in the urine of seven. Michea,
confining his inquiries to epileptics and hysterica, found neither
sugar nor albumen in the urine of such cases.
M. Hubert, resting on the experience of English observers,
affirms that the presence of albumen in the urine of epileptics
has been demonstrated.
MM. Moreau de Tours, Sailly, Jaccoud, and Bourneville,
pronounce emphatically against the presence of albumen, while
Otto found it rarely in the urine of epileptics.
These contradictory conclusions were tested at Mareville by
M. Christian, who examined the urine of 38 epileptics, before,
during, and subsequent to a paroxysm, and notwithstanding all
scientific care in the manipulation, albumen was detected in the
urine of only one individual, who, it was found, clinically laboured
under parenchymatous nephritis, albumen having been discovered
EPITOMISED TRANSLATIONS. 03
not only before and after a paroxysm, but associated with granular
fatty cylinders. The experiments of Claude Bernard, by puncturing the fourth ventricle, and the subsequent appearance of
albuminuria, and the supposed connection of the surrounding
cerebral region with epileptic disease, has not been borne out
by the researches now under consideration. It is obvious that
the obstacles presented to respiration during an epileptic fit,
by the immobility of the muscles of respiration, and by the
closure of the larynx, though grave, are not of sufficient duration to prevent the formation of albumen, and, consequently,
according to M. Bourneville, no such substance was detected in
a patient who died during the paroxysm. Besides, the visceral
congestions present during an attack, rapidly disappear on its
cessation.
Recent works contain the theory of M. Hamon that
albuminuria is itself a nervous affection, dependent upon the
central and ganglionic systems. It has been added that attention should be directed to the condition of the nerves whicli
supply the kidneys, as in eclampsia; the presence of albumen
must be regarded as a consequence and not as a cause of the
disease. Lesions of the nerves, and even conditions of the
encephalon may lead to interstitial nephritis, and consequent
albuminuria. It should be added that in the examination of
14 persons who died in the Statu Epilepticus, and of various
other diseases, with the exception of two instances of slight
congestion, no perceptible structural change could be detected
in the substance of the kidneys. M. Bourneville has recorded
a similar experience in five cases.
It would appear from these observations that no connection
lias been established between epileptic affections and the secretion of albumen by the kidneys. De Witt, an American, is reported to have found albumen in one-twentieth of the cases of
epilepsy which have come under his treatment.
It would appear from the above observations, and from the
experience of a large number of the most distinguished French
experts, delivered upon the controverted points, that traces of
albumen may be detected in the urine of epileptics, especially
after repeated attacks of the malady; but that the occurrence
is very rare, and, as none of the concomitant or collateral conditions or symptoms of the patients in whom the detection was
made have been described, no reliable conclusion can be drawn
as to the connection between albuminuria and this form of the
neurosis ; indeed, it is probable that where this condition was
observed, it depended upon renal, or even remote causes, and
not upon epilepsy.
Annates Medico Psychologiques, Nov. 1880.
