A Treatise on Diseases of the Nervous System
=============================================

282 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
Illustrated with Lithographs, Photographs, and two hundred
and eighty Woodcuts, 2 vols. By James Ross, M.D.,
M.R.C.P. Lond.; Assistant Physician, Manchester Royal
Infirmary; Consulting Physician, Manchester Southern
Hospital. Churchill, London, 1881.
Tiie progress of investigation, clinical and experimental, tends
to make works on diseases of the nervous system become
speedily out of date. Even standard treatises are obsolete in
a few years. It is not that the older books were inaccurate in
their descriptions of disease, or were wrong in their treatment
of it. On the contrary, it is easy to find, in old medical
literature, portraitures of disease as vivid, as striking, and as
accurate as any that can be found in the pages of our best
modern writers. The old authors fall into desuetude, not
because their statements are inaccurate, but because, since their
day, many additional facts have been observed, interpreted, and
embodied with .our previous stock of knowledge. A ripening
experience has not merely added new facts, but has discerned
the relations that bind them together. And so it happens that
nervous diseases are now perhaps as well understood as any
other disease whatsoever. The changes in structure that underlie altered function have now to a very large extent been made
out; and it is now possible in most cases to say, with a close
approach to certainty, what is the precise seat and nature of the
disease.
The work before us is a noteworthy one, and is sure to
become the standard treatise on diseases of the nervous system.
It possesses all the marks of the highest merit in standard
works. It is comprehensive; it is accurate; it is thoughtful.
The style is plain, simple, and clear?such as befits both a
scientific subject and an earnest worker. The illustrations are
copious; many of them are original; most of them will be
new to English readers, while they are all characterised by the
ease with which they are understood and by the appropriateness
with which they throw light on matters that otherwise would be
difficult of comprehension.
Regarding the plan of the work a few7 words may be said.
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 283
The first portion, occupying about two hundred and eighty pages,
treats of the general pathology of the nervous system, and
includes an outline of the structure and functions of the nervous
system generally. Chapters on etiology, symptomatology, the
elementary affections of the Sensory, of the Motor, and of the
Nutritive apparatus follow; and the general diagnosis, prognosis,
and treatment of nervous diseases are discussed with considerable
fulness. The remainder of the work is occupied with the Special
Pathology of the Nervous System.
The divisions under which the Special Pathology is dealt
with are five: diseases of the peripheral nerves, of the sympathetic system, of the spinal cord and medulla oblongata, of
the encephalon, and lastly ot the encephalo-spinal system.
A minute and admirable account of the anatomy and physiology
of each portion of the nervous system precedes the descriptions
of the diseases to which it is subject When thus examined
in the light of physiology, the diseases become much more
intelligible; and we do not know any systematic work in which
anatomy and physiology have been kept so steadily in view
throughout, and in which the application of physiology to
medicine has been so fruitful of good results.
This work embodies the outcome of continental, as well as
of home, neuropathic research. Not merely is it a credit to the
provincial school where so much work of merit has been accomplished ; it is an ornament to English medical literature.
Diseases of the Nervous System, especially in Women. By
S. Weir Mitchell, M.D. London, Churchill, 1881.
This book consists of a pleasant series of lectures by a distinguished American physician. The subjects dealt with are
mostly unusual or puzzling varieties of nervous diseases in
women, and the mode of treating them.
Formerly no cases were more unsatisfactory as regards
treatment than some chronic hvsterial ailments. The patients
were confirmed invalids, the despair of physician after physician,
who in turn had charge of them. In most cases the patients
are weak, pallid, and flabby. The successful treatment of
these cases is accomplished by seclusion, rest, massage, electricity, and full feeding. In a comparatively small number of
cases the patients are stout; but not well coloured; though fat
they do not look healthy. These cases require a little modification in the foregoing treatment. They must first for a while
be underfed, and then built up afresh by over feeding. The
284 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
absolute rest enables the underfeeding to be carried out with
safety, while the massage and electricity take the place of
exercise. By these means Dr Mitchell, and many other
physicians, have had unprecedented success in the treatment of
these trying and distressing maladies.
The book is a good and useful one and will repay perusal.
Rheumatism: Its Nature, its Pathology, and its Successful
Treatment. By T. J. Maclagan, M.D. London : Pickering & Co. 1881.
This work, by Dr Maclagan, who was the first to introduce
salicylic acid as a remedy for acute rheumatism, is full of suggestive remarks and valuable practical hints. His theory is
that acute rheumatism is the effect of miasma, and he quotes
Haygarth who "thought that there were several analogies
between an ague and a rheumatic fever." For the facts on
which he bases his theory we must refer our readers to
Dr Maclagan's work. They are too numerous for insertion
here, as our space is too limited for their enumeration. We are
at issue with the author as regards the comparative value of
salicylic acid and quinine?he gives his preference to the former
drug ; we think the latter is by far the most efficacious remedy,
given with bicarbonate of potash, and held in solution by means
of a solution of gum arabic.
American Journal of Insanity. July, 1881. Edited by
Dr J. P. Gray, of Utica, N.Y. State Lunatic Asylum,
New York.
This journal never disappoints us. The following remarks by
Dr Jacob Weiss ot' Vienna on Melancholia deserve especial
notice:
" It has become the custom to regard, as a stage of melancholia, conditions of stupor beginning with general depression,
under the name of melancholia cum stupore, in contradistinction to melancholia activa or agitata. We have elsewhere
insisted that stupor is not to be confounded with the clinical
phenomena of melancholia, that the condition of stupor stands
in no closer connection with melancholia than with any other
form of psychical disturbance ; and if the systematic grouping
of different symptoms is to have any significance at all, we must
not lose sight of definite characters as belonging to a definite
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 285
complexus of symptoms. This is not the case, however, if we
regard as characteristic the anxious and gloomy frame of mind,
with all its concomitant expressions of self-reproach and tendency to suicide, while at the same time we consider the state
of total psychical and motor arrest, without spontaneity whatsoever on the part of the patient, likewise a melancholic condition.
Depression and fretful self-disparagement, the cardinal symptoms
of melancholia, have just as little to do with stupor as with
typical mania. It is an error to suppose that there is behind
stupor a condition of depression and anxiety. Convalescents
from stupor remove all doubt in regard to this point, since they
aver that they thought of nothing and were incapable of
thinking, intimating that all cerebral activity is impossible.
" This is not the case with melancholies. Psychical processes
take place, if in dreary monotony of distressing ideas. The
melancholic is never so apathetic and void of all spontaneity,
never so listless and indifferent as the patient in a state of
stupor. Apart from the intercurrent stages of extreme excitement which frequently supervene under the influence of great
anxiety, the melancholic always evinces a certain degree of
activity, a necessity to give vent to his woes and self-depreciation, which is entirely excluded by stupor. We may refer,
in this connection, to the frequent cases of senile melancholia,
which are diagnostically obscured by stupor only in extremely
rare instances, indeed almost never."
The whole of the article, as well as all the other papers, are
well worthy of perusal.
The Medical Record, a weekly journal of Medicine and
Surgery. New York. July 30, 1881.
We regret to find the following statement, made by the editor,
in a notice of Mr. Cyples's work, " An Inquiry into the Process
of Human Experience " :? " It is undoubtedly the tendency of
scientific studies to incline the mind toward materialism." We
beg to protest most decidedly against this assertion. A smattering of science no doubt " puffeth up," and makes " the fool "
say " in his heart there is no God." It is far otherwise with our
deepest philosophic and scientific thinkers, e.g. Bacon, Newton,
Bradley, Pascal, Barrow, Whewell, Sir Humphry Davy,
Faraday, Brewster, &c. &c. These men " looked from Nature
up to Nature's God." We would remind the writer of Lord
Bacon's celebrated aphorism :?" A little philosophy inclineth
men's minds to Atheism, but depth in philosophy bringeth
men's minds to religion."
PART II. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES. X
286 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
The New York Medical Journal and, Obstetrical Review.
Edited by Dr Frank P. Foster. August, 1881. New
York : D. Appleton & Co.
In this number Dr H. H. Kane discusses the important question of
Habits. He is the author of Drugs that enslave. The Opium,
Morphine, and Chloral Habits. He contends that there is such
a thing as chloral habit, although it has been denied. He
instances two cases of chloral-taking which had given rise to
habits, after there was no furthei occasion for the use of the
drug. The most interesting part of his paper is that in which
he discusses the meaning of the word habit. He says:
" It is a term that is, at best, indefinite, and one that has
been used by different writers very loosely. There seems to be
no single word in any language that expresses precisely the
hold upon the system acquired by certain drugs, when taken for
a longer or shorter period. Levenstein finds the term 'morbid
craving for morphia' best suited to his understanding of the
peculiarities of these cases. Like the word ' habit,' however, it
does not express the matter either fully or clearly.
" Of those people who are addicted to the continual use of
morphia and chloral there are two classes, the division resting
upon the manner in which the drug was first used. In the one
class there is a morbid appetite that may be fed upon excitement, alcohol, absinthe, quinine, hashish, bromide of potassium,
chloral, or opium. It may have for its subject anything, and
will be classed according to that upon which the appetite
becomes most fully fixed. Given a person with such morbid
propensities, and let him, either of his own free will or through
the agency of another person, begin to use any drug of this
class, and he will fix upon that drug in nine cases out of ten and
become an habitual user of it. Once habituated to its use, the
entire nervous system rebels at its withdrawal, and the victim
to his own morbid appetite continues to use the stimulant or
sedative, as the case may be, not because the satisfaction first
experienced continues, but because any attempt to do without
the agent produces such distressing symptoms that the weakwilled patient is compelled to resort to that which he at one
and the same time loves and hates. Opium and morphine, but
more especially the latter when used subcutaneously, seem to
stand first in the list of those substances that have the power
to enslave persons of this class.
" In the other class there is no morbid craving for any form
of stimulant or narcotic, but the long-continued use of the drug,
usually for the relief of pain, produces a systemic state analogous
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 287
to that existing in the first class before the drug was taken. In
the one the drug ministers to a morbid craving already existing;
in the other it establishes a necessity for continuing its use.
The objection to the term ' craving' in this connection is that
it implies a longing for something that is expected to give
pleasure, whereas to the majority of habitues pleasure becomes
a meaningless word after a short time, and ' inability to do
without' takes its place. It is really an hereditary or acquired
involuntary tendency, that through accident or design becomes
fixed upon a certain stimulant or narcotic that develops,
increases, and perpetuates the tendency.
" As an example of the second class of cases, we may take
those persons who, having absolutely no desire or longing for
tobacco, commence its use simply because it is the custom,
despite the fact that it sickens them at first. Having continued
its use for some time, they find that they have fastened upon
themselves a habit that requires no little will power to shake
off. Tobacco is the type of those substances that possess less
fastening power than morphine. To this class belong alcohol,
chloral, hemp, the bromides, quinine, &c. In the case of each,
we find persons who can and do use it for a certain length of
time without the establishment of that systemic state that
calls for a repetition of the dose as soon as the effect of the
preceding dose has worn off. The knowledge of this fact, however, does not prove to us that certain persons, owing to some
peculiarity wholly unknown to us, will not under the same
circumstances become abject slaves to the necessity for continued use."
There are also some valuable Psychological Notes in the same
number which will interest all engaged in the treatment of
insanity.
Thirty-Eighth Annual Report of the TJtica State
Lunatic Asylum.
The report of the managers of the State Lunatic Asylum of
Utioa, for the year ending September 30, 1880, is an interesting
one in many respects. During the twelve months, 1,088 patients
were under treatment, 468 having entered within the year, 620
being the number in the institution at its commencement. Of
these, 565 were men, and 523 women ; while the discharges
amounted to 271 males, and 203 females. These latter are apportioned as follows: recovered, 155, viz. men, 74, women, 81;
improved, 66: men, 40, women, 26; unimproved, 197: men,
117, women, 80 ; not insane, .14 : men, 13, women 1; died, 42 :
x 2
288 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
men, 27, women, 15. Deaths took place in the case of seven
patients within eleven days after admission, acute or chronic
disease being at the date of their entry well determined. To
these must be added two cases of suicide, omitting which
and thirteen deaths from paresis, the number of instances of
what may be termed preventible mortality is reduced to five?a
small percentage on the total number of inmates. These five
patients died: three from meningitis, one from cerebral
congestion, and one from acute pleurisy. No case of zymotic
disease occurred during the year; and the general health
throughout the asylum is described as excellent. Certainly the
results speak well for the hygienic and sanitary arrangements,
in carrying out which considerable expense is shown to have
been incurred, from the balance-sheets included in the repoit.
It may be that the advice tendered by the superintendent, and
followed in part in the Utica asylum, is calculated to bring
patients under the most favourable circumstances for treatment
in case of illness. It certainly deserves to be noticed. He
suggests the construction of a small wing in connection with
the wards, for the especial care of the sick ; and the experience
obtained on trial of the plan on the women's side of the house
has been of the most favourable kind. It is calculated that
such a hospital wing, with necessary bath and service rooms,
heating apparatus, &c. costs about ?2,500. It offers very
fair prospects of being attended with advantages.
The important subject of staff discipline affords material
for some apposite observations in this report, and it appears
from it that stringent regulations are enforced in the asylum
to ensure the most favourable treatment of patients by those
entrusted with their care. " Nothing," it is urged, " short of
the highest discipline can secure that degree of oversight and
care so essential to the comfort of the patient and his restoration to health"; and we may add that the pages before us
amply testify to the zeal and efficiency, with the duty of
superintendence, in this particular has been carried out. The
truth contained in the following statements might, we fear,
be better appreciated in more than one public institution in
this country, to the advantage of patients, and the success of
the asylum. " In their daily intercourse with patients, the
attendants are required to be governed by the same laws of
politeness that are recognised and obeyed in ordinary life.
Indeed, they must extend to those under their care far more
than the ordinary consideration and kindness of humane society."
With experiences of the uncouth, careless demeanour of state
asylum attendants in this country before one, there is some
difficulty in understanding that this is written of officials in
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 289
public asylums for the insane in America. That it simply
defines what is, after all, no more than ought to obtain, does
not lessen the force of the comparison ; it can only excite an
earnest wish that such enlightened rulings may quickly become
commonly recognised in place of the harsh, unfeeling principles
that seemingly guide the conduct of keepers in British statesupported institutions.
The question of restraint, important in itself, doubly so in
its issues, is discussed at some length. The managers of the
Utica Asylum " have not failed to observe in some quarters a
disposition to create agitation upon questions which might be
supposed to have long ago settled themselves in the light of
experience, if experience is to be allowed to settle any issue
that is acknowledged to rest upon a practical question of fact.
There must be some subjects, however," they continue, " upon
which experience proves the safest test of practicability ; and
such a subject, we believe, is the care and treatment of the
insane, and the conduct and management of our lunatic asylums.
The managers would refer .especially to the discussions that have
arisen among professional men in the care of asylums in regard
to the desirability of abolishing and dispensing with all forms
of mechanical restraint in the treatment of the insane, and the
question whether various proposed substitutes for these things
are really in the line of advance, or rather form a retrograde
movement in dealing with this fearful malady. This discussion,
carried on almost with acrimony by some theorists, is reflected
outside of the circle of professional experience, even in the
ordinary newspaper press, creating prejudice, not to say alarm,
in the popular mind, and is more or less concerned in the
legislative inquiries into the internal management of the
public institutions that have been prompted from time to time.
Feeling, therefore, the importance of the subject, the managers
have requested the superintendent of this asylum to include in
his annual report to them a full presentation of the present
status of professional opinion and practice on this question,
whatever it be, fortified by such facts of experience as may
throw light upon it and furnish its justification."
This report of the superintendent, Dr John M. Gray, is
printed in full, and constitutes an admirable and exhaustive
analysis of the opinions held in respect to restraint by a large
number of eminent authorities. It forms most instructive reading and reflects infinite credit on the author of the paper, who is
thus enabled to put the whole question in judicial form before
the eye ; and not least instructive is the final conclusion at
which he arrives, and which is but a repetition, to the following
effect, of that which, as he says, he uttered twenty years ago :
290 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
" We look upon restraint and seclusion, directed and controlled
by a conscientious and intelligent medical man, as among the
valuable alleviating and remedial agents in the care and cure of
the insane. That they are agreeable in their application or
use, either to the physician or patient, no one will maintain.
Indeed, few, if any, medical prescriptions are agreeable. The
bitter and nauseating draughts, the abstinence in diet, the
seclusion of the patient to the sick room, and the exclusion
therefrom of friends, are prescriptions for the cure of disease, as
are the knife and appliances of surgery, and they are adopted
and prescribed as such. The physician who would not administer the best remedy because it might offend the taste, or the
surgeon who would not use the knife, or other means, because
he might thereby cause pain ; or the obstetrician who would lay
aside, under any such consideration, the remedies required in
critical cases, would be unworthy of the profession, and the confidence of the public."
Occupation for the insane is considered at some length, and
expressions are employed in accordance with the general
English view that beneficial results are obtained from insistance
on a due amount of labour, to be exacted from all capable of
healthy employment. There is every indication indeed, that
the affairs of the asylum are conducted with the strictest regard
to the chief purpose for which it exists, viz., the cure, and improvement of the mentally unsound. The whole report is most
satisfactory, and in many places is full of valuable suggestions.
Sixty-fourth Annual Report of the Asylum for the Relief of
Persons Deprived of the use of their Reason, Philadelphia.
The Asylum for the Relief of Persons Deprived of the Use of
their Keason is the somewhat extended title of a small institution at Philadelphia, managed by members of the Society of
Friends. The sixty-fourth annual report of the Superintendent,
Dr John C. Hall, briefly details the changes which have taken
place among the inmates under his care during the twelve
months covered by it. From it we gather that one hundred
and thirty patients were treated in that time, of which number
40?17 men and 23 women?were new arrivals. Thirty-six
discharges are chronicled ; of these 14 were restored, six much
improved, three were improved, and 13 were stationary. This
asylum might, we should imagine, justly claim to be the paradise of chronic cases, judging from the length of time many of
the patients have been resident therein. One of the discharged
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 291
is said to have been an inmate of the asylum " about fortyseven years," his removal to a state hospital having been necessitated in consequence of the cost of maintenance. The
superintendent cheerfully explains that " a large majority
of those who are at present inmates of the house are chronic
cases, in which the hope of recovery is but small," and further
on he adds, " A number of these have been residents of the
asylum more than thirty years, are now quite advanced in life,
and will in all probability add to our mortuary list, as similar
cases have in the past year." This touching trustfulness in the
certain extinction of the aged chronics, who form the major part
of those for whom he is called upon to care, oddly precedes the
statement that " The general health of the patients has, however, been good, there having been no epidemic or endemic
disease prevalent."
The following passage from the report is worthy of note, and
will probably be endorsed by all who are widely familiar with
the prominent part played by alcohol in the causation of
insanity:?" In considering the causes of insanity among those
admitted last year, we find seven patients, four men and three
women, whose disease was attributable directly to intemperance.
I believe its influence in the production of insanity to be rather
understated than otherwise. If those cases could be numbered
in our statistical tables where the indirect effects of this vice
can certainly be traced, the list would be augmented."
The occupation question seems to excite the American
superintendents of asylums in a great degree; and even in the
little institution maintained by the Philadelphian Quakers, a
difficulty arises in respect to it during the colder part of the
year. The long winter evenings are with difficulty got through
without the aid lent by amusements, and in America these are
largely enlisted as a means of expediting the passage of time.
In the summer less trouble is met with in this respect, and the
Philadelphia asylum is well situated in wooded country, and
provided with ample gardens and lawns.
This report includes no special details of scientific interest,
but is a plain, unpretending record of the year's progress.
Annual Report of the Kingston, Ontario, Asylum for 1880.
During the year ending September 30, 1880, there were under
treatment in the Kingston Asylum 491 persons, of whom 245
were male and 246 female patients. Of this number 32 died.
The number of admissions in the twelve months was 68, 31
being women. The discharges amounted to 24, 15 men, 9
292 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
women; in addition to these two males " eloped." The discharged patients are divided into probationers and permanent.
Of the former there were 14, 5 of whom were sent away as
"recovered " and 1 as "improved." Three others have been
returned to the asylum, and 5 were at the time the report was
issued still at large on trial. The superintendent explains that,
owing to sundry circumstances, the institution under his care
contains but few acute cases, the great majority of the residents
being incurable, thus bringing the discharges to a very meagre
total. He makes the suggestion that were district physicians
to urge the immediate removal of patients to the asylum while
their insanity is still in the acute stage, much greater benefits
to them would be the result. Among the deaths was one of a
man subject to severe epileptic attacks, who succumbed during
a paroxysm of unusual length. On post-mortem examination
the skull was discovered very much thickened and indurated,
and in places bony projections into the cavity were found.
Disease of the membranes existed also, but the brain attained
average weight and development, and " no disease could be
detected with the naked eye." It is perhaps too much to
expect that every asylum shall contribute pathological records
concerning the condition of those of its patients who die while
under treatment, but there are an infinity of reasons why they
should be obtained whenever possible. In many of the better
managed institutions this is now attempted as far as possible,
and we may by and bye be able to look upon those asylums
whence such reports do not emanate, as the exception rather
than the rule. The gross results of post-mortem examinations are valuable so far as they go, but they do not go nearly
far enough to satisfy the curiosity reasonably felt by the medical
psychologist to know what are the conditions set up by the
diseases of insanity. Only as knowledge of the most perfect
kind in this direction is accumulated, can we hope to make a
real advance in the science of treatment.
The bulk of this report deals with matters that will have
interest only for the subscribers to, and governors of, the institution in question; but the paragraphs relating to winter
amusements provided for the inmates are noticeable as showing
the extent to which this mode of providing for their wants is
practised on the other side of the Atlantic. Indeed, in all
American asylums much stress is laid on the necessity of
affording frequent evening entertainments to the patients, and,
as a rule, the work seems to be well and faithfully carried out.
So far as any direct judgment on the advantages conferred by
these attempts to divert the minds of the insane for a time
from their pre-occupation, can be formed, it must, of course, be
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 293
drawn from a study of the statistical returns provided in the
reports furnished from time to time by professional superintendents, and comparison of them with similar statistics from other
places where a like plan of providing amusements is not followed out. We do not propose to do this here any further than
to say that any superiority of result is apparently on the side of
those who systematically pursue the former course ; and with
American institutions for the treatment of insanity generally, it
is found that much good is obtained from frequent introduction
of such an element of change as is instanced in these entertainments.
The following extract from the Kingston, Ontario, Asylum
report under notice, inserted in the inspector's account of his
visit to the institution, will be of interest as showing the necessity
for an arrangement which exists in all well-regulated establishments in this country:
" In previous minutes I have called attention to what
appeared to me to be a rather serious defect in the asylum
service, viz., the performance of ward duty by the mechanical
staff of the asylum. It was quite evident that if the carpenter,
tailor, gardener, and farmer performed the work required of
them in a satisfactory and efficient way, they could not have
time to look after patients other than those whose work they
were required to direct and supervise. Such being the case,
the Medical Superintendent was instructed to detach the
employes named from the list of attendants and require of
them only the performance of the work their respective designations indicated."
Annual Report for 1880 of the Inspector-General of the
Insane, New South Wales.
The official report of Dr F. Norton Manning, InspectorGreneral of the Insane for New South Wales, is a document
from which very much interesting and instructive information
is to be obtained. It extends over forty-four closely-printed
pages of foolscap, and deals with the condition and progress,
during the year ending December 31, 1880, of a total of 2,099
patients, distributed through six permanent and one temporary
hospitals, and one licensed house. The number of patients
admitted for the first time into the hospitals for the insane
during the year was 267 male and 145 female, a total of 412 ;
and the readmissions numbered 28 males and 30 females, a
total of 58. The admissions and readmissions together were
470, being in excess of those for any previous year. The
294 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
number of patients received from other institutions for the
insane?transferred under section 80 of the Lunacy Act?was
66. At the Licensed House, Cook's River, 5 patients were
admitted for the first time, 1 was readmitted, and 9 were
received from other institutions. It thus appears that the
total admissions to all the institutions was 417, the readmissions
59, and the transfers 75. The largest of these institutions, the
Paramatta Free Hospital for the Insane, contained, during- the
twelve months, an average number of 744, 562 males and 212
females; 124 patients were admitted, and 41 discharged recovered ; while 3 were absent on leave, and 53 died in the
hospital. At the date of the report the number of inmates had
risen to 839, and complaints are made of the insufficient
accommodation afforded by the existing buildings for the large
number it is found necessary to receive within them. The
Medical Superintendent reports his regret " that the new
buildings intended for the comfort and reception of the female
patients remained almost in the same condition as they were
this time last year. No steps have been taken towards completing them, and this excellent block of buildings remains
useless and uninhabitable, whilst the female patients are consigned to such accommodation as is a standing reproach to an
institution dedicated to the care and alleviation of the most
terrible forms of human suffering." This unsatisfactory state of
affairs may well arouse the expostulation of the officials, on
whom, moreover, must fall some share of the blame attaching
to improper arrangements, however much they may deprecate
their existence. With the drawbacks thus apparent it says a
good deal for the executive, that it is possible to record a percentage of 46 recoveries on admissions of free patients, while
on all classes, the hospital receiving in addition a certain
number of criminal lunatics, the percentage of recovered is
39'4 on first admissions. Amongst the deaths we find one at
89 years, this patient having been a resident in the Paramatta
Hospital for a quarter of a century. A male, aged 72, died
after being 32 years an inmate, and the youngest who succumbed was 26 years old, resident nine months. One patient,
over 80, was discharged recovered after 21 days, and the
average duration of residence was: of men, 8 years 9 months;
women, 10 years 8 months. Two sudden deaths from apoplexy
occurred, and the whole 49 who died are accounted for thus:?
cerebral disease, 31; thoracic disease, 8, 6 being classed as
pulmonary consumption ; general debility, and old age, 9 ; and
dysentery and diarrhoea, 1. In spite of the insufficient state of
the buildings referred to, the general health of the patients is
described as good, and a freedom from epidemics prevailed. In
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. ' 295
a table showing the causes of insanity of those admitted during
1880 we find the three highest numbers (excluding the " unknown," 16) assigned to intemperance, 11; hereditary influence, 7 ; and ascertained congenital defects, 8. The question
of amusements has occupied considerable attention, and every
effort appears to have been made to secure as much rational
recreation as possible to the patients in the hospital. A large
theatre is provided in which entertainments and concerts are
given, and outdoor recreation at suitable seasons is plentifully
allowed and encouraged. The result is described as being in
all respects a good one to the patients.
The next largest hospital in point of numbers at the same
date, December 31, 1880, is the institution at Gladesville,
where during the year a total of 988, or 49G males and 492
females, were under treatment. 247 first admissions, and 54
readmissions were registered, the discharges amounting to 161
males and 123 females, or 284 in all. These are arranged by
the medical superintendent thus: 86 males and 51 females
recovered ; relieved, 16 males, 17 females ; transferred, 21 males,
32 females ; escaped and not recaptured, 2 males ; and died, 36
males, 23 females, giving a death-rate on the average number
resident of 8*60. Among the causes of insanity in those admitted, hereditary influence accounts for 30, intemperance for
18, epilepsy for 19, puerperal state 18, previous attacks 47, and
in 114 no cause could be assigned. Some attention is deserving
to the significant number of 47 patients out of 311 having been
admitted for treatment on account of a recurrence of dangerous
symptoms, and it cannot fail to suggest a reopening of the
subject of premature discharge so often discussed in these
pages. On this point further information is afforded in one of
the general tables compiled by the Inspector-General, who
records that the total number of readmissions during the year
at all the hospitals under his supervision was 58, 54 of whom
are credited to Gladesville. This yields a percentage of readmissions to total admissions of 12*39, but even this, as the
Inspector-General points out, compares favourably with the
numbers obtaining in English asylums, the percentage in them
being 13*62 of total entries. In this calculation, in both
instances, it should be said that transfers are not considered.
The Hospital of Newcastle held, on December 31, 1880,
228 patients, 124 being males and 104 females. Overcrowding
here also is seriously complained of, and writing on the almost
universal want of space in the hospitals visited by him, the
Inspector-General thus delivers himself:
"For the year 1879 it was my duty to report that there,
were 263 patients in the public institutions in excess of the
296 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
number for whom there was proper accommodation?such
accommodation being on the standard of cubic space fixed by
the English Commissioners in Lunacy as the lowest compatible
with health. During the year 1880, the only increase in the
amount of accommodation was offered by the removal of the
Superintendent of the Hospital for the Insane at Newcastle,
from quarters in the main building, to a small detached
residence formerly occupied by the Police Magistrate. This
gave space for 17 patients with 2 nurses, and was occupied with
patients as soon as some necessary alterations and repairs could
be effected. Twenty-two patients found accommodation in
the wards at Callan Park, and the remainder of the 88 were at
the close of the year distributed in the already overcrowded
dormitories at Grladesville, Paramatta, and Newcastle. Some
minor and necessary alterations were made during the year
which slightly affected the accommodation, and the following
return shows this accommodation and the number of patients
at the close of the year :
Return showing Number for whom there is Dokmitory Accommodation, and the Number in Hospitals for the Insane,
December 31, 1880.
Number for which there
is Dormitory
Accommodation
Number in Hospital on
December 31,1880
Hospitals for the Insane :
Gladesville ....
Paramatta (Free and Convict)
Do. (Criminal)
Callan Park ....
Newcastle
Temporary Hospital for the Insane:
Cooma
Male
259
573
57
141
111
56
Female
244
123
1,197 437 1,634
Total
503
696
57
141
181
56
Male
335
577
53
129
124
64
1,276
1,197
Total Number in excess of accommodation
Female
369
209
437
Total
704
780
59
129
228
64
1,964
1,634
330
" It is, I think, desirable to consider the extent and the
character of the existing accommodation, both with regard to
the steps which have already been taken to increase it, and to
those which may be necessary in the future."
Then, after detailing the improvements in course of construction, among which the erection of wooden buildings to
accommodate 252, one-third the total number of female patients,
he continues :
" The experiment of housing the insane in wooden buildREVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 297
ings has been tried to a greater extent in this Colony than in
any other part of the world, and there can be no doubt but
that such buildings can be erected more cheaply than more
substantial structures, and serve admirably for the accommodation of certain classes of patients. They present, however,
special danger from their liability to fire, they need frequent
painting and repair, and the experiment has not yet been made
long enough to enable a correct idea to be formed as to its
ultimate economy.
" Moreover, the experiment has now been carried to the
fullest extent compatible with the safety and comfort of the
patients, and experience has clearly shown that there are large
classes, especially the more noisy, dangerous, and demonstrative, and all those in the acute stages of the malady, who cannot
safely be placed in buildings of this kind. About one-third is
the greatest number which can be placed in wooden buildings
without danger or without imperilling the comfort and recovery
of other patients."
The extent of overcrowding at the Newcastle Hospital
during 1880 was very considerable, 47 patients being there at
the end of the year in excess of the number for whom adequate
accommodation could be provided. The Inspector reports of it
that?
" At the close of the year 89 males and 83 females?a
total of 172?were imbecile or idiotic, suffering from congenital
defect, or an arrest of intellectual development, whilst the
remainder were dements, the intellect after development having
failed from different forms of brain disease. No less than 30
males and 32 females suffered from epileptic fits, but in several
cases in which epilepsy was present on admission it had ceased
under care and treatment, but not before it had permanently
affected the mental condition. The majority of the patients?
143 in number?were under 20 years of age.
" The Institution had been quite free during the year
from epidemic disease, and though measles were for months
prevalent in the city, and several of the attendants' children
suffered, no patient was attacked. He attributed this result
largely to the care exercised by the Superintendent, and to the
excellent sanitary arrangements of the Hospital. In one case
a patient was somewhat thoughtlessly forwarded from another
Government institution only ten days after recovery from
measles, but precautions were taken to isolate him after arrival
and to prevent any chance of infection."
The remaining hospital reports which are included, are
the convict and criminal houses at Paramatta, the Callan Park
Hospital for males only, and containing 129 patients, the
298 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
Cooma temporary hospital, and the Cook's River licensed house.
Of the temporary hospital the Inspector-General reports more
favourably than of any other institution visited by him in his
official capacity. He writes that " the number of patients in
this Hospital at the close of 1879 was 57, all males. Three
patients were admitted direct, and seven were transferred from
Grladesville, making a total of 67 under care. Of these one, an
aged and feeble man, was transferred to Grladesville, and two died,
leaving 64 on December 31, 1880. The death-rate was lower
than at any other institution. The cause of death was epilepsy
in one case and pulmonary consumption in the other."
At Darlinghurst a reception house for the insane is established, whence patients are drafted to permanent hospitals, or,
if speedy recovery ensue after their admission, they are discharged either in the care of friends, or to the mercy of the
law, according to their description as criminal or free patients.
The following statement, showing the number of patients who
passed into this reception house during 1880, and their ultimate
disposal is interesting:
Remaining . ...
Received ....
Sent to Gladesville .
Paramatta .
Callan Park
Newcastle .
Cook's River
Hyde Park Asylum
Police Court
Discharged of Sound Mind
? to care of Friends
Died ....
Remaining 31st December, 1880
Male Female Total
3
202
122
2
49
1
1
1
26
1
2
1 4
126 328
111 233
2
49
1
1
1
.. i 1
8 34
1 1
2 3
4 i 6
The licensed house for the insane at Cook's River is reported
on in the highest terms by the Inspector-General, and it
certainly appears as though a much greater degree of comfort
was experienced there than in the public institutions. During
1880, five patients were admitted for the first time, one was
readmitted, and nine transferred from the hospitals, which, with
133 in the house at the end of 1879, gives a total under treatment of 148. Of these four recovered, two were discharged
relieved, two transferred, five died, and on December 31, 1880,
there were left resident 135 patients. The recoveries give the
very high percentage of 66*66 on the admissions, and the deaths
reach an average of only 3*79 on the average number resident.
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 299
These results speak very well indeed for the efficient management and excellent arrangements of this Asylum, and this is
evidently acknowledged by the Inspector-General, who pointedly
remarks that even when his visits were quite unexpected, he
never failed to find the patients well cared for and comfortable,
and everything in good order in the Institution.
We have perused the report of the Inspector-General for New
South Wales with very considerable interest, and while there is
a good deal of evidence in it of a need for sweeping changes in
the arrangements made on behalf of the Colonial insane, we can
notwithstanding congratulate the author of the report on the
conspicuous care with which his share of the labour has been
accomplished, and also on the admirable assistance rendered to
him by the various hospital medical superintendents.
Eighth Annual Report of the Western Hospital for the Insane
of the State of Wisconsin.
The trustees' report on the operations of the Asylum under their
control in Wisconsin, puts the amount per head required for
maintenance of patients in the institution at $4^, equivalent
to about 17s. 9d. sterling, per week. This sum is somewhat
in excess of that which is regarded as sufficient to support a
patient for the same time in this country, since a usual charge
of 15s. is made on account of pauper patients transferred to
private institutions. The expenditure on account of buildings
and improvements is reduced to a minimum, as the trustees
point out, by the fact that in this institution it is not considered
necessary to have high wire or wood fences such as are
common in many other places ; they say these have never been
required, considering it more advisable to permit the fullest
amount of freedom from restraint both inside and outside,
consistent with the well-being of each individual. There exists
a growing tendency in this direction, on the part of American
asylum officials, and the consequences attending the introduction
of greater freedom have, in all instances reported, been of a beneficial kind.
The report of the superintendent, Dr Walter Kempster,
shows a total of 719 patients; 363 male, and 356 female patients
under treatment during the year ; and under " discharged," we
find 42, male, 22, females, 20; recovered, 77, 28 men, 43
women; improved, 77 males, 38 females; unimproved, 39;
and two women sent away as not being insane. Deaths
numbered 38, 23 being men, 15 women. The ages of the re300 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
covered patients varied from 20 to 80, and the causes are
arranged in a table from which it appears that phthisis is held
accountable for 14 of the whole, four of them being males;
chronic brain wasting is credited with three deaths; general
puresis two ; and acute meningitis two. Here once more we
cannot refrain from expressing a wish that facilities were generally existent to enable accurate histological reports to be made
on all the cases of death in asylums; and, in the case under
notice, if the energetic superintendent had spent on this work
the time devoted in writing the elaborate psychologicomedical essay appended to his account of the year's work, we
venture to think a much greater amount of permanent good
would have resulted. This lengthy paper is in many respects
excellent reading, but the views it propounds ought to be
familiar to all well educated superintendents. When he deals
with more practical questions, Dr Kempster is more likely to
effect good by suggesting food for general reflection. For
instance, his inquiry into the causes for a preponderance of cases
of dementia and melancholia among the admissions into the
asylum. He has been struck by the continuance of this excessive proportion, even after the exciting causes primarily set
down had been removed. After referring to the numbers in
foreign institutions, he adds :
" In this hospital the percentages are as follows : of those
admitted with the asthenic form of disease, as melancholia and
dementia, there were 17*11 per cent, native and 22-04 per
cent, of foreign born, a total proportion of .39-15 per cent, of the
asthenic (depressed) type, against 6-86 per cent, of native, and
7*06 per cent, of foreign born, or a total of 13*92 per cent, of
the sthenic. In other words, the number of those admitted
into the Northern Hospital, with melancholia and dementia, is
19*60 per cent, greater than it is in foreign hospitals, having
only the native born as patients, and 14*03 per cent, greater
than in the eastern hospitals where nationalities are more nearly
equal than they are here. Thus, in foreign institutions where
all, or nearly all of those admitted are native born, there are
6*11 percent, more cases of the asthenic than of the sthenic
forms."
A table showing probable exciting causes in those admitted
into the asylum, gives " scrofulosis" as the cause in 23 cases;
" intemperance " in 15 ; "subacute meningitis" in 14; hereditary, either alone, or with other causes, 15 ; and unknown, 34.
The total number of admissions for the year was 173, 92 being
men. The total number under treatment for the twelve months
reached 719, 303 of whom were males ; and a series of instructive and carefully prepared tables, relating to these numbers is
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 301
appended to the reports of the medical officer. This is well
conceived and well executed, and exhibits the institution it
refers to as in an excellent condition, and one on which the
executive is to be congratulated.
Twenty-third Annual Report of the Nova Scotia Hospital for
Insane, for the year 1880.
The medical superintendent of the Nova Scotia Hospital for
Insane, reports that during 1880 there were under his care
453 patients, of whom 43 were discharged as recovered, 28 as
improved, and 1 as unimproved, while 20 died in the institution, bringing the whole number discharged to 92. The deathrate is given as 4*4 of the whole number under treatment, and
on the admissions 22-47 ; the number of new entries having been
89, of whom no less than twenty-five had formerly been inmates,
viz., 17 once, 5 twice, 2 three times, and 1 four times; 21 of
these readmissions, it is instructive to learn, had been discharged as recovered, while only one had gone out " unimproved," and only three as " improved." Among the 20 deaths
is included that of one man, by suicide, through jumping from
a window. The superintendent reports that only 20 per cent,
of the windows are guarded, and it is to be hoped so serious an
oversight may not longer continue to facilitate suicidal dangers
on the part of patients.
On the subject of " recoveries," the superintendent offers the
following remarks. We would draw attention especially to the
lines we have italicised, they bear their own suggestive moral.
" The recovery rate has been very favourable (48*3), nearly
fifty per cent., the mean of all former years being (43*1) fortythree ; but less than last year (54), fifty-four per cent.
" Kecovered patients are always discharged on trial, so that
we have a satisfactory report from the friends as to the recovery
of the patient before the final discharge. The monthly average
of patients continually out on trial, for the past year, has been
(121), twelve and half persons. Even the two cases that go to
swell the death-rate, who died from incidental causes when out
on trial, would have appeared as recoveries, if after two months
there had been no recurrence of insanity, and this would in all
probability have been the case.
" Patients discharged as 4 improved,' are also on trial for a
varying period before their final discharge.
" Our recovery rate is much above the average of other
insane asylums and hospitals, because from limited accommoPART II. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES. Y
302 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
dation a preference is given lo those labouring under acute
disease, such cases (for this hospital is specially designed for
their accommodation) are never refused admission.
" As previously stated (43) forty-three cases, different persons, have left the hospital so well as to be able to fill their
accustomed places in society. Among these were nine who had
been discharged as recovered in previous years?six of whom
were each discharged once, two twice, and one three times,
making in the hospital statistics 13 recoveries from these nine
persons in addition to their discharges this year. Thirty-four
(34) had never previously been under treatment."
The treatment of the insane is dwelt on at some length in
the report, and is intended apparently for the information of
the public in this matter. We have room only for one quotation from this part of the paper.
" We treat our violent cases as we would children. If they
tear clothes, we put on raiment too strong to be torn; if
they strip themselves, we button or tie the clothing so that
it cannot be undone by the patient. If they pick the face or
scratch themselves, we sew up the sleeves of the dress or jacket
so that the fingers cannot be used for such a purpose. If they
pound with their hands so as to hurt themselves, or if they
strike others, we muffle the hands; but every patient who is
physically able has the free run of the hall inside, and the
grounds outside, along with the other patients."
A number of carefully constructed tables are appended to
the Report, which is generally well compiled and instructive.
