On The Treatment of Blindness and Deafness Resulting from Cerebro-Spinal Meningitis
=====================================================================================

70 Art. VI. BY THE CONSTANT CURRENT OF
ELECTRICITY.
By EDWARD C. MANN, M.D.

Supt. Sunnyside Retreat for Diseases of the Nervous System, Dipsomania and the Opium Habit,
Member New York Neurological Society; New York Medico-Legal Society ; Am. Ass'n for
cure of Inebriates, etc. Fort Washington, N.Y. City, U.S.A.
The blindness and deafness resulting from cerebro-spinal meningitis have generally been considered by the profession as
incurable. We have been led to the study and investigation of
this class of cases by a very fortunate result obtained recently
in a case of blindness, which will be detailed further on, in
which, by patience and perseverance in the treatment, sight was
finally restored; and the results gained in this case, by the use
of the constant current, have led us to believe that these cases
are not all incurable, and, in giving the results of our investigations, we hope that others may be induced to adopt a like
treatment with equally happy results. The catalytic effect of
the galvanic or constant current of electricity is such as to
remove organisable deposits in all other parts of the body, and
to modify nutrition as no other agent can do, and we have long
thought that such an action could be excited on brain tissue ;
and we have, in many instances, seen cases of grave brain
exhaustion, bordering on insanity, yield rapidly to galvanisation
of the brain, with the chloro-phosphide of arsenic as the only
internal remedy. We had been successful in freeing an immovable uterus from the organised effusion which had bound it
down after cellulitis, and had rendered it freely movable in the
pelvis. The success obtained in this case first led me to hope
for results in galvanisation of the brain where the effect of
cerebro-spinal meningitis has been to produce both blindness
and deafness by the effect of the inflammatory products in the
corpora quadrigemina, and on the auditory nerves, by impairing
their nutrition. In cerebro-spinal meningitis, we have an
exudation in the sub-arachnoid space. The convexity of the
cerebrum is affected, but the base of the brain most injuriously
so. The exudation is the greatest about the chiasm, in the
fossa of Sylvius, at the base of the cerebellum and in the fissures
of the cerebrum. The nerves from the base of the brain are
completely bathed in the exudation. In the spinal cord we find
ON TIIE TREATMENT OF BLINDNESS, ETC. 71
vascularity of the dura mater, sometimes between the dura
mater and arachnoid an effusion, and generally there is purulent
effusion between the spinal arachnoid and the pia mater. The
tissue of the pia mater is implicated. In this, as in other
inflammations, we have an exudation of liquor sanguinis and
migration of white blood-corpuscles and alterations in the nutrition of the inflamed tissue.
These alterations in nutrition are characterised by an exaltation of the nutritive functions of the cellular elements of the
tissues involved in the inflammatory process. We have consequently cell-proliferation. These new cells are not properly
developed, are prons to take on retrogressive changes, and if
they form a new tissue it is poorly organised. It is supposed
that this increased nutritive activity which characterises this
tissue change is due to the stimulation of the cellular elements
by the liquor sanguinis exuded from the blood vessels, and also
perhaps partly by impressions conveyed to them through the
nervous system. As changes of a more chronic nature we have
a more gradual increase in the connective tissue (neuroglia) and
atrophic and degenerative changes in the various new elements.
We bave then in the cases I speak of, where the special senses
have become involved as the result of cerebro-spinal meningitis
?a diseased condition of the nerves of sight and hearing, caused
by disturbance of nutrition; the result of the products of inflammation. The question now is, can we so improve the nutrition
of these nerves, and remove these disturbances of nutrition, so as
to restore lost or impaired sight and hearing ? I claim that we
can, and that the catalytic action of the constant current of
electricity has a sufficient power to modify and improve the
nutrition of these nerves when properly and intelligently applied.
I was much surprised when a patient of mine told me recently
that an eminent oculist told her that she could allow an electrician to use the induced or Faradic current for her child who
was deaf as a result of cerebro-spinal meningitis. "Naturally
enough she got nothing but a very disagreeable effect, with no
benefit whatever. There is a great difference between the
chemicai and catalytic effects of the galvanic and the Farradic
current. The former current possesses them in a very high
degree?the latter has no chemical action in solution of salt,
water, solutions of albumen, etc. Ten years ago I commenced
the study of electro-therapeutics, and can to-day, from almost
daily experience with both currents in nervous diseases, state
positively my firm belief in what Niemeyer stated in 1870, that
" in the constant current we have a means more powerful than
any other* of modifying the nutritive conditions of parts that
* Italics are mine.
72 ON THE TREATMENT OF BLINDNESS, ETC.
are deeply situated," I most firmly believe that other physicians
can get the same results I have obtained in these cases with
patience and perseverance. The most interesting case was that of
blindness so complete that all the oculists of eminence in the
country, to whom the patient's parents had taken her, had pronounced the case absolutely incurable, and said that the young
lady must remain blind. The young lady was referred to me
by an eminent specialist in nervous diseases, and after carefully
examining her, I told her parents that I would take her under
treatment, and do what I could. My treatment consisted in
hypodermic injections of nitrate of strychnia ; phosphorus and
cod-liver oil interually, and the constant current of electricity
applied several times a day at first, for a few moments each
time. I soon improved the general health, which was much
impaired, but worked carefully and patiently on the case for
some weeks with no appreciable benefit to the sight, so far as I
could discover. One day, about eight weeks or more after her
admission here, I was applying the constant current through
the optic nerve, she exclaimed : " Dr Mann, I can see a flash
of light." Up to this time the retina had not responded at all
to the constant current. She described the light as appearing
like heat lightning we witness in summer. From this time on
there was steady improvement, and at the end of about six
months' treatment I sent my patient home so well that she
could see to thread a cambric needle. My idea of the pathology of this was that we had optic nerves bound down by an
organised exudation and that this disappeared, and that the
atrophic and degenerative changes also disappeared as the effect
of the constant current of electricity. I know of more than
one case where parents of children suffering from blindness and
deafness have been told so positively by oculists that they
could do nothing for them, and they were incurable ; that they
had absolutely refused to trouble themselves any further about
the matter. I think I am the first to suggest a cure and treatment by this method of using the constant current, as I have
searched the literature of the subject without finding even a
hint at the possibility of its being done. In closing I would
say, that of course we do not know how many cases of this kind
we can cure. I do know, however, that they are very troublesome to the general practitioner who has not the time to devote
to them. We shall most gladly receive any such cases here
from the profession as we deem worthy of especial study and
investigation, and patient and careful treatment; and we hope
and believe that the results of our investigations in this
direction will lead us to be able to class blindness and deafness,
resulting from cerebro-spinal meningitis, among the curable
ON TIIE TREATMENT OF BLINDNESS, ETC. 73
forms of diseases of the nervous system. There are also chronic
congestive states of the brain which tend to mental disorder if not
checked, where, in my opinion, we have in the constant current
of electricity the very best therapeutical means of cure. The
vessels of the dura mater and pia mater, and of the brain itself
are habitually dilated in these cases, and we have to get a tonic
contraction of these vessels if we are to cure our patient. By
using the positive pole at the level of the first cervical vertebra,
and the negative at the level of the superior ganglion of either
of the cervical sympathetic nerves we can get this result.
Two things must be observed in order to be successful. 1st.
Long continued treatment; and 2nd. the avoidance of an
injuriously strong current. It is well to use a slowly interrupted galvanic current to promote vascular contraction.
Patients usually experience relief which they describe as very
marked, after each application. The subject of electrisation of
the brain and its membranes is a matter of deep practical
interest to all who are interested in nervous diseases, and the
practical application of the constant current in physiological
medicine is as yet in its infancy, and results show that the
tissues intervening between the brain and the electrodes, do
not offer very much difficulty in application.
