Six Addresses on the Being of God
===================================

By C. J. Ellicott, D.D.,
Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol. Published under the
direction of the Tract Committee. Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge: Northumberland Avenue, Charing
Cross, London. &
It must be a source of gratification to all who take an earnest
interest in the vital questions of the day, to find that the
admirable addresses, delivered last autumn twelvemonths bv
the Bishop of Gloucester, in the course of his visitation to'the
clergy and others, have been published in a separate form by
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 95
the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. The zeal,
high mental culture, and profound scholarship of Dr Ellicott
are an abundant guarantee that any subject which he takes in
hand will be treated thoughtfully, cautiously, and faithfully.
The Addresses are divided into six parts. 1. The nature of
the principal arguments. 2. The Being of God attested by
the general consent of mankind. 3. The being of God as
shown by the existence of the universe. 4 The being of God
as shown by the presence of final aims in nature. 5. The being
of God as evinced by the moral law. 6. The evolutionary
hypothesis.
It is impossible for us, within the limits of a review, to do
more than quote a few passages from this valuable work. The
following remarks are especially noteworthy:?
" To prove anything involves an appeal to something higher
or more certain than the thing to be proved. But here we are
attempting to prove the existence of the Ens recilissimum, of
that which in itself is the very essence of all certitude; Ave are
attempting to show that He is, who is himself the fountain and
source of all existence. Proofs then, as proofs, and arguments,
as arguments, may rightly be set aside, but in the form of considerations, especially if set forth with plain common sense,
they may be found very useful to many of us just at the present
time. . . . They will be of use to us in giving clearness to
our own inner convictions; and will especially help us in all
our more serious efforts to convince others. If we would really
persuade in subjects of this higher nature, two things are imperatively required in us, first: ?thoroughly realised convictions,
and that lucidity of thought which nothing but organised knowledge can give or will give to the mind that would bring home
to others the primary and fundamental truth of the being and
personality of God."
" This lucidity of thought, and clear common sense is now
required more than ever. Popular scepticism, at the present
time, is increasingly guilty of confusions of thought that can
hardly be too strongly condemned. Doubtful science, and still
more doubtful logic are now united in the discussion of all
deeper subjects; and of these in none more than in the discussion of the great subject we are nosv considering. The whole
principles of causation, as we shall more clearly see in a later
portion of this charge, have been tampered with and thrown
into confusion. Definitions have assumed the conceptions of
that which they are elaborately constructed to set forth and
define. Even such fundamental ideas as force and energy have
been mixed up by some of our greatest thinkers, and whole
theories elaborated from data that will not stand the test of a
moment's really rigorous and scientific criticism."
96 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
" The time, therefore, would seem to have fully come for a
sober and impartial review of the leading considerations, which,
apart from revelation, lead us to a belief in the blessed and
consoling truth, that there is an almighty, all-wise, and all-holy
personal God, who has created all things?worlds visible and
invisible ; spiritual and material; and who governs all according
to the good pleasure of His holy and eternal will. The considerations, it will be observed, are of different degrees of cogency;
but taken together, and especially in their proper gradation, they
will certainly be found to form a multiform argument which it
would seem hard for any candid mind fairly to resist. This
aspect of the momentous question has been far too much
neglected. It has not been seen sufficiently clearly that it is on
the cumulative, or to speak perhaps most accurately, the ascensive
nature of the considerations or so-called proofs that conviction
seems mainly to rest. No one of them, to a really candid
mind, seems perfectly sufficient, taken by itself, to prove the
whole truth ; but when all are taken together, it will be, I trust,
acknowledged by every fair reader or hearer of this charge that
the weight of the united considerations is especially great, and
that the popular assertions as to the utterly invalid nature of
the proofs for the existence of Grod are certainly without just
foundation."
Dr Ellicott first appeals to History for his proofs, secondly,
to Nature, and thirdly, to Humanity. He says that the arguments derived from the moral world, are those that the deepest
thinkers consider to be the most convincing.
With regard to the proofs derived from the general consent
of mankind, he observes:?
" When we turn to the two most ancient of the great religions of the old heathen world, the two earliest religions of our own
Aryan race, the Vedic and the Zoroastrian, it seems impossible
to deny the evidences of a belief not only in supernatural and
divine agency in regard of the existence of the visible and
material, but even in the being of One who was regarded as the
substratum and foundation of all existence. It may, and indeed
ought to be admitted that in these ancient forms of faith the
idea of creation was by no means clearly united with that of
the One Being who was felt to be, though not definitely declared
to be, the sort of First Cause or substratum of all things. Still
we certainly do find in them the two ideas which, taken together, make up that one idea which we are now seeking to
substantiate?the idea of an all-creative Grod. In the Vedic
faith this was much more obscured, though in the remarkable
practice of representing each god as, for the time being,
supreme, we see the old monotheistic idea struggling to find
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 97
expression, and again to assert itself in the soul of the devout
worshipper. Far more clearly do we trace the conceptions of
creation, and even of monotheism itself, in the profoundly
interesting religion which connects itself with the great name
of Zoroaster. If Ahura-Mazda is the maker of all things, if
he is the Lord of the worlds, and the first fashioner of all existence, yet behind him and behind the Spirit of darkness and
evil to whom he is eternally opposed, is the aboriginal One?
whether destiny, Grod, or Supreme and Infinite Being we know
not?is He who produced both. Even where dualism is most
sharply accentuated, there are no obscure traces of a yet purer
and older conception. ' The Duad, with the Monad brooding
behind it,' as has most truly been said, 4 is the fundamental
principle of the Avesta' and of the old and once wide-spread
faith that is set forth in its venerable hymns."
Dr Ellicott's views, on the proofs of a deity derived from the
existence of the universe and also from our moral nature, are
equally lucid and convincing, and are all deserving of the most
attentive perusal.
J. M. W.
