In Memokiam
===========

279
1/

Dr Isaac Eat, M.D.
, born January 16th, 1807
Died March 31st, 1881.
Between Dr Isaac Ray and myself there has subsisted a most
intimate and cordial friendship for nearly fifty years. Yet we
never met. The cherished tie was mutual respect, identity of
pursuits, and appreciation of the qualities and objects of our
minds ; and these strong and earnest bonds have stood the test
and tear and wear of half a century of wide separation by time,
continents, and opinions, and now leave me an aged mourner
over the last of his early compeers and with the same profound
respect and sentiment of attachment originally created, and
which was shared bv Lord Cockburn, then Attorney-General of
England, for the philanthropist who had written " the most,
scientific treatise that thf age had produced on the subject of
insanity in relation to jurisprudence." On my side the introduction was effected by my perusal and admiration of the work
thus characterised, which appeared at Eastport, U.S., in 1838,
which coincided so closely with the philosophical views which
I then entertained, advocated so lucidly and with such humanity
the condition, the capacities, and the practicable amelioration
of the insane, and was couched in a style so pure, dignified, and
thoroughly Anglican, that I then ranked and still rank the book
as among the classical works in our department. Our intercourse was sustained by correspondence, but chiefly by the
interchange of our respective writings, and the views and the
hopes and experience which these contained. I journeyed with
him in all his onward steps towards that elevation to which he
ultimately attained. I studied and conserved his principles
and propositions, and it is possible that he offered me the same
homage in becoming acquainted with what I did and what I
aspired to do. I embraced or anticipated his views on t,h?
" Legal Consequences of Mental Deficiency " both as they were
propounded judicially and philanthropically. I advanced still
further, and at a period when such opinions were regarded as
heretical, I admitted with him the existence of "Moral Mania"
as cognate with other forms of insanity, and as exonerating
patients so affected from the accusation or punishment of guilt..
His perspicuous illustrations of the " Duration and Curability
of Madness," " Lucid Intervals," " Simulated Insanity," all presented freshness and fulness to the mind of the Anglican psychologist. His observations on the effect of insanity on evidence
are, especially in connection with several of his subsequent
280 IN MEMORIAM.
Papers, still worthy of grave attention. Amongst the more
recent writings alluded to are many of his essays composed and
published after he had retired from the public charge of the
insane, established himself in Philadelphia, and devoted himself
either as a student or an expert to testify to sound views as to
the responsibility of those suspected of alienation or actually
brought to trial. Amongst these may be enumerated " The Law
of Insanity in Criminal Cases " ; " The Trial of Rogers " ; " The
Insanity of Seduced or Deserted Women " ; " The Parish Will
Case," &c. &c. &c., and a large number of others comprehending even a wider subject, and containing vast stores of knowledge and experience which had been garnered in the most
fertile fields, and by the most careful and conscientious of cultivators. All these memoirs were written in the purest, most
lucid, and unprovincial English that has ever been attained
either by a scientific or literary foreigner. My venerated friend
lighted his path by the lamp of religion, high morality, and
domestic affection until the very close of life.
Dr Isaac Ray was born at Beverly, Mass., January 16,
1807 ; he graduated at Harvard Medical School in 1827 ; in
1841 he was appointed superintendent of the State Hospital
for the Insane at Augusta, Me., where he remained till
1846, when he accepted an appointment to the superintendency of the Butler Hospital at Providence, R.I. In this
institution, which may be said to have been created under his
auspices, Dr Ray remained a laborious administrator and
faithful student of this great specialty, for the benefit of the
public? non sibi seel toti?until the year 1867, when, impelled
by considerations of health, he resigned, and removed to
Philadelphia. Since the period of his retirement Dr Ray
has never ceased, even under the infirmities of failing health,
to enlighten his profession and the community as a scientific
authority, a learned expert, and a philanthropist.
The last words written to me by my dear and valued correspondent are dated January 11, 1881, and conclude as
follows :
" If I have made mistakes, it ought to be considered that
I was a sort of pioneer in a department of medical science
which had been little trod before, and really deserve commendation for having made so few. I certainly drew attention to
the subject as it never had been done before, and honestly believe
that between 1838 and 1881 some advance has been made,
sure and stable, in the right direction.
"You heard correctly that my health is failing. An old
bronchial complaint, reinforced by an old chronic rheumatism,
has sent me a long way towards the end. I am so short of
IN MEM0R1AM. 281
wind, that the slightest muscular movement makes me pant,
and keeps me confined to the house, oscillating between the
sofa and easy chair. My nervous apparatus is also so disturbed
that all capacity for thinking has gone, or with not more left
than is sufficient for reading a newspaper or a novel. Generally my hand is so shaky that I am unable to write beyond a
few minutes, and I am now surprised that I have accomplished
so much as this. Of course with such ailments, and with
74 years on my head, I cannot last much longer. I am
rejoiced that your latter days' journey is attended with so many
alleviations, and trust they will continue to the end.
" My friend Dr Kirkbride, who a year ago was near unto
death, seems to be as strong as ever, and has even written
a book. But my hand begins to tremble, and my brain to
swim, and so I hope you will excuse my stopping here with so
much blank space left. Again expressing my thanks for your
kind inquiries, I remain," &c. &c.
W. A. F. Browne.
