Lunacy Law Reform
===================

78 Akt. VIII.?.
Among the innumerable essays and newspaper articles on the
subject of lunacy, and asylum arrangements, which have lately
appeared, a series of papers in " Social Notes," entitled " Lunacy
Law Reform," deserves serious attention. Unlike most of the
productions of voluntary critics of this subject, the author of
these articles approaches his work in a fair and temperate spirit,
untainted by the rabid sensationalism that deprives most productions of the kind of any claim to consideration. His
strictures are based on a careful examination of the facts which
authorise them, and though it can hardly be said that he displays so intimate an acquaintance with the working of the
regulations he condemns, as should be, yet he is obviously careful
to criticise only after attentive study of as much as he has been
able to acquaint himself with.
The question how far medical men generally are, and should
be, specially educated in the science of mental medicine, is
one that has engaged frequent attention on the part of professional authorities, and is one moreover on which there will be
found a common agreement. That the curricula of the schools
are oftentimes deficient in this particular may perhaps be admitted. The power the law gives to a qualified practitioner, by
his ipse dixit, to influence the freedom of a patient concerning
whom he is called to pronounce an opinion as to mental condition, presupposes a familiarity on his part with the phenomena
of insanity, as well in its initial phases as when it has developed with marked characteristic symptoms. The absence of
any universal standard of requirement in this respect from examining boards, however, precludes the probability that an
attempt will always be made by students either before, or subsequent to, qualification, to ground themselves in the knowledge
requisite to give their diagnosis any authoritative weight.
It is true that opportunities are not wanting in this respect;
that every medical student can easily obtain permission to
investigate practically the appearances and causes of insanity
in institutions specially devoted to the treatment of the disease;
but it is little to be wondered at that, with the voluminous
studies he is compelled to undertake, he but rarely finds time
or even inclination to prosecute others in this line. Extension
of the period of education will, sooner or later, have to be
determined on ; and when this has been settled it may be
LUNACY LAW REFORM. 79
accepted as certain that nervous diseases will occupy a conspicuous place in the enlarged curriculum. In the scheme of
examination of several licensing corporations mental medicine
has for some time past found a place, but there is, naturally, a
feeling of unwillingness on the part of examiners, however
much they may feel the necessity of it, to insist on adequate
replies to the questions set in this subject, as a sine qua non of
success. The writer in " Social Notes " recognises this difficulty,
and points out the anxiety expressed by the various examining
bodies on behalf of more extended information. He is in fault,
however, in quoting from the "Lancet" of 1865, to the effect
that " no instruction whatever is given at any of our London
medical schools on the subject of mental disease," with the
intention of applying it to the present condition of things.
At several schools the importance of training in nervous
diseases is prominently recognised. At the Charing Cross
Hospital, for instance, there is a special class devoted to the
subject, under the care of Dr. L. S. Forbes Winslow; and at
the London Hospital the clinical lectures of Dr. Hughlings
Jackson are entirely devoted to lesions of the nerve structures.
At other schools, too, though perhaps less directly, the subject
is daily receiving an increased amount of attention. The
defect, however, remains in great part that, as a rule, medical
men do not receive that degree of instruction which is demanded both by its importance per se, and by the great discretionary powers invested in physicians, by virtue of the
authority given them to decide on the necessity for special
treatment in particular cases. As reflecting the opinions common among the most intelligent lay observers, the following
passages are worth reproduction from the " Social Notes " contributor's article. It will be apparent from it that he only
vaguely appreciates the difficulties surrounding the subject,
and that he only in a degree comprehends the resources
available for removing them.
He writes that " To become conversant with mental alienation, it is necessary not only to be well-informed upon medicopsychology from books and other publications connected therewith, but clinical lectures on the same should be attended in the
wards of lunatic asylums. Now while psychical lectures have
been established, insanity is not made a compulsory subject for
examination by any of the medical corporations. On the other
hand, subjects of comparatively smaller practical value to the
great majority of practitioners, as botany and practical
chemistry, form a necessary part of the curriculum of medical
education. This omission arises from various causes, among
which may be mentioned, firstly, the little interest taken in the
80 LUNACY LAW REFORM.
study of psychology until very recently; secondly, the great
number of subjects upon which medical students are required
to read for their examinations, the very limited time allotted
to them for this purpose, and the reluctance on such account
of the medical examining boards to add to this almost intolerble burden : and, thirdly, the great difficulty of the subject,
which can only be appreciably studied by senior students who
are well-informed on collateral medical questions, but who are
very much engaged in hospital practice when lectures are
delivered on mental disease."
This is a fair statement of the problem, but exception may
be taken that it is only incomplete after all. The " difficulty "
of the subject is one associated with preliminary knowledge
rather than any other defect. The medico-psychologist requires to be, above all, a skilled physiologist, and only so will
he, with the additional assistance received from the practical
application of physiological principles in the ward, become at
length an alienist with sufficient knowledge to give him weight
in his future relations with the mentally unsound.
The beneficial effects produced on patients in asylums by
providing them with subjects on which to occupy their minds is
adverted to, and it is suggested that methodical educational
training should be universally introduced into all asylums for
the insane. " Jylox " (the pseudonym under which the papers
in " Social Notes " are written), however, seems not to understand
the marked distinction between private and public asylums in
this country, respecting the facilities given to their inmates for
intelligent recreation. While the State-controlled institution
possesses all, and only, the characteristics of a prison, conducted
with prison-like routine, patients in private houses are always
free to amuse themselves after the manner that they desire, so
long, of course, as it is a harmless one ; and they possess, moreover, the incalculable advantage of liberty, in every case where
it can with ordinary safety be permitted to them. There is
undoubtedly much to be said in favour of regular employment
of an elevating kind, and, when resorted to under adequate precautions, it unquestionably results in good to the patients
themselves, and in relief to those charged with their supervision.
" Jylox," however, is inclined to judge somewhat sweepingly
from the published reports in one or two cases, that the measures
he applauds will be universally beneficial. He does not apparently speak as having a practical and extended acquaintance
with the working of asylums, and to this extent his reflections
are deprived of the importance that would attach to them after
personal investigation of that he essays to examine. With this
drawback, however, his articles are careful and intelligent: they
LUNACY LAW REFORM. 81
profess to deal only with the necessity for reform in the existing
laws ; but inasmuch as the necessity for reform can be deduced
only from a knowledge of present imperfections, there is strong
a 'priori reason why suggestions concerning it should be based
on accurate knowledge of the evils consequent on its defects.
These evils are freely described and exhaustively criticised
in sensational articles, but since they, as a rule, exist
only in the imagination of the heated opponents of things
about which they generally possess only hearsay information, it is not surprising that most of this kind of writing is
a mere aggregate of nonsensical absurdities. The public mind,
inflamed by the recollection of enormities which?before the
era of the Royal Commission on Lunacy, were of undoubted
occasional occurrence, is at all times ready and willing to give
heed to whatever highly-seasoned descriptions of impossible
scenes are presented to it. Hence is it that so much that
is criminally libellous finds its way into the columns of newspapers and magazines to the detriment of private asylums. It
is, therefore, a matter of congratulation that even one writer
from the outside ranks, is conscientious enough to throw aside
the prejudices that influence his class as a rule, and in place of
wholesale attacks in the dark consents, before hurling his bolts,
to inform himself by reading and by inquiry of the things
that actually are. We are not surprised either that even after
this proceeding, he writes in condemnation of the existing laws.
The authorities he cites are such as to show that he has consulted those who, for one reason or another, have presented one,
and that the worst, side of the question in their testimony. Dr.
Bucknill, than whom hardly a more misleading guide could
have been selected, is again and again quoted in support of
views in favour of reform. The ill-judged attacks of Dr.
Bucknill have been sufficiently refuted ere this, to deprive his
dictum of any force, and we can hardly suppose that any one
now will be prepared to attach importance to the assertions he
makes. The need for reform will make itself sufficiently
apparent as it arises, and assurance may be entertained that
measures will be taken to secure the changes necessary to effect it.
None are more alive to the advantages of improvement than
those who are the vanguard of its promoters, the proprietors of
private asylums. They know full well how far it is wise to
amend, and they progress along the path of advance slowly but
surely. The practical alienist recognises the folly and the carelessness of sweeping changes, and he prefers, in the interests of
his charge, rather to incur ignorant censure than to do that
which would tend to the injury of those committed to his care,
however loudly the demand from outside may be echoed.
PART I. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES. G
82 LUNACY LAW REFORM.
Fortunately, too, the Legislature acknowledges the intimate
dependence of successful reform on its adaptation to necessities
as they arise, and is content to trust to those to initiate it who
can alone be confided to sketch its essential outlines.
We have drawn attention to the " Social Notes" articles
because they are considerably higher in tone than the vindictive
abuse characteristic of the ignorant productions ordinarily found
in newspapers and magazines. They plead for reform greater
even than Mr. Dillwyn's bill provides for. To their author we
would suggest, in the most friendly spirit, a more extended
acquaintance with the practical working of the laws as they are.
