Lord Beaconsfield Viewed Psychologically
=========================================

265 Art. X.
Very considerable difficulty must always be experienced in
attempting to analyse the character of any individual in whom,
at times, widely different types of intellectual fitness for great
works have made themselves evident. The labour of accurately
apportioning the degree and importance of varying attributes of
mind is ever one of considerable magnitude, and the danger
associated with the undertaking is of that twofold kind from
which the object of the attempt, and the one who makes
it, will both be likely to suffer. Just as sympathy is engendered with efforts directed to personal exaltation, so is
there a possibility of diminished interest being excited on
behalf of those higher and nobler aspirations that are directed
towards attainment of wider benefits than can be those of immediate advantage to the designer of them ; and it is, perhaps,
a detraction from the best qualities the late Earl of Eeaconsfield
undoubtedly possessed in perfection, that, throughout his public
career, self was a conspicuous factor in his creed. Whether we
are justified, however, in regarding the proofs he has himself
adduced of this predominant feeling as an indication, as some
have not failed to urge, of psychical inferiority, may be advanced
as a valid argument for discussion. It would be difficult to
select any single historical name, and to say of its owner that his
impulses were purely extra-personal; or that even the most
admirable of them had been directed with the sole aim of
securing advantages for the enjoyment of others rather than
himself. Judged from a standpoint of pure intellectualism,
Lord Beaconsfield, no less than any who are worthy to rank with
him, commands the utmost homage in our power to bestow, and
homage, too, that is almost involuntarily tendered on account of
a disposition which, if not invariably self-sacrificing, was, at least,
at all times patriotic in the most inclusive sense of the word.
Patriotism was, in all that he did or said, a foremost consideration
with him ; his acts all tended to the fulfilment of desires that had
for their first aim the advancement and consolidation of national
greatness; and how, with this fact before us, it may be asked,
can we hesitate in bestowing frank and honest admiration for
the determination which shone out in every attempt of his
political life ? We do not intend in this place to pursue the
266 LORD BEACONSFIELD VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY.
consequences of any of these efforts, but to view them only as
indicating the lines on which his active mind proceeded, and as
tending to show the motives actuating him. They are sufficiently a matter of common knowledge to render any recapitulation of them unnecessary, but it is worth while spending a few
moments in striving to dissect the feelings and motives to which
they were primarily due.
In pursuing this attempt we must reflect for a moment on
what were the salient features that marked the mental character
of young Disraeli5 and forgetting the aspersions that have been
so plentifully bestowed on him, it is not impossible to gather
from his own words a good deal of enlightenment on the
point. Ambitious he certainly was, but the ambition he displayed may not unjustly be taken as suggestive of his intense
appreciation of the need for temporal power as a means towards
performing works of general utility. He had a keen perception of the truth of this statement, and his earliest
achievements exhibit him as one possessed of the idea inseparably connected with it. Moreover, he was speedily convinced
that his devotion to mere business pursuits, however laudable
in themselves, was little calculated to advance the aims even
then held in view by him. Hence his speedy determination to
eschew the limited field he thus early entered on for the wider
arena of politics; and hence, too, the opportunity for hastily
misjudging his ruling motives on the part of those who have
striven to put a base construction on his endeavours. Except
in the novels of young Benjamin Disraeli, we possess no means
of estimating his thoughts at this period ; but in these works
there is abundant proof that he was fired with desires that ought
to exact an unfailing tribute of respect. The high-flown expressions of youthful genius, it is true, cloak and obscure many
of the nobler fancies the pages picture forth, but there is no
blinding ourselves to the fact that high desirings are embodied
therein. It was the author's belief that the world's work could
be accomplished through the world's help, and this assistance
he resolved to gain in order to fulfil the lofty mission defined in
his own mind for himself. The mode of gaining that aid lay clear
before him, and that mode was to command it. He must have
seen the difficulties that beset his path?indeed, we know they
presented themselves in full force to him?but it is honourable
.to him that we can now declare they availed nothing to deter
him from opposing them. But though he failed again and
again, and yet again, to realise success at first, he never quailed
before the appearance of impregnability presented by the obstacles he encountered. Mere hopes and personal aggrandisement would never have carried him so far in an apparently
LORD BEACONSFIELD VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY. 267
hopeless struggle, and though he might perhaps himself have
sanctioned the explanation that amour propre incited him to
renew his efforts, yet we are able at this time to afford a more
exalted and a more fitting reason for the continued battle.
It is undoubtedly dangerous to venture on the ascription of
noble impulses to one who figures after all as more or less of an
adventurer, but the proceeding is eminently justified in the case
of Lord Beaconsrield. By a multiplicity of golden deeds he has
repeatedly shown that mere self-desirings were never properly
attributable to him; even in those positions where he had most
the appearance of seeking his own individual advancement,
careful examination of the motives guiding his conduct reveals
that this was the outcome of suggestions prompted by other than
personal aims. And so entirely throughout his life can this be
said of him, that it will be profitable to inquire in what particular his special intellectual constitution contributed to bring
about the result. As we have hinted, the patriotic sentiment
largely influenced him ; but it is necessary to somewhat qualify
the word as here employed, that it may include, outside and
beyond love of country as being the home of adoption, an absorbing desire also to demonstrate the wisdom of that country's
trust in an alien race. Moral consciousness of his position, and
inherent national desires, combined to make young Disraeli supremely anxious to vindicate at once the claim of his people to
respect, and his individual claim to be the exponent ot' its
deserts. Accepting this view of his motive, we can trace its
action on all the notable performances of his life, and everyone
must also admire the persistence with which he ever held it
before him. The taint of greed can have 110 right of association with the qualities which distinguished him, nor have we
any means of showing that such an ill-feeling ever animated his
endeavours, either publicly or privately, to advance the views
he entertained. Thankless though the course may be, and is,
to refute indefinite charges of this kind, the freedom with
which they have from time to time been cast abroad, calls for
some defence of their object. In many ways might he on
frequent occasions have pandered to a craving for temporalities,
had it existed. Disraeli's mind, however, could not bring
together two ideas so different as are those of mere personal gain
and national progress. In forwarding the one he pursued his
life's ambition; of necessity he advanced along with it, and it
is the triumph of his life that we can say of him his own
glory was a reflection of that shed through his influence on the
country he so devoteoly served.
Lord Beaconsfield was essentially a man of extreme intellectual activity. In some respects he thus bore resemblance to
268 LORD REACONSFIELD VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY.
his illustrious political opponent, the present Prime Minister;
bat in all that emanated from his mind there was the stamp
of a philosophic spirit rather than the mark of laborious production, which distinguishes the mental character of Mr.
Gladstone. Even in the most trivial utterances Disraeli always
succeeded in concealing a thought or an idea, examination of
which repaid the time spent in it; and in his finished pictures
we all recognise, and unfailingly admire, the skill and subtlety
of the man of genius, and the philosopher of social life. In
his own analysis of character and aims, such, for instance, as
are to be found in ' Coningsby,' in ' Lothair,' and, though less,
certainly, perhaps in his last work, ' Endymion,' we can discern
most easily the sympathies uppermost in himself. Honest
ambition he always defends, and the higher the goal the more
surely is the aspirant favoured ; while for the inferior spirits who
seek to ascend only to justify a paltry desire for personal
advancement, no denunciation is too strong or too severe.
Political opponents in the heat of controversy cannot be expected
to weigh the difference between apparent and actual avarice.
From this misfortune no one, possibly, ever suffered more than
the late Earl; but when the heat of party passion had subsided,
and a calm survey of the well-spent life was in the power of all,
it is satisfactory to remember the generous enthusiasm with
which all parties alike united in recognition of the dead man's
real worth.
The psychologist's study of Lord Beaconsfield's character is
necessarily confined to a simple estimate of the powers he
possessed, and the way in which their evolution was influenced
by the circumstances surrounding his existence. The speciality
of these lies in the fact that they were to a great extent
moulded by himself, and were in many cases turned to sacrifice
in behalf of aims in the fulfilment of whi^h he by no means was
the first one interested, and in securing which nothing was left
to chance which he conceived it in his capacity to accomplish.
The men whose autobiographies make up the history of an age
are all more or less spirits akin to this; and it is no uncertain
test of the value of any individual person's achievements that is
afforded by the immediate appreciation in which they are held.
In this particular respect Lord Beaconsfield is not likely to
suffer by comparison with any who were his contemporaries, and
in the one point of absolute intellectuality he can be compared
with no one, since he was himself incomparable. Not that it is
easy or perhaps possible to gauge the depths of his mentalism,
so to speak, but we can form a fair estimate by admiration, of
the diversified genius that was at once philosopher, romancist,
psychologist, and politician. Lord Beaconsfield undoubtedly
LORD BEACOJVSFIELD VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY. 269
was a psychologist of a high order. Each one of his works
exhibits him in this light; and every character he has drawn is
a careful study of a type more or less familiar to every reader.
Nor are the lessons taught by him in any way less than those a
rigid moralist would deem advisable in the interests of common
weal. Although he is careful to avoid exaggerations such as
many lesser novelists have been guilty of, and which they have
been led into under the impression that so only could they hope
to point the sins against which their protest is raised, yet
the influence of Disraeli's novels in forming the character
of the young who make a study of them, is now and will
always be a potent factor in developing the minds of
English youth. Very possibly they, alone, might not have
so powerful a force, but they must ever possess the distinguishing feature that they are really an exposition in more
or less precise terms of the conditions and motives under which
the life of their author assumed its special shape. Apart from
their literary excellence, they have a living interest, deathless
as the monuments raised by the genius ot' him they continually
enshadow, and, like himself, the outcome of an age that made
him while itself was made by him.
In his personal relations Lord Beaconsfield was especially
happy. Homage he received spontaneously; there was no
occasion to exact it; and the kindling story of his defiance of
defeat, his steady perseverance in pursuit of the end set
before himself, and his ultimate triumphant vindication of
every lofty aspiration with which he commenced his career,
failed not to attract to him the devoted friendship of those
whose friendship was an act of grace. His wit was of a kind
to serve him well; keen, and cruel even, when occasion called
for its employment, it was never directed against the helpless,
or invoked in vain on behalf of deserving objects. It never
failed to hurt; it never hurt unfairly, or in an unjust cause.
They can recall it who suffered by it; but even the most
severely stung would probably now be the first to admit the
justice of the rebuke conveyed by the punishment.
More exhaustive memoirs must be consulted for the detailed
history of Lord Beaconsfield's life; we have sought here only
to indicate a few of the points connected with his psychological
development. :
PART II. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES.
