The Factors of the Unsound Mind
=================================

126 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.

By William A. Guy, M.B.,
F.R.S. London: Thos. De La Rue & Co., 1881.
Universal welcome will be accorded to Dr. Gruy's new volume,
containing the substance of the Lumleian lectures delivered
by him in 1868, amended to bring the work abreast of advances
made since the date of their first appearance. The strong interest
taken by their author in the criminal aspects of insanity, and
his well-known insistance on a full and complete recognition of
its bearing on the perpetration of acts committed under its
influence, lends especial value to the opinions formed after what
has probably been a fuller and more lengthened experience of
the subject treated than has been enjoyed by any living observer.
The title of the work is a peculiarly happy one. It indicates
exactly what is contained in it; and the exposition of principles
which are at the root of every problem of incipient mental un-
soundness to which we are treated in it, is a masterly perform-
ance, of incomparable excellence. On one point, occurring in
the first chapter, we are bound to disagree with Dr. Guy, and
that is the confusion he imparts to the use of the terms " imagi-
nation " and " fancy." More than once he employs the terms
with the evident intention of ascribing the same meaning to
each, as e.g., on page 21, where he asks, " Are spectral and other
illusions, in any proper sense results of the workings of imagina-
tion or fancy?" And further on in the same page, as though
to remove any doubt as. to his actual intention to assign equiva-
lence to the two names, he continues : " In these cases, which,
as I have said, are very numerous, it seems obvious to attribute
the illusions to that active, busy, creative faculty which we call
Imagination or Fancy." Now, from this passage, in which we
have italicised the essential words, it is sufficiently evident that
to the mind of Dr. Gruy there is no distinction between that
which is attributable to imaginative proceedings, and that which
is the outcome of fanciful creations. And yet we are compelled
to regard the two operations as specifically distinct, and as
depending on utterly different antecedents. There is an im-
portant question involved in this bearing on the origin of the
illusions to which Dr. Gruy attaches, correctly, so high a value
in the genesis of mental disease ; all the more reason, therefore, is
there that an accurate conception of the two activities should
be generally held. At one time the two terms were used in an
identical sense, but there is an important distinction between
them, which Leigh Hunt carefully explains, declaring Fancy to
mean "nothing but a spiritual image or apparition (tyavTaafia,
appearance, phantom)," and having no relation to real and
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 127
existent objects, with which, on the other hand, imagination is
wholly concerned. But the latter may alter, contort, rearrange,
and rehabilitate the recollections of actual experiences, and in
all this it will not ascend to the idealism that is pre-eminently
characteristic of fancy. In connection with the illusory phenomena
described by Dr. Guy, the play of imagination is perfectly
marked ; in all of the narrations he incorporates, the subjects
of illusion have been under the spell of imagination simply; and
it does not seem to us at all hypercritical to insist that those
appearances should be ascribed to their real source, and that
the name " Fancy " should be reserved to designate that which
it legitimately belongs to, the spiritual creations, so to speak,
of genius.
Dr. Guy brings together a number of histories of persons
who have been subject to illusions, and from them he proceeds
to discuss the occurrence of illusions in animals, which fact he
considers to prove that the intervention of such a faculty as the
imagination is not necessary between the action of the brain
and the illusion, and cites the following instance:?" Mr. W. J.
Palmer, of Calcutta, gave to a puppy the liquid resulting from
the chemical treatment of the stomachs of a man and his wife
who had died poisoned by the young shoots of the dhatoora
plant. The puppy vomited, performed a few antics, and fell on
his side in a deep sleep; after ten minutes he got up, stared
wildly about him, and appeared to see visions which he would
scratch or snap at, but finding that they eluded him, he walked
to his accustomed corner of the room and there lay down. A
kitten treated to the contents of another stomach containing
also the poison of dhatoora, when consciousness returned, is
described as staring wildly, performing a series of grotesque
actions, as being irritable and almost wild
If Mr. Palmer is not wrong in his interpretation of the
movements of these animals, and if other observers have not
been similarly mistaken, then it follows that we may have
illusions of the senses in creatures which we do not credit with
any faculty resembling the human imagination." It is quite
possible of course, nay, more, probable, that Dr. Guy's assump-
tion regarding the mental constitution of animals will not be
generally accepted, and thus his deductions will not weigh with
others as with himself. Few will disagree, however, with him
as to the powerful influences illusions exert over their victims,
who, impressed against their will and wish, with their reality,
become for a time the unreasoning servants of an irresistible
power. If asked concerning the phantoms they energetically
declare they have no reality, and yet at each fresh occurrence of
an illusion they are found to act for the time as if fully believing
128 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
in it. " A man who knows right from wrong, whatever the
condition of his mind in other respects, and whatever the strength
of the impulse which urges him to action, is held to be respon-
sible for his act. Do not these cases help us to understand the
surpassing reality of the brain's own creations, and the tyranny
they exercise over men's actions, even in presence of the most
perfect knowledge (experimental and theoretical) of their true
nature and causation ? And if illusions of the sense of sight,
which, if not corrected by real objects, are at least mixed up
with them, are thus vivid and life-like, what shall we say of
those illusions of the sense of hearing which, so to speak, have
the mind all to themselves, and take the shape of definite com-
mands to commit suicide or murder ? " This passage sounds
the key-note of the work, and it is followed by a luminous
exposition of the data on which the final conclusions to which
Dr. Gruy gives expression are based. The second section is
devoted to delusions, and concludes with the following passage :
?" I believe that there are illusions of the senses and delusions
of the mind which are to the full as involuntary, and as cer-
tainly due to the direct action of the brain itself as the outward
manifestations of emotion, the grotesque movements of chorea, or
the aimless convulsions of epilepsy." Succeeding comes a chapter
on " Dreams" and the analogy between these and the insane
condition is dwelt on. Dr. Guy refers to the strange and in-
comprehensible rapidity with which a lengthened series of
events is sometimes gone through in imagination by the
sleeper, between the occurrence of a noise which suffices to arouse
him, and the actual awakening. Every physician has some
time or other experienced this, and has striven in vain to afford
a physiological explanation of it. Years may appear to elapse,
and the actions and incidents crowded within them passed in
detailed review, leading gradually up to some event connected
with the sound which startles out of sleep, and yet we can be
certain that an almost inappreciable period of time elapses
between the two to full waking time; notwithstanding, sufficient
for the mental review of a lifetime. In the lunatic this con-
dition has not been recognised; but as Dr. Gruy suggests,
" possibly some happy accident may supply us with a case in
point." It can hardly be that there is never anything equivalent
to be noticed, and it were better to conclude that our means
of observation are as yet inadequate to estimating the value
and extent of the mental changes that make up the phases of
insanity. The temptation to conclude that this latter condition,
of necessity implies structural changes to disturb every normal
process, is one that is found almost too strong to resist; and
until there is a general willingness to regard the mentally
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 129
alienated more in the light of a simply aberrant type, advance
will be slow and gradual.
The exception we have ventured to take to a confusion of
imagination and fancy is justified by the phenomena of dream-
ing. This has always reference to actual experiences; we never
find a dream concerned with purely ideal creations of fancy ;
even the most fantastic and impossible conceptions are based
on some fact or occurrence of former time. There is no ini-
tiation or real origination of ideas, and we may perhaps be
allowed to suggest that the recognition of this and its appli-
cation to the phenomena of insanity may be found pro-
ductive of good result. The two states, dreaming and insanity,
agree in this, that each is concerned with that which is or
has been. The lunatic may be wondrously imaginative, may
be even poetical, but he is never a producer of new ideas, only
always an adapter of old ones; and thus is he strangely and
surely marked off from a class often unjustly put with him by
hasty generalisers, viz. geniuses. Somnambulism, and delirium
are treated by Dr. Guy in separate chapters. Under each
heading he has much to say that is interesting, and especially
in the former section when dealing with double consciousness
and spiritualism. As might be anticipated, the bearing of the
somnambulistic condition on homicidal and suicidal tendencies
is dilated on with the view of'bringing into relief the influence
they have on the criminal aspects of such acts.
"The word delirium," says Dr. Guy, " was formerly in frequent
use as the equivalent of insanity, and is even now occasionally
employed in that sense. But its more common and appropriate
use is to designate a state of mind which springs up during
fevers, inflammations, (especially in the internal organs) severe
wounds and injuries, the action of poisons, and especially
of such poisons as opium and alcohol. Delirium tremens, the
Nemesis of the drunkard, is one of its most instructive forms."
This definition of delirium satisfactorily includes the phenomena
presented during those stages of illness of which it forms a
characteristic feature, and separates it from the apparently
similar states observed in actual insanity. We could wish that
Dr. Guy had somewhat extended this chapter to include a more
complete differential diagnosis; but so far as it goes it is an
admirable exposition of the subject it describes.
Catalepsy is a condition so rarely met with, and, when seen,
so excessively instructive, that it is much to be desired it
could be more fully studied and explained. Dr. Guy is unable
to add much to what is already known concerning it; he states
he has never seen a case since he was a boy. And the records
of medicine contain so few descriptions of the disease, there can
PART I. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES. K
J 30 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
be but little learnt from them about it. It is possible to believe
even of some of the few cases of which a history has been given,
that their nature has been improperly understood, and they
entitle to be ranked rather as instances of extraordinary
hysteria. We believe Dr. Drummond, physician to the New-
castle-on-Tyne Infirmary, has a woman now under his care, in
the wards of that institution, of whom it would be rash to assert
whether she can be correctly described as hysterical or cataleptic.
In non-professional circles every convulsive seizure is a "fit,"
and, from occasional accounts received of " fits " occurring more
or less frequently in persons who are not regularly under medical
treatment, it is not unreasonable to assume that conditions
allied to that of catalepsy are more frequent than we are in
the habit of supposing. They are less fearful in appearance
than the more terrifying epileptic attacks, and as in the case
we refer to, it is only after long continuance, or increased
severity of symptoms, that resort is had to skilled advice. Of
epilepsy, fortunately, Dr. Guy is enabled to speak definitely ;
and he assents to the views propounded by Dr. Cheyne that the
strumous diathesis is a strong exciting cause of the complaint.
Its relation to insanity is briefly but clearly described in the
words of Dr. Burrows, to the effect that " Epilepsy is frequently
complicated with, or ends in, mental derangement. It may be
complicated with every form of aberration, alienation, or defi-
ciency of intellect. Thus we find it combined with mania,
melancholia, demency, and idiotism. The epileptic attack may
be preceded by a furious paroxysm, or merely by elevated ideas,
by great depression of spirits, or by mental imbecility, forget-
fulness, &c.; or the reverse may obtain, and the sequel of the
epileptic fits may exhibit these morbid conditions of the mental
functions."
Hysteria will probably never lose its interest for the prac-
tical physician ; and each year, in consequence of the attention
that is given to it, we are becoming better and more truly
acquainted with the meaning of its symptoms. The proneness
of numbers of women when associated together, to imitate the
hysterical condition when any one is attacked by it, is well
known, and affords our author a theme for cogent and instruc-
tive comment. The subject of hysterical males also is carefully
touched, and one case which came within Dr. Guy's own expe-
rience is so instructive in its details that we are unable to
forbear quoting it in full. Dr. Guy writes: "I was one of a
party assembled one evening at the house of a friend. The
conversation took the direction of mesmerism, and I was
appealed to, as the person most likely to understand it, for an
explanation of its method and effect. I disclaimed all know-
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. J 31
ledge of the subject beyond the fact that the manipulations of
the mesmeriser consisted of passes of the hand before the face 5
and the effect sleep, or a state allied to it. I illustrated the
method by making a few passes, which were not directed
towards anyone present, nor had I any particular person in my
thoughts. But the master of the house, a healthy well-made gen-
tleman, above the middle height, inclined to corpulence, of the
temperament known as phlegmatic, and of an easy disposition,
very ready to accept the views of others where most men prefer
to help themselves?this gentleman, not being near me, or in
the direction of my movements, suddenly sank on a sofa by
which he was standing, and became convulsed, his features be-
coming so distorted that it was hard to say whether their
expression, or the horror of his wife, or the surprise of the rest
of the party, was most noteworthy. As the expression of his
face, as well as the incoherent words he uttered, had reference
to myself, I withdrew, and noiselessly, as I thought, made
my way to an apartment above. But his eyes, gestures, and
words followed me there, and I soon determined to leave
the house. Next day I met him, and would have shaken
hands with him, but he motioned me away,' alleging
that he could not bear it It is impossible to
imagine a more complete illustration than this case affords of
the existence of that exceptional condition of mind and nervous
system which gives force to the passes of the mesmeriser and
the fixed gaze of the biologist. In this strange case there was
neither intention on the part of the operator nor imposition
or possible imitation on the part of the ' subject.' Attribute
the phenomena if we will to the workings of the imagination,
we do but assign a real cause; we do not, and we cannot,
explain its mode of action. Some time after this event I was
informed that the oldest son of this gentleman was found to be
among the most susceptible persons at a meeting convened by
a celebrated biologist." Dr. Gruy adds in reference to this
question, " the effects attributed to an external cause may be
really due to the inner peculiarities of the ' subject' himself;
that convulsions and other abnormal states of the nervous
system may originate, not in the strong will and confident
actions of the mesmeriser or biologist, but in the hysteric
weakness of the ' subject.' " These passages are among the
most instructive in the book. They are exceptionally interest-
ing in themselves, but as much, too, showing the conserva-
tive tendency of their author's mind in rejecting the modern
developments of physiological science in .respect to the sub-
ject he is discussing, and especially on account of his utterly
ignoring the remarkable performances of Heidenhain.
132 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
The second part of Dr. Guy's volume is devoted to "The plea
of Insanity." We cannot now give space to any lengthened
analysis of its chapters, but it will suffice almost to say of it
that it is an able, eloquent, and irresistible argument in favour
of removing the onus of responsibility from the insane criminal.
Dr. Guy recognises five classes of cases in whieh the plea of
insanity can be admitted; they are (1) cases of acute instinc-
tive or impulsive insanity, (2) cases of chronic instinctive or
impulsive insanity, (3) cases of epilepsy with homicidal impulse,
(4) cases of imbecility, (5) cases of mania. In demonstrating
this part of his subject, our author will carry every educated
physician with him. We have not always been able to agree with
him in the earlier part of his work, but here we are heart and soul
at one with his noble and generous desire to reform what is, per-
haps, the greatest scandal of the criminal code. Indeed, it is
high time that we dispense with all refinements in a matter so
simple. A man kills another, and the plea of insanity is set
up and maintained. Delusion is proved. If you can show
that the madman knows right from wrong, and that murder is
unlawful, do you also prove that he could act upon his know-
ledge as the sane criminal does ? Give what definition or
description of madmen you please, you cannot exclude from it the
weakening or destruction of the will. We cannot, in conclusion,
say anything higher in praise of Dr. Guy's most admirable book,
than that he succeeds in showing the perfect truth of a passage
prefixed to his own volume, from Coke in " Blackstone." " But
if there be any doubt of sanity, surely the evidence of men of
acknowledged science and reputation should, at least, be
listened to, especially in capital offences, lest the execution
of the maniac be a miserable spectacle both against law, and
of extreme inhumanity and cruelty, and be no example to
others."
