Visual Disturbances Experienced
=================================

By A Former Medical Superintendent of The Insane.
V61 Art. VIII.?
The subject of the following illusions, after six months' unheeded warning's, broke down about two years ago from heart
disease.
At first, and for about two months, it manifested itself
chiefly in attacks of angina pectoris, which were specially
neurotic in character.
These were followed by gradual general improvement, but
leaving the subject of them open to recurrent attacks, and
especially liable to suffer from physical or mental exertion.
This condition of improved, yet impaired health, continued
till the spring of this year, when the writer became the subject
of what may be called an attack of acute dyspepsia, during the
development and persistence of which occurred the phenomena
of which the following notes are an imperfect record.
The attack referred to was indicated mainly by intense
thirst, a foul tongue, bad taste, loss of appetite, persistent constipation, loss of sleep and mental exaltation.
The notes were sent to a medical friend during convalescence,
but were certainly not intended for publication, which, however,
has been assented to on the advice of others. They embrace a
period of nine weeks, three of which, however, are a blank, as
the phenomena then were too complicated and confused, and
the writer too ill to analyse or remember them. During the
two last weeks of the period they were too vague to be worth
noting.
They have been re-read, but left nearly in the condition in
which they were at first recorded. As the attack was followed
by considerable prostration, during which was penned the
description of the unusual phenomena, it is neither so lucid
nor so vivid as otherwise it might have been. After all, only
salient points are recorded.
I. Visual disturbances first noticed.
(a) Flashes of light.
These were similar to so-called summer lightning?sudden
faint flashes of light, seen, however, in daylight, which involuntarily drew attention to the sky and the clouds. It was only
by careful observation that they were made out to be subjective.
The moment attention was directed to them they ceased to
exist.
PART II. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES. S
238 VISUAL DISTURBANCES EXPERIENCED.
(6) Zones of light.
This was a more advanced, and therefore more persistent
condition. On looking at a cloud a yellowish zone of light
surrounded it, or a portion of it, which persisted only for a
short time, hut long enough to determine its source and reality.
The area within the zone seemed a little darker than the cloud
itself.
(n) A dark central area.
This, as seen, presented a dark circular field, which increased
in darkness until the ground became broken up into a mass of
black minute moving objects. In form they were stellar cruciform, or exhibited some irregular polygonal outline. In size they
were -J-rtli to the -J^nd of an inch. In number, say a thousand.
In colour, black. Their motions rapid?a veritable dance ot
atoms. They had very much the appearance of a swarm of
? animalcules on the field of the microscope.
The above series of phenomena were introductory to those
which follow. They were most marked when looking into
diffused daylight. They lasted for about ten days. They
regularly succeeded each other, each gradually increasing in
intensity, then declining and merging into its successor.
II. Disturbances which occurred after a three weeks' interval. They are described when they are supposed to have
reached their greatest intensity.
(a) The gas when burning looked like a jet of electric
light.
(b) The fire like a reservoir of melted metal at whjte heat.
(c) Daylight a brilliant haze.
(d) The sun was too bright for even a venturesome gaze.
(e) A page of print looked exactly as if a strong brush had
been dashed through the paper, leaving the words and letters
broken into fragments. As the fragments were dissociated
from each other only within narrow limits, by a special effort
of attention a word, or even a line, could be made out, but
leading was impossible, and for many weeks the writer was
deprived of his main solace during the previous eighteen
months' forced retirement from active work.
The disjecta membra, verbal and literal, were confined to
the centre of the visual area, outside of which the rest of the
page was a vague confused mass.
(J) On looking into the open.day nothing was seen but a
confused haze, in the centre of which fragments of objects
could be seen very much as the words and letters referred to.
Here, as there, by a special effort of attention they could be
made out more distinctly.
III. Phenomena which are still more complex and peculiar.
(a) Looking at the ceiling in the dark, or with the eyes shut,
VISUAL DISTURBANCES EXPERIENCED. 239
it matters not which provided light be absent, a dark form is
seen, representing the shape of the human eye enlarged, that
is, a spheroid, with its longer axis horizontal, apparent size a
foot to 18 inches, the central third of which corresponds to the
central axis of vision. This is a dark grey oval plane, on which
is seen a moving for min soft bright silvery light. The
nearest comparison to it which I can think of is the frilled
border of a lady's cap, or much better, a piece of intestine.
In the latter you have the convolutions extending along one
side, on the other a puckered line. Suppose this laid on the
plane referred to in a circle, the puckered line towards the
centre, the convolutions looking away from it, the central third
of the area being free. The white glistening appearance of
the intestine, as well as its outlines, presents as nearly as
possible the phenomenon described.
It has, however, not only form and colour, but motion.
This motion is continuous, and very peculiar. The circle of
convolutions move slowly and regularly backwards and forwards
towards the centre, but never reach it. The whole circle does
not move at once, but successively in three or four sections.
They invariably left the impression that they were the result of
some regulated piece of mechanism.
This vision lasted for many days and nights, seen with eyes
open or shut, best seen in darkness; even in daylight it could
be made out, though indistinctly; in short, it was evidently
persistent, though it ceased to become an object of consciousness when attention was strongly directed elsewhere.
Like all the other phenomena it gradually declined in intensity, and merged into others ; however, even when others had
taken its place and had become more prominent, it could still be
traced as a shadow.
(b) Another figure which succeeded this was entirely different. Its form was that of a rayless composite flower, say a
Michaelmas daisy. It was about y ^-ths of an inch in diameter.
The centre was filled with a golden flame colour, surrounded by
a narrow, somewhat irregular black line or border.
Whenever the attention was directed to it the golden centre
became gradually filled with black points, which passed into
rapid motion, then it gradually faded into darkness.
This vision lasted for two or three minutes, was constantly
seen in darkness or with the eyes shut, but only imperfectly, in
light. It lasted for a period of about ten days, when, like
others, it gradually declined in vividness till it disappeared.
IV. Another vision, or rather series of them, still more
extraordinary, presented themselves as figures of living creatures.
The larger mammalia wild and tame, birds, serpents, and fishes.
s 2
240 VISUAL DISTURBANCES EXPERIENCED.
They seemed to occupy the same relative position to the
central axis of vision as the intestinal circle already described.
(?) As to their forms, they were only partial, that is, only a
portion of the figure was visible, viz., the head and shoulders.
They were not only partial, but imperfect, that is, the forms
were always distorted, just enough of regularity left to ensure
identification.
(?) In position their heads were always towards the centre.
(c) Their numbers were four to six standing in a circle.
(d) Their motions, as in other cases, were slow, deliberate,
see-saw, not altogether, but successively in sections to and from
the centre, but never reaching it.
(e) The same set of figures always appeared together, and continued for a day or two, when they were succeeded by a new series.
V. Another series may be described as follows:
When the room was dark, or the eyes shut, the whole area of
vision,not the centre merely, as hitherto described, was occupied
by a black ground, on which appeared, as if painted, a series of
geometrical figures as lines, angles, in flame or gold colour.
They had very much the appearance of Japanese paintings
minus, however, all organic forms.
This appearance gradually faded away as improvement progressed. The forms remained the same, but the colours gradually
grew fainter, the dark ground becoming lighter, the golden
patterns passing into dull yellow, salmon, and various shades of
grey.
VI. Eccentric Phenomena.
In looking at an object in the axis of vision we see it directly
and distinctly, but are at the same time indistinctly conscious
of other objects lying in an outer circle.
The preceding series of phenomena were confined to, or at
least most prominent in the central area of vision ; the fifth, just
described, occupied the whole field, outer and inner ; that which
we now proceed to describe was confined to the outer circle.
The centre in this case was dark and unoccupied by objects
of any kind. The outer circle was filled by what can only be
described as exactly resembling the ordinary patterns seen in
wirework. These varied from time to time, each new pattern
succeeding a former one, while within the meshes of the network the animalcular forms already described continued
vigorously their atomic dance.
VII. Special Phenomena.
We may here add that visions of a more pleasing if not more
interesting character sometimes, though rarely, made their
appearance. They were entirely scenic, as distant towns, seas,
lakes, cliffs, mountains, &c. They were always single pictures,
VISUAL DISTURBANCES EXPERIENCED. 241
and were never repeated, as was the case with the other visions
described.
As to an explanation of these phenomena, the writer has
nothing whatever to say. His object has been to record and
describe the facts as truthfully as he was able, and he begs now
to conclude with a few general observations which he thinks
worth noting.
1st. The absence of colour.
Black, white, and flame colour, that is modifications of
natural or artificial light, were characteristic of all the phenomena, the more intense passing into fainter shades as the successive visions gradually declined.
On only two or three occasions were colours seen, and these
faint and transient, as a pale pink, a. light blue.
2nd. There is the rarity of single pictures or objects,
these only occurring a few times and within the limits of two
or three days, apparently just when improvement had begun.
3rd. There is the gradual growth, perfection, and decay of
the successive visions as they gave place to or merged into one
another.
4th. Another characteristic was the persistence of the
declining phenomena alter their more marked and vigorous
successors had taken their place. This was constantly noticed.
Sometimes three successive visions could be made out at the
same time, each appearing more faint according to its distance
in time. When so seen they were never mixed up irregularly,
but appeared as occupying successive strata, leaving the impression that they were really persistent, but lost to view by the
successive additions made by their more recent and more
vigorous companions.
5th. The deliberate, regular, machine-like motions, as well
as their repeated similarity in this respect in the successive
visions, is another interesting characteristic.
6th. There is the position the various phenomena occupied
relative to the axis of vision. By far the greater number presented themselves in the centre of the visual field where objects
are seen directly and distinctly. A few only occupied the
external area where objects are seen indirectly, as the zones of
light and the wire-net phenomena. Fewer still occupied the
whole area, as for example the Japanese figures.
In conclusion, as to the eyes themselves, no change was
noted in the body of the eye external or internal, no pain was
felt nor discomfort experienced except what arose from a tendency to lachrymation. This tendency was especially manifested during the later stages of the disease, and continued for
about a fortnight after visual disturbance had ceased, and when
convalescence was far advanced. J. Gr., ]\1. D.
