Prophylaxis Of Insanity
=========================

32 Art, II.?
By J. M. "WINN, M.D., M.R.C.P., Consulting Physician to St. George's and St. James's
Dispensary, &c., formerly Resident Physician of Sussex House Lunatic Asylum.
In the following remarks we propose to treat only of insanity
in its hereditary character. It is admitted by the highest
authorities in psychological medicine, that about one-half of the
cases which have come under their care could be traced back to
some insane or half-insane ancestor. If, however, it can be
proved, as I have before now contended, that not only insanity,
but every form of hereditary disease may, by a conservation of
morbid energy, give rise to insanity, the cases which owe their
origin, without predisposition, solely to moral causes and vicious
habits, must be reduced to a small minority.
In 1869 I published a treatise on The Nature and Treat-
ment of Hereditary Disease, with reference to a correlation of
Morbific Force * in which I remarked that if any medical man,
conversant with the treatment of insanity, and who has oppor-
tunities of knowing intimately the connections of his patients,
will make careful inquiries into their history, he could scarcely
fail to discover evidence of some form of hereditary disease, in
one or other member of the same family. If he has not detected
the existence of decided insanity, for friends and relatives gene-
rally endeavour to conceal such fact, he would probably
ascertain that few have escaped some constitutional taint, in the
form of scrofula, phthisis, epilepsy, &c; for how few of us can
boast of an ancestry entirely free from hereditary disease. To
substantiate this theory of a correlation of morbific force, I
published in the treatise referred to, clinical cases, showing how
skin diseases correlate with mania; epilepsy and phthisis with
acute mania; scrofula with melancholia, &c. On May 21,
1870, I sent a letter to The Medical Times and Gazette, in
which I gave additional facts in confirmation of my theory.
Since my treatise appeared, the tendency of thought amongst
medical men has been in the direction of my theory. Nine
months after its publication Mr. Jonathan Hutchinson read a
paper at a meeting of the Hunterian Society on Some of the
principal Diatheses, and their mutual Relation, in which he
argued that gout, syphilis, scrofula, cancer, bronchocele, dar-
trous affections, &c., have common properties. This group
(although syphilis is mentioned, which I do not include in my
category, and insanity is omitted) bears a very close resemblance
to mine. Mr. Hutchinson classifies these diseases under the
head of diathesis, which he considers different from dyscrasia or
* Published by David Bogue, 3 St. Martin's Place, W.C.
PROPHYLAXIS OF INSANITY. 33
temperament; but all these words are vague, and do not convey
to the mind the same clear idea that is expressed in the term,
correlation of force.
In 1878, in a paper on The Brain in Health and Disease,
by Dr. Edward C. Mann, late of the New York State Em.
Insane Asylum, the writer, in referring to the connexion between
phthisis and insanity, recognises my theory, but does not men-
tion my name. He observes: " I also believe there is a
correlation of morbific force, which renders these diseases
mutually convertible"?using my very words. Again, in 1880,
Dr. Walter Kempster, in his annual report of The Northern
Hospital for the Insane of the State of Wisconsin * gives
instances of the mutual convertibility of different forms of
hereditary disease, without any reference to my researches
twelve years previously.
My attention has recently been called afresh to the subject
of this paper, by some remarks made by Dr. Greorge M. Beard,
in the prospectus of a National Association for the Protection
of the Insane and the Prevention of Insanity, in the United
States. He observes: "The subject of insanity is greater than
insanity itself, since all the diseases of the brain and the nervous
system, by whatsoever names known, are related to each other,
run into each other, and take each other's place. The man who
only knows insanity,- does not know even that; all the diseases
of the nervous system are members, one of another, and are to
be studied as parts of a great whole and in relation to each
other." This is all very well as far as it goes, but the induction
is only partial, and is included in my broader generalisation.
The expression, " diseases of the brain and nervous system," has
nevertheless a wide application. Who can say in what medical
disease (not zymotic) some disturbance in the nervous system is
not the fons et origo of all the mischief ? It is now admitted
that in diabetes the nervous system plays an important part,
and the most rational theory of " catching cold " is that which
attributes it to an impression made on the nervous tracks by a
low temperature.
To establish a correlation of force it is necessary to prove a
mutual convertibility. It is not sufficient to give instances of
one disease passing into another; we must demonstrate a see-saw
sort of action; and I gave instances in my treatise of diseases
passing backwards and forwards, either in the same individual, or
in various members of different generations of the same family.
That some sort of force is active in insanity cannot be
doubted?force is in operation everywhere; as Carlyle said,
* Published in Part I. Vol. IV. of the Journal of Psychological Medicine.
Now Series.
PART I. VOL VII. NEW SERIES. D
34 PROPHYLAXIS OF INSANITY.
there is force in a rotting apple. One case in particular, in
which the insane force manifested itself, is indelibly impressed
on my memory. I have mentioned it before, but, it will bear
repetition. The patient, a highly educated gentleman about 40
years of age, and of unexceptional moral character, was subject
to attacks of acute mania of the most violent character. During
the intervals between the attacks, his mental and bodily condi-
tion were those of a person perfectly free from disease, and
formed a striking contrast to his maniacal state. The paroxysms
were marked by outbursts of uncontrolled passion, violent ges-
tures, and the use of obscene and blasphemous language. After
the lapse of a few weeks this terrible commotion would subside,
leaving the patient calm and rational. It was like the clearing
of the atmosphere by a thunder-storm, and supports my theory
that there were latent morbific forces in the system which
became developed by some exciting cause, leading to a dis-
turbance of the nervous molecules. No one can doubt that this
was an expenditure of force, and in every sense of the word we
may term this energy morbific. An ordinary attack of epilepsy
bears a close resemblance to a recurrent case of acute mania?in
it we perceive the same expenditure of energy.
That a morbific element may lie dormant during a whole
generation need not surprise us, when we see how the terrible
poison of rabies may be latent for an indefinite period.
I have dwelt thus long on the etiology of insanity before
discussing its prophylaxis, as a rational mode of treatment of
any disease cannot be devised until we have ascertained its
cause; and if there be but one cause for the existence of all
hereditary diseases, as we have given grounds for believing, it
follows that there must necessarily be one general plan of treat-
ment, more or less applicable to the whole.
The prophylaxis of hereditary disease involves the to
important questions of hygiene and marriage.
Hygiene.?Hygienic treatment cannot begin too early.
Where hereditary taint is feared it should commence with the
earliest period of life. Constitutional disease is often mani-
fested soon after birth in the form of convulsions. The
nourishment of the infant must be the first care. The food
which nature supplies is the best; and even if the mother
belongs to a family in which there is hereditary disease, I do
not think it an objection to her nursing, provided she be strong
and has plenty of milk, for there is no ground for believing that
the class of hereditary diseases to which I have referred can be
transmitted, like syphilis, through the secretions of the mother.
The three other requisites for an infant's health are air,
warmth, and bathing. Its moral education should begin in
infancy. Firmness must be combined with tenderness.
PROPHYLAXIS OF INSANITY. 35
A lengthened discussion on education would be out of place
here, but a few words are requisite on the danger of over-
stimulating the brain by too great a variety of studies.
Precocious children are often scrofulous, and parents take a
foolish pride in the exhibition of their talents, and are disposed
to keep them at their tasks, when they should be romping with
their playmates.
The most critical period of life is the interval between fifteen
and twenty-five. This fact shows the necessity of controlling
the sexual passions at this period.
There can be no doubt that a large class of those disposed
to hereditary maladies might have escaped disease had they
chosen a suitable profession or vocation.
Regular exercise in the open air is a most powerful thera-
peutical agent. An empiric once gained great reputation for
*the cure of epilepsy. His plan was simply to order his patients
to walk a considerable number of miles daily.
Whilst on the subject of the treatment of hereditary disease, we
must not forget the great value of cod-liver oil. It bears a similar
relation to hereditary that quinine does to zymotic disease. Issues,
once so much in vogue, should not be overlooked.
Marriage.?This subject demands the most earnest atten-
tion. I have generally found it useless, when consulted by young
people as to the advisability of their marrying, to say?don't.
There can be no doubt as to the danger of two individuals
marrying when there is hereditary taint on both sides. It is
not necessary, if the views I have inculcated be right, that the
form of hereditary disease should be the same.
The general rule of transmission is from parents uninter-
ruptedly to the children, and from them to the grandchildren,
frequently with an interruption, from the grandparents to the
grandchildren. Sometimes the taint is derived from collateral
branches.
Some time since I drew up the following rules for the
guidance of those who have consulted me as to the advisability
of their marriage into any family of which one or more members
have suffered from constitutional disease. They were published
in my treatise On the Nature and Treatment of Hereditary
Diseojse. As I am not aware that anyone else has drawn up
rules of a similar character, and as they have an approximative
value, I will repeat them: ?
1. If there be a constitutional taint of any kind in either
father or mother on both sides of the contracting parties, the
risk is so great as almost to amount to a certainty, that their
offspring would inherit some form of disease belonging to the
class to which these investigations refer. .
2. If the constitutional disease is only on one side, either
D 2
36 PROPHYLAXIS OF INSANITY.
directly, or collaterally through uncles or aunts, and the con-
tracting parties are both in good bodily health, the risk is
diminished one-half, and healthy offspring may be the issue of
the marriage.
3. If there have been no signs of constitutional disease for
a whole generation, we can scarcely consider the risk materially
lessened, as it so frequently reappears, after being in abeyance
for a whole generation.
4. If two whole generations have escaped any symptoms of
hereditary disease, we may fairly hope that the danger has
passed, and that the morbific force has expended itself.
We now arrive at the vexed question of consanguine
marriages. Perhaps the true reason why the intermarriage of
blood relations is so generally considered to be a fruitful source
of disease, is that, if there be any latent morbific force in both
parties (both of whom are derived from the same ancestor),
it is likely to be more intensified by their union than if there
were no consanguinity. Nevertheless, if both parties are in
good health, and free from ancestral contamination, there can
be no reasonable objection to the marriage of cousins.
It may be argued that it is of little avail to give prudential
rules respecting marriage where the affections are strongly en-
gaged, and that the stamping out of hereditary disease is a Utopian
notion; but medical science should aim at the highest ideal,
and it is the province of the physician and sanitary reformer to
point out the best means of preventing physical evils, as it is
that of the moral philosopher to exhibit the disastrous conse-
quences of a violation of moral laws.
Whether the rules I have suggested concerning marriage
be adopted or not, there can be no doubt that hygienic means
have done much to arrest and alleviate hereditary disease.
A medical man is often rewarded for his care and attention by
seeing delicate children grow up strong and healthy men and
women, the morbific force either expending itself or continuing
latent. Sometimes if disease cannot be eradicated, a favourable
change of type occurs ; a grave malady being transmuted into
one of a less fatal character. One case of this kind especially
recurs to me?that of a professional man who was very delicate
in his youth, and liable to haemoptysis. In after years he
became subject to attacks of gout. When in his ninetieth
year, he was able to ride on horseback and attend to business,
although still occasionally laid up with gout.
We must also take heart from the new doctrine of dissi-
pation of energy. If this be true, we can look forward to the
dissipation of morbific force. The vital force of an individual
is exhausted in a few years, why then may we not hope for a
similar termination of hereditary evil ?
