Thomas Carlyle Viewed Psychologically
=======================================

THE JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE AND MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
Art. I.?
A howl echoed from John-o'-Grroat's to Land's End on the
posthumous publication of the "Reminiscences of Thomas
Carlyle." This cry of pain and indignation arose from those
who had abruptly seen an idol which they had been accustomed
to reverence as arrayed in all pomp and power and majesty,
desecrated, denuded, and exposed as a coarse, rough-hewn, and
somewhat unattractive block; from others who had been the
fellow-worshippers with these idolaters when the object of their
reverence was desecrated and broken by Iconoclasts of their own
creed; and from others who, less enthusiastic in their senti-
ments, experienced disappointment on the premature disclosure
of attributes and circumstances utterly irreconcilable with the
object of their intellectual regard. Among the latter I would
feel disposed to range myself, regarding Carlyle as one of the
most conspicuous thinkers of our age, if not a man of exalted
genius; but as further conceiving his powerful mind to be
warped, unregulated, and eccentric?or, say, in some of its phases,
eccentric. It would be foreign from my purpose and my
feelings to do more than allude to the unseemly internecine
squabble existing between his friends and relatives as to the
time and mode in which his literary remains should have been
brought before the public. My impression is that the author
of these memorials did not intend that they should see the
light unrevised, perhaps expurgated ; but such as they now are,
I shall, in my analysis of the lifelong mental condition of
Carlyle, confine myself exclusively, almost rigidly, to the facts
and illustrations which they contain ; as my impression is that
PART II. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES. N
158 THOMAS OARLYLE VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY.
the published works of Carlyle may, in many respects, be
accepted as his holiday attire, elaborated and finished with
extreme care and difficulty and pain, deserving the designation
of the pangs of literary parturition ; or that in many cases his
works may be compared to his war-paint, seeing that the
tomahawk and scalping-knife were more freely used than is
consistent with the general character and tendencies of the
writer. In employing such materials it will be absolutely
essential to our purpose to quote the very words of some of
the multitudinous biographers and critics in order to secure
a sufficient amount of accuracy and evidence, so as to avoid the
possibility of personal bias; but every effort shall be made to
represent the materials provided, scanty though they be, in all
kindness and sympathy as well as in philosophical discrimination.
I must claim the credence as well as the indulgence of my
readers as to the fidelity of the quotations and extracts which I
must unavoidably introduce into the text, as the employment of
references, inverted commas, &c., would prove not merely per-
plexing, but would utterly destroy the continuity of the state-
ment. The paucity and the rudeness of the aspects in which
Carlyle has represented himself in his " Eeminiscences " may
be fairly attributed to his conviction that he was merely pre-
paring the outlines of an autobiography. But why Mr.
Froude, who is a man high in culture, fine taste, and literary
tact, should have permitted such an imperfect sketch, such a
mere skeleton, to be obtruded upon those who admired and those
who did not admire the author?even before the " wee crimson-
tipped flower," the only funeral wreath that was permitted in
Ecclefechan churchyard, could have "glinted" on the sage's
grave?is incomprehensible.
The future sage of Chelsea was one of nine children of a
stalwart, reticent, respectable, but rather repulsive yeoman, who
plied in succession the trades of farm-servant, mason, and
farmer, in an obscure but romantic valley in the south of
Scotland. He belonged to a family possessed of great muscular
strength, displaying much eccentricity, and, occasionally, the
pugnacity and violent habits which characterised the borderers
in the debatable land towards the close of the last century.
The tide of hereditary tendencies thus originated may have
been swelled by the insanity of Carlyle's mother, who was
deranged for some time, removed from home, and, even after her
return, spoke absurdly and incoherently. Her child was a
6mall, large-headed boy of singular precocity, being able to
speak when fifteen months old, could repeat the heads of any
sermon to which he listened, at a time when such discourses
were prodigiously long and prosaic, and performed many other
THOMAS OARLYLE VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY. 159
feats in which memory played the most conspicuous part. It
is recounted that he became the pet of a village dame, who
carried him much to and fro in the village, and, doubtless,
imparted much of that folk-lore which was then prevalent in
the district; and, from a trustworthy authority, we learn that
she always regarded him as a thoughtful and studious child,
who mixed little with the village children, or even with his own
brothers or sisters, having a greater relish for the society of his
grandfather and other grown-up people, and who was fond of
roaming about the fields and hills, always with a book in his
hand.
It would be rash to connect this prematurity in age and
habits with the early intellectual development recorded; but, in
all cases of rapid enlargement of the brain, it should be recol-
lected that there is a tendency to irregular evolution of its
various parts, to cerebral irritations of various origin, as well as
with rare psychical qualities. Before reaching his eighth year,
and in the marvellously brief period of three months, it is
affirmed that he mastered Virgil and Horace, under the tutor-
ship of his clergyman's son, and in such a manner as to astonish
his teachers on going to school in the neighbouring village. His
physical strength does not appear to have kept pace with the
advancement of his knowledge. He was puny, or dwarfish, and
his inferiority to his companions provoked that cruel tyranny
which even boys are prone to exercise over those who are more
defective or defenceless than themselves, and which inflicted
upon Carlyle miseries and feelings of retaliation which were
never obliterated, and which, poisoning the very fountain-head
of gentleness and brotherhood, may have embittered his inter-
course with many classes of his fellow-men. During his attend-
ance in this humble academy, two events, important to him,
occurred. He formed a boyish friendship with the only indi-
vidual whom he seems to have sincerely and permanently loved.
This was Edward Irving, who seems to have shared in his lite-
rary tastes, as well as in his patriotism, and to have preserved a
certain influence over his feelingy, although unfortunately not
over his religious opinions, almost throughout their mutual lives,
and until the preacher became first an enthusiast, then a fanatic,
and ultimately a theomaniac. The utterance of Mrs. Carlyle
herself is almost prophetic when she says, " It was mostly mad
people who came running after Carlyle;" but although the
setting sun of the career of both was obscured by gloom or
positive darkness, there was neither similarity nor identification
in the clouds by which they were surrounded. The second
event alluded to consisted in his first tasting of the sweets ot
fictitious literature, most strictly prohibited by his father as
H 2
160 THOMAS OARLYLE VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY.
frivolous, pernicious, and profane; his introduction to this for-
bidden honey having consisted in securing an odd volume of
" Roderick Random," and in devouring it in solitude in the
fields, while his more natural schoolfellows were enjoying the
boisterous attractions of the playground. He ever regarded
Smollett as one of the best examples of a pure English style ;
and without venturing upon any disputation as to his correct-
ness, we may conjecture that this early impression and opinion
?the quaint, gloomy, transcendental theology taught liim from
the pulpit?as well as his subsequent devotion to the German
language, may have mainly contributed to build up that
obscure, involved, and parenthetical style of thought and
phraseology which afterwards became habitual. His un-
familiarity with the best, specimens of the poets and novelists
may have prevented him from euphemising the uncouth Doric
in which his tongue learned to syllabalise his thoughts; but
there were other factors at work in preventing him from draw-
ing waters in the well of " English undefiled" and in
selecting new or more attractive forms of expression. The most
culpable of these was an apparent antipathy and estrangement
towards the classical languages, which were then and are still
conceived to lay the foundations of purity and perspicacity in
construction. " The minister's son was the first person that
ever taught me Latin, and I am not sure but that he laid a
very great curse upon me in so doing. I think it is likely I
should have been a wiser man, and certainly a godlier one, if I
had followed in my father's steps, and left Greek an:l Latin to
the fools that wanted them."
This scathing, mature condemnation was uttered in despite
of early proficiency and subsequent cultivation, but evidently
without appreciation, or rather with a contempt for the benefits
which he had himself derived from such studies. It is possible
that, from his unfamiliarity with that popular literature which
must have fallen under his notice, if it did not attract his
admiration, and by its wide divergence from the standard
which he had created for himself arose his ignorance or silence
upon this subject, and that to such causes may be traced his
contempt for the poets and philosophers and litterateurs, who
adorned the age of which he was himself a prominent orna-
ment, but whom he denounces in such terms as?" Our current
literature is like our current life, made up of shams, hypocrisies,
counterfeits, deceits, and lies."
Independently, or rather in addition to such considerations as
explanatory of the great obtuseness or disregard of the sage towards
the most sublime efforts of genius, it must be recollected that
there was a radical, probably a congenital defect or inappetency
THOMAS CARLYLE VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY. 16 L
for music, painting, art, and architecture, to such an extent in
reference to the latter, that, when gazing on the glories of York
Cathedral, he bluntly confessed his wonder that men could collect
and heap-up such piles of stones. But did he even receive impres-
sions of beautv or sublimity from external nature ? We can
recollect one glance almost of inspiration when gazing down
the beautiful valley of Kith from his hermitage in the wilds,
where he had buried himself in order to compose a crooked
travesty of his youth and early manhood, and the world in
general, under the title of " Sartor Kesartus "; but, in general,
the light which shines in upon his consciousness, or blazes out
from his imagination, is lurid, while his landscapes are volcanic,
sulphureous, phlegothonic, the reflections of the pain and irri-
tation created by dyspepsia and stomachic disease. A rainbow
rarely spanned his murky cloudland ; and. yet the writhing
hypochondriac was conscious that his one and only function in
life required for its happy pursuit health and robustness. He
appeared to be charmed with the pleasing aspect and arrange-
ment of his drawing-room, created by the delicate taste or
sense of comfort of his wife; but the suspicion is allowable
that he valued this evening resort as much for its comfort, his
squatting on the rug, his tobacco, and the presence of a good
listener, as for its elegance and beauty. From his infancy a
soil appears to have been preparing for the sowing of that seed
which was calculated to darken and disfigure even a genial
and generous disposition. If his schoolboy days at Annan were
bald and barren, except in friendship, his home was equally
unattractive; during his early years it was poverty almost
penury-stricken, and destitute of almost ail the feelings and
pleasant amenities which constitute the happiness and much
of the primary education of childhood. There was, indeed, one
redeeming and beautifying presence whioh must have irradiated
his budding thoughts and emotions in the love and companion-
ship of his mother, which he seems to have treasured with
religious tenacity throughout life. She confessed that she did
not understand " Tarn's tricks," but she evidently understood,
supported, and strengthened the child, and identified herself
with his inner soul; for even on the verge of life he not only
often repeated her name, but bemoaned the absence of such a
relationship. Yet this loved and trusted guide uttered words
tantamount to a confession that her charge was somewhat
refractory, violent, and unmanageable.
His father was cold and stern; and although he did not
either understand or properly estimate his boy, he desired to
cast him in his own iron mould. He is said to have seemed as
if he were walled in : he had not the free means to unbosom
1G2 THOMAS CARLYLE VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY.
himself. It seemed as if an atmosphere of fear repelled ns
from him. Yet awe, or reverence, or fear, so mystified and
misled the son, to whom his ambition prescribed nothing
higher than husbandry or orthodoxy, that, as if under the
influence of superstition, he magnified his father's attitude and
qualities into a Titanic aspect, and regarded him as equal, if
not superior, to that grandest of Scotland's sons, Robert
Burns. This comparison, it is charitably supposed, was made
before Carlyle had read, or read with discrimination, the works
of the ploughman poet. This guardian attempted to bend the
youthful will to his own settled purpose, but then, as subse-
quently, signally failed. Such divergences, perhaps, at first
amounted to little more than the opposing tastes and tendencies
elicited in a domestic controversy carried on by friendly
antagonists around the cottage fireside on a winter's evening,
recalling the family circle in the "Cotter's Saturday Night;"
but they deepened and widened as life rolled on, and as its
issues became graver and grander. The patriarch was inevitably
disappointed that he could not inspire his son with the
reverence or the holy zeal of becoming a pastor in the dissenting
sect to which he belonged, or a revised covenanter, and, it
might be, the shepherd of the flock, to mingle with which he
weekly marshalled his numerous progeny in the bare and
humble chapel where they worshipped, and where a chronic
dispute was sustained as to whether blinds should be provided
for the windows, having, as it was solemnly argued, the effect
of shutting out light from the temple of Deity. But this dis-
appointment engendered no niggard spirit in the parent, for,
although never possessing more than ?100 in his life, his
scanty means enabled the aspiring genius to matriculate in the
University of Edinburgh, although it is surmised the expenses of
his curriculum must have been partly contributed to from private
tuition. As a student he was, doubtless, industrious and hard-
working, and the anecdote has been preserved that in the library
he was regarded as an insatiable glutton in reading, although un-
fortunately the precise nature of the diet selected has not been
ascertained, but it may be confidently asserted that his appetite
was omnivorous. It is illustrative of the encroachment of the
spirit of egoism, solitariness, and of subjective life, that during
this and a subsequent period of residence in Edinburgh, com-
paratively little is known of his pursuits or companions. This
period was marked, not merely by unremitting mental toil, but
by a crisis whichi it is almost certain, exercised a powerful and
detrimental effect upon his constitution and character. He had
been destined, perhaps from his cradle, but certainly from the
domestic deliberatings and disputations of his family, to be a
THOMAS CARLYLE VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY. 163
minister. " But now that I had gained man's estate, I was not
sure that I believed the doctrines of my father's kirk ; and it
was needful I should now settle it. And so I entered into my
chamber and closed the door, and around me there came a
trooping throng of phantasms dire from the abysmal depths of
nethermost perdition. Doubt, Fear, Unbelief, Mockery, and
Scorn were there, and I arose and wrestled with them in travail
and agony of spirit. Whether I ate I know not; whether I
slept I know not; I only know that when I came forth again it
was w ith the direful persuasion that I was the miserable owner
of a diabolical arrangement.called a stomach ; and I have never
been free from that knowledge from that hour to this, and I
suppose that I never shall be until I am laid in my grave."
Other annotators have darkened this already gloomy picture, and
have written that the most brilliant years of youth and early
manhood were overshadowed to him by doubt as to his own voca-
tion in life, by repugnance to the pursuits that lay before him,
by dyspepsia which never left him, by despondency, by hypo-
chondriasis. But we deeply regret to confess that this melan-
choly chapter in Carlyle's history is not exhausted. He not only
repudiated all connection with his father's creed and church,
but Irving drew from him, in the gentlest manner, the confession
that he did not think as his companion did of the Christian
religion, and that it was vain to expect he ever could or would.
Do we blame the still youthful philosopher for his scepti-
cism? Should we blame the colour-blind for his inability to
perceive the most luminous and beautiful rays in the spectrum ?
Both are mentally incapable of seeing and embracing truths
which are patent, even forced upon the attention of much
inferior minds. There are individuals originally so constituted
that they fail to conceive a Creator or Saviour; there are
others in whom such conceptions have been blotted out by
disease; and still others who, labouring under mental perver-
sity, feel antagonism for Divine truth, defy the Author of their
sufferings- deny the existence of such a Being, and argue against
the possibility of such an arrangement in relation to them-
selves. This intellectual rebellion is often encountered in
forms of religious and misanthropical melancholia. Carlyle
has written of his own conversion soberly, and in what appears to
us appropriate language?certainly in no satirical spirit?a con-
dition probably altogether evanescent. He addressed a long
communication to Dr. Chalmers, which is vague and vapoury,
realising his own or Goethe's sneer as to thinking about thinking,
and which certainly leaves the subject nearly as he found it,
and his own convictions hazy and undeclared. His orbit seems
to have been far outside and beyond such discussions, and to have
164 THOMAS CARLYLE VIEWED" PSYCHOLOGICALLY.
guided him or constrained him into altitudes or abysses where
the human intellectual eye could not follow, nor the human mind
calculate. This gloom and confusion was doubtless the light in
which he lived, the colouring imparted by bis malady to the
most insignificant as well as to the most sacred of the impres-
sions made on his consciousness; but it is greatly to be lamented
that this sciolist?and I hope he was nothing more?had not
recorded a clear, coherent, and precise declaration of his diffi-
culties and uncertainties of what he aocepted and what he re-
jected, of the dogmata upon which other men rest, and has left
his admirers as well as his detractors to guess at his creed, or his
want of it, and to attribute his extravagances and evasions to
the ramblings and ravings of alienation.
It is marvellous that, when rejecting the faith of his father,
or recoiling from the forms of worship in which he participated,
he did not seek for truth under some other new aspect in
one of the many creeds or rituals which were accessible around.
It is equally marvellous that he should have remained stolid
and uninspired by the persuasiveness of external nature, by the
pensive sympathy and unobtrusive piety and example of his
mother, that he should not have sought, or sought ineffectually,
for enlightenment or consolation from the philosophical authori-
ties with which he must have been familiar; but, failing to draw
knowledge from such sources, his mind seems to have remained
a blank, and unimpressionable by religious truth. He often
expatiates upon profundities, immensities, eternities, employing
the magniloquent sesquipedalian words, not in order to mystiiy
his readers, but in the hope, perhaps, of deceiving himself.
Some of his writings betray, in epithets and phrases, the indeli-
bility of early religious forms of expression; but these are the
relics of a former world; they are merely remembered sounds,
and form no part nor portion of the inner reflecting man ; in^
deed, that he turned from the influence of such holy memories
may be suspected from the narrative that, on arriving towards
evening at the door of his father's cottage, and finding from the
chant of " Plaintive Martyrs," or some equally familiar sound
from within, that the family was engaged in worship, he did not
join them, nor kneel in humble reverence, at least, of early
teaching by those who ^n all sincerity and simplicity, if not in
wisdom, had attempted to train his childish mind to the con-
ception that there was a Being outside mind, to the conception
that there was a Being outside himself, above himself, more
powerful than himself, and, so far as his thoughts or even
imagination could reach, omnipotent.
But we are disposed to find, in the terrible religious cataclysm
incorporated with his autobiography, other results than mere
THOMAS CARLYLE VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY. 165
infidelity, or, to use a softer term, intellectual doubt and dark-
ness. We imagine that his whole nature underwent a change,
not assuredly sudden nor rapid, but that long-continued affec-
tions of the digestive and nutritive organs, although compatible
with life and energy and lucidity in certain departments of
cogitation, must have sapped and altered the foundations of his
original intellectual constitution, and have eventuated in pheno-
mena which may not have been connected in the opinions of those
most interested in his career, but are in ours, with the working
and fruits of his studies, his supposed discoveries in ethics, and
must have exercised an enormous power over every process of
ratiocination or reverie in which he engaged, and in imparting
not merely acrimony and jealousy to the disposition with which
he viewed all surrounding objects, and even in causing a
deviation from that course of investigation in which a healthier
judgment or imagination would have prosecuted research.
Traces of acidity and ungeniality may be noticed, even on
his own confession, in early years; but it was not until
Valetudinarianism had penetrated deeply into his system that
the revolution occurred which altered the current and course
of his thoughts, and even modes of expression, in which he
became the Ishmael of literature, and, Titan like, hurled his
rocks and club against the serene sky of consecrated usages,
beliefs, and hopes, proclaiming everything, save his own rather
obscure interpretation, to be sham and shoddy. While resi-
dent in Edinburgh, his first literary efforts appear to have been
contributions to the Encyclopccdia, a translation from a French
mathematical work, and a poem of creditable merit. His next
advance was in the publication of three articles, entitled
"Burns," "Thomson," and "Characteristics," so clear, clever,
and consequential, as to render it difficult to suppose that they
were the production of the hand who wrote " Sartor Resartus."
With exceptions of " Wilhelm Meister " and his " History of the
French Revolution," all his subsequent works are characterised
by the features which we shall subsequently investigate. The
former book was enthusiastically received, perhaps because it
discovered to English readers new modes of thinking, and an
introduction to new thinkers. The latter work has been stig-
matised as a rhapsody, which, however, contains many passages
of brilliancy and force, scenes in which the figures are artisti-
cally grouped, as well as boldly drawn; but it rarely conde-
scends to plain narrative or unimpassioned estimate of character ;
it is unlike history; and, lastly, had it not been preceded
by narratives descriptive of the actual places, personages,
and transactions of the period, it could not have been com-
prehended at all. In the northern metropolis he was the friend
166 THOMAS CAllLYLE VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY.
and protege of Jeffrey and Brewster. They fed both his love
of distinction and his larder; but it is inexplicable that he
should have formed so few intimacies or connections with th<?
crowds of poets, philosophers, wits, and wise men, who at that
epoch secured and justified the appellation to .Auld Eeekie of
the Modern Athens. It may be conjectured that politics or
personal peculiarities might have shut out Carlyle from Black-
wood's coterie or the Parliament House ; but his isolation in the
very centre of authorship is difficult to understand. From
this stage in his progress a very discernible change in his com-
position in many of his convictions, and, in all probability,
in his relations to society, may be noticed, nearly contempo-
raneous, it should be marked, with the aggravation of his
stomachic malady and nervous irritability, and his retirement
to the highlands of Dumfriesshire, where he engaged in the
elaboration of that uncouth metaphysical romance, " Sartor
Resartus," which probably he approached with the same sense
of loathing and compunction that attended his embodiment of
his more pretentious historical works. Here likewise" com-
menced the evolution of what has been epigrammatically
styled the " Mirage Philosophy," as implied to the melancholy
impressions of dust, rags, shabbiness, mildew, and cobwebs
inhabited by monstrous spiders, which constantly crossed
Carlyle's imagination, and which must, even to a cheerful
nature, which he was not, inevitably have caught a sympatheti-
cally mournful, if not dreary hue. It is confessed that this
and multiform ideas of the same kind were derived from the
transcendental philosophy of Fichte, which is?
" That all things which we see or work with in this earth,
especially we ourselves and all persons, are as a kind of vesture
or sensuous appearance ; that under all these lies, as the essence
of them, what he calls the Divine Idea of the World ; that is,
the reality which lies at the bottom of all appearance. To the
mass of men, no such Divine Idea is recognisable in the world;
they live merely," says Fichte, " among the superficialities,
practicalities, and shows of the world, not dreaming that there
is anything divine under them."
Such sentences as this, where the sense is evasive, or where
the meaning escapes our penetration, justify the impression
that when we find, as we sometimes do, that the style continues
while the thinking is left out, the marvel becomes a prodigy or
an incoherence.
The author has often written so metaphorically and ellipti-
cally that the fault may be ours in failing to distinguish
between what is a mere flourish of rhetoric, a truth, or, to use
Mr. Froude's word, a delirium.
THOMAS CAELYLE VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY. 167
Some time since, and in this Series (Vol. IV., No. 2), we
preferred, to a description of the mental delirium or logo-
diarrhcBa to which the self-suicidal Coleridge had reduced
himself by his psychical habitudes or physical habits, to quote a
portion of his writings, and this course was adopted on the sug-
gestion or rather by the aid of Carlyle. There was in the
extract no positive incoherence and but slight inconsequentially,
but the power of constructing lucid and logical statements
seemed to have escaped the writer, who was carried on blindly
and blunderingly through mazes of words which it was im-
possible to unravel and to a point which vanished into thin
air. This analysis is in a measure applicable to the following
extracts from Carlyle, and which have been cited by his critic as
an illustration of imaginative power and inconsistency :?
" Truly it may be said the Divinity has withdrawn from the
earth, or veils Himself in that wide-wasting whirlwind of a de-
parting era, wherein the fewest can discern His goings. Not
Godhead, but an iron ignoble circle of necessity embraces all
things: binds the youth of these times into a sluggard, or else
exasperates him into a rebel. Heroic action is paralysed, for
what worth now remains unquestionable with him ? "
And again :
" His melodious stanza, which he cannot bear to see halt
in any syllable, is a rough fact reduced to order ; fact made to
stand firm on its feet, with the world-rocks under it, and looking
free towards all the winds and all the stars. He goes about
suppressing platitudes, ripping off futilities, turning deceptions
inside out. The realm of Disorder, which is unveracity, Un-
reality, what we call Chaos, has no fiercer enemy. Honest soul!
and he seemed to himself such a stupid fellow often: no tongue
learning at all; little capable to give a reason for the faith
that was in him. He cannot argue in articulate logic, only in
inarticulate bellowings or worse. He must do a thing, leave it
undemonstrated; once done, it will itself tell what kind of thing
it is by-and-by. Men of genius have a hard time, I perceive,
whether born on the throne or off it, and must expect contra-
dictions next to unendurable, the plurality of blockheads being
so extreme."
These revelations may be prophetic, or mystic, or thauma-
turgic, but to the perception of the vulgar and uninspired
votary they sound very like unconsequential rodomontade.
These paragraphs are not paraded as proof of the failing
faculties of the sage, for we believe they were written in his
meridian, but testify strongly to that involution or perplexity
of illustration which was, or might be, a forerunner of the
feeble, parenthetical, often absurd phraseology, traceable in the
168 THOMAS CARLYLE VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY.
" Reminiscences" of his wife. It would have been as easy to have
washed an Ethiopian white as to convert Carlyle to the familiar
and classical language of English literature. An analyst of
his mode of composition has epigrammatised it as the eccentric
exponent of eccentricity. He treats as unintelligible what lie
did not give himself the trouble to understand, and thinks he
has disposed of the population principle by fostering a senseless
prejudice against it, and of the Utilitarian philosophy by call-
ing Bentham a bore of the first magnitude. He did not write
English, but badly-translated German?a peculiarity engrafted
perhaps on his mind after maturity had been reached, but un-
doubtedly intensified by that torture, those agonised convulsive
throes, to which he subjected his reasoning or his emotions
during the process of composition. His constant recourse to
pet epithets, nicknames, or cant phrases, such as " the little
Kaiser in the red stockings," greatly deform and obscure his
writings, and give rise to the suspicion either that he is laugh-
ing in his sleeve at his readers, as when describing his most
admired production as play-acting or prophecy; or that this
habit may have been assimilated to that iteration of words or
syllables so often observed in the soliloquies of those who are
partially deranged. This act may have been voluntary, but it
certainly had a morbific origin. But, although reluctant to
detect in his style in declining years indications of growing-
imbecility, except in the instance alluded to, there are other
indications, and these of a more painful character, of perverted
feeling and unfair judgments connected with his decline. An
able apologist, even champion of Carlyle, who has entered the
lists in order to denounce Mr. Froude for having published the
"Reminiscences" at all, or at all events without deletion, expur-
gation, and rearrangement, reveals that even in her estimation
he had passed into second childhood, that his utterances were
those of a mind diseased. His works and composition betray
mental decay and unvarying peevishness, and, viewed as a
whole, his deportment latterly was that of a diseased state of
mind. There is another count added to this sad indictment
when the enfeebled octogenarian is accused of ingratitude, of
profaning and abusing the hospitality and friendship of those
who conferred upon him benefits as well as protection or patron-
age. But while it must be confessed that a loss of the higher
and purer feelings often accompanies the decline of life, and
while we would prefer to any other supposition the theory of
even a contemner of Carlyle, that he was not himself when he
felt and acted thus, it would be unjustifiable to omit this for-
getfulness of obligations and kindness from the symptoms of
actual disease.
THOMAS CARLYLE VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY. 169
Rut while octogenai'ianism may be admitted as a factor of
the painful manifestations to which I am hastening, it cannot
be concealed that many of these denunciations occurred when
he was in the vigour of manhood, or in such vigour as his con-
stitution ever possessed, and that no excuse nor explanation of
their occurrence can be discovered except in his rudeness,
churlishness, ill-temper, or in the writhing of local pain or the
bitter feelings of retaliation on all around indiscriminately,
which sometimes ascend from the ccenesthesis to the subversion
or perversion of the sentiments and higher emotions. It has
been questioned whether he was not suffering under some chronic
malady, moral or physical, which might have swayed him in his
own despite; and it might be surmised that the discomforts of
his social position engendered a general feeling of discontent,
self-absorption, and retreat from the world as it was; and that
throughout his career there was much to contract his range of
thought, and to concentrate his thoughts and feelings upon
himself and his doings and sayings so as to render his faculties
at last altogether incapable of embracing a wide scope of nature
and of man, and even to impart a vague hostility against every-
thing and every person around. The virulent caricatures of
those who occupied the same level as he on the world's platform,
or had been elevated to a more distinguished place, or of his
own familiar friends, consisted in detractions and defamations of
various kinds and degrees, which must be grouped together in
order to present some conception of the general unhealthy tone
of mind which prevailed. There is not, in fact, in all the wild
waste or chaos of the world which he has painted, one spot upon
which the dove, or rather more correctly the raven, could have
rested a foot. He attacks Jeffrey with a degree of malignity
not commonly addressed even to benefactors; he sets down
Lamartine as a grimacing caricaturist; Thiers as superior to
Lamartine, but unfaithful and unscrupulous as a writer; and
Guizot as cadaverous, undecided, and as perhaps believing in
the resurrection of Louis Philippe; whilst he huddles together
De Quincey, Procter, Adam Smith, Malthus, Bentham, Howard,
and Clarkson as having no human stuff in them because they
did not make their way by force. Of the gentle, genial,
exqiiisitely witty, though unfortunate, Charles Lamb, he dares
to assert that he was a poor thing with an insuperable proclivity
to giD, with a talk contemptuously small, a ghastly make-belief
of wit, more like diluted insanity, usually ill-mannered. Of
Wordsworth he says, with what may be accepted as forbearance,
that he wrote poetry in a sort of limpid way; and as a hard-
tempered, rather dull, unproductive, and almost wearisome kind
of man. He depicts the gallant and romantic Shelley as a
170 THOMAS CARLYLE VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY.
ghastly object, colourless, pallid, without health or warmth or
vigour. The noble, whole-hearted Southey appears to have
secured his sympathies, or a ray from them, less by the multi-
plicity and grandeur of his gifts of genius than by some
accidental coincidence and compatibility in political or philo-
sophical discussion, but one, and that the most saintly,
member of his family was assailed. The patriotic Hampden
he did not like. The philanthropic Wilberforce, recognised by
world-wide fame as humane and heroic, he calumniates as the
famous nigger-philanthropist, drawing-room Christian, and bus} -
man and politician ; but yet the unfortunate obliquities of this
sufferer's moral perceptions were such that he could praise
Mirabeau, the worst product from the caldron of the French
Revolution ; he could dote on and dally with the mad Frederick
as well as the bad Frederick, and could almost beatify Cromwell.
Even the females of his circle of intimates do not escape from
misconstruction and misrepresentation. Even the kind and
courtly Mrs. Montagu is spoken of sarcastically; Jeffrey's
daughter is harshly treated; the wife of his dear friend Irving
is described as diseased and deformed?a calumny which has
provoked controversy, in which the epithets malevolence,
wanton misstatement, and cruelty are ventured upon with a
rash forgetfulness of the peculiar infirmities of the maligner.
It would be fatiguing to load these pages by swelling this
catalogue with more than the names of those who have been
perpetuated by sneers or faint praise in what may be styled the
Carlyle literature : Leigh Hunt, Bookseller Tait, Allan
Cunningham, Old Lady Holland, whom he describes as a kind
of hungry ornamented witch looking over him with carnivorous
views, the patriots Hampden, Elliot, and Pym, Sir W.
Moleswortb, Mazzini, Mrs. Taylor, Harriet Martineau.
There are certain marked periods in a life at which new
mental qualities or phases come into prominence. These are
puberty, the decline of vigour, and vivacity. It has been
observed that, when we attain the stage when manhood merges
into age, the watershed of mental existence, as it may be called,
certain incompatibilities, contrarieties, irritabilities, exercise a
power over the individual and all surroundings hitherto un-
noticed, even unsuspected. Might not this be the case with
Carlyle ? or might not?we utter it reverently?a similar con-
stitutional change have occurred in his companion?or, again,
it may have been that the hitherto gentle, discriminating,
dutiful, almost worshipping companion, who had idolised, who
had spoiled the sage with whom she had been associated; while,
offering her adulation or adoration on the shrine or in the measure
which he was accustomed to receive from his own family, showed
THOMAS CATtLYLE VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY. 171
less reciprocity than she had been accustomed to do in youth
and during the growth or maturity of the sturdy and summer
affections and passions, and thus estrangement may have sprung
up. One who loved her, and painted her in glowing and
generous colours, writes:?
" She for her part?let us not be misunderstood in saying so
?contemplated him, her great companion in life, with a certain
humorous curiosity, not untinged with affectionate contempt and
wonder that a creature so big should be at the same time so
little, such a giant and commanding genius with all the same
so many babyish weaknesses, for which she liked him all the
better.
" We never marry our first love, it has been speculated ; it
is highly possible that in every romantic conjugal tie the contact
is with an abstraction and not with the human member of the
union. It may have happened that, as time wore on, and as
mental infirmity increased, the gigantic baby may have found
in his wife less a companion than a critic, less a minister to his
wants and wishes than an observer of much that she loved or
pitied or palliated, but could not justify or admire. There is no
harder task than to watch over the daily wants, real and
imaginary, for a man of genius cursed with a bad digestion,
intolerant of the slightest noise (for to Carlyle the cocks and
hens in his neighbours' yard were demon fowls), irritated by
contradiction and of an atrabilious temperament. In this case
these sources of vexation would be greatly exaggerated by the
labour and annoyance which seems to have attended the act of
composition. On joining his patient admirer after a day of toil,
and possibly after disturbing and distracting the feeble, if not
dying, woman by incessant narratives of obscure battles, he
describes his way of working during his season of labour, and his
long wrestling, thirteen years and more, with the Friedrich
nightmare affair, and the disgust and loathing his efforts had
inspired, during which he seemed to have suspended, or in great
measure avoided, all except obligatory intercourse and corre
spondence.
The episode devoted to a memorial of his wife may be
regarded, according as it is accepted, as a maudlin, maunder-
ing, or morbid monody, replete with epithets of affection or
ill-judged fragmentary incoherences, or puerilities, such boyish
endearments occurring 133 times in 235 pages, rather than with
expressions of the maoly sorrow of a stricken heart. Or it may
be interpreted as an outpouring of compunction, as an offering
to the manes or memory of one whom he had failed sufficiently
to appreciate, with whom he had stood in relation of coldness
and estrangement rather than of genial affection. Or there may
172 THOMAS CARLYLE VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY.
be found in its pages glimpses of nature, a genuine regret for an
amiable and worshipping companion whom he had lost for a
support and succour, ever present to minister to his wants and
weakness, mingled with much that is painful, unseemly, and
extravagant. It must, however, be remembered that the Paper
was written when the shadows of evening were gathering around
a troubled and shattered life, and when his habitual malady may
have shaken the frame to its very centre. Years before the
final close of life, and when able to mingle with friends and
relatives, and when soothed and strengthened by the affection
and judicious influence flowing from these sources, he complained
to a medical man of great irritability and per vigilium, that
heritage and penalty of an active and ardent brain, and that
after the short sleep which had been secured by long exposure to
the open air, he felt as if a thousand devils were gnawing his
heart. We shall allow a lenient and laudatory intimate to
depict the sad lineaments of his declining days : " ' They will
not understand that it is death I want.' Then he told me of
the weakness that had come over him, the failing of age in all
his limbs and faculties, and quoted the psalm (in that version
which we Scots are born to):
Threescore and ten years do sum up
Our days and years, we see,
And if, by reason of more strength,
In some fourscore they be ;
Yet doth the strength of such old men
But grief and labour prove
Neither he nor I could remember the next two lines, which are
harsh enough, Heaven knows ; and then he burst forth suddenly
into one of those unsteady laughters. ' It is a mother I want,' he
said with mournful humour ; the pathetic incongruity amused
bis fancy, and yet it was so true. The time had come when
another should gird him and carry him often where he would
not. Had it been but possible to have a mother to care for
that final childhood !"
" The first sight I had of him, after his wife's death, was in her
drawing-room, where, while she lived, he was little visible except
in the evening to chance visitors He was seated,
not in any familiar corner, but with the forlornest unaccustomed-
ness in the middle of it, as if to show by harsh symbols how
entirely all customs were broken for him. He began to talk of
her, as if the one subject of which his mind was full, with a
sort of subdued, half-bitter brag of satisfaction in the fact that
her choice of him, so troublesome a partner, so poor, had been
justified before all men, and herself proved right after all in her
THOMAS CAELYLE VIEWED PSYCHOLOGICALLY. 173
opinion of him which she had upheld against all objections ;
from which, curiously enough, his mind passed to the mythical,
as he calls it, to those early legends of childhood. . , . With
that pathetic broken laugh, and the gleam of restless, feverish
pain in his eyes, he began to tell of this childish incident; how
his wife had been carried to the ball in a clothes-basket, perhaps
the loveliest little fairy that was on the earth at the time. The
contrast of the old man's already tottering and feeble frame, his
weather-beaten and worn countenance, agitated by the restless
grief and the suggestion of this loveliest little fairy, was as
pathetic as can be conceived, especially with the laugh of
emotion that accompanied it His old wife was
still so fair to him, even across the straits of death?had returned
indeed into everlasting youth When there was
reference to the circumstances of her death, so tragical and
sudden, it was with bitter wrath, yet wondering awe, of such a
contemptible reason for so great an event."
We shall not further penetrate into the solemn and sacred
gloom which should surround the expiring energies of this great
man, but shall leave to Mr. Froude to withdraw the veil which
we, with a sense of relief, allow to fall.
The following works have been read and reread in the con-
struction of the foregoing analysis :
Reminiscences. By Thomas Carlyle. Edited by Anthony Froude, in 2 vols., 1881.
Thomas Carlyle: The Man and his Books. By Wm. Howie Wylie, 1881.
Thomas Carlyle: The Iconoclast of Modern Shame. By Rev. J. Wilson, M.A.
Albernyte, 1881.
Thomas Carlyle. An Essay. By General Sir E. B. Hamley, 1881.
The Athenceum, Nos. 2,785, 2,786, 2,790.
Macmillaiis Magazine, April 1881. (Mrs. Oliphant.)
Quarterly Review, July 1881.
Edinburgh Review, July 1881.
Contemporary Review, .Tune 1881. (Miss Wedge wool.)
Nineteenth Century, June 1881. (Taylor.)
? >, July 1881. (Froude), &c., See.
British Quarterly Review, July 1881. (Larkin.)
PART II. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES.
