Mania Errabunda
================

Akt. v.?
By W. A. P. BROWXE, LL.D., formerly Aledical Commusioaer in Lunacy, Scotland.
In antiquated synopses, or systems of nosological arrangement,
may be found tlie words which form a title to this communica-
tion. The specific name and the mental excitement which it
signified have almost or altogether disappeared. The same
observation applies to many other modifications of the neuroses,
but in many such instances the designation is the only vestige
which remains, like the obscure forms in an archaeological
museum, of what was formerly, in all probability, an important
element or factor in the social or individual economy. Although,
for example, lycanthropia and the dancing mania are now
rarely, if at all, to be encountered, I may record that, in what
is now a very protracted noviciate, a case of each of these
species has been committed to my care, which proved, after
sufficient experience, to resemble in all particulars the epidemics
of the Middle Ages. The disease of which we treat, presented,
as its most prominent and characteristic symptom, a propulsion
to move, more frequently to run or rush, forwards in a direct line.
This wild career was executed without any regard whatever to
roads, rivers, or bridges. The patient traversed morasses, stum-
bled over rocks, waded or swam rivers, and appeared but little
conscious of the wounds or injuries or inconveniences received in
this procedure. In many examples where information could be
extracted from the sufferer, he was not urged onward by any
appreciable motive. He did not desire to reach any particular
object, and was conscious of no other impulse than a desire for
change of place, for rapid motion, and that in a straight
line from his existing standpoint. The solitary instinct to
wander speedily forwards was the typical germ of the affec-
tion ; but it is not contended that, in the majority of individuals
affected, there were not other motives in operation; that while
one might confess to act like a machine in obedience to a blind
and unintelligible law, many others would assert that they were
escaping from an enemy, an avenger, a phantom, a fire, or some
unknown or inexplicable danger; and others that they were at-
tracted by a search for pleasure, or fame, or gold, or some coveted
object which could be reached and secured only by the means
which they adopted. While marked and distinct forms of this
malady are now extinct, a rapid motion, racing, or hurrying to
MANIA ERRABUNDA. 217
and fro in the wards or galleries of an asylum, or wherever the
sport of insane propensities may be confined, are still significant
of many aspects of lunacy. While many diseases have ceased
to exist, or have been greatly minimised in number by changes
in our manners and customs, even our agriculture, commerce,
or government, it may be fairly argued that the Mania Errabunda
has been arrested by the multiplication of asylums, and by the
seclusion of that class of patients who are likely to be infected
or influenced by the tendency 'described. It is certain that
many physical causes, in conjunction with moral perturbations,
must have contributed to produce the extraordinary manifesta-
tions of muscular and mental excitement in this affection. It
might have been predicated that of the latter the depressing
passions and sentiments would be the most powerful and pro-
minent ; and. accordingly, at a time when this species of mania
was placed under such scientific research as then existed, it
would appear that whatever enfeebled the vigour of the body,
or the emotional nature, established conditions which eventuated,
orwhichmight have eventuated,in this running amuck against all
external objects. In fact, it, has been suspected that the Malay
or, latterly, the Indian practice of rushing, being armed with a
cutting instrument, through and against all friends and foes
who might oppose their path of blood, and striking down every
living obstruction, may be little more than a modification in
savage tribes of those solitary cases which occurred among
people claiming to be civilised or partly civilised. This is all
the more feasible when it is known that the performers in
these tragedies were previously roused to the highest pitch of
excitement and recklessness either by drugs or hatred, or a
desire for distinction. However this may be, we find Arnold
enumerating among the prime factors of that " spasm " of the
large vessels, and even the heart itself, but especially, and con-
spicuously, of the capillary arteries on the surface of the body
in which Pathologically, Panphobia was believed to consist;
and effects of " spasm," reaction, relaxation ; all of which, in
some degree or other, in proportion to the violence and duration
of the passion of fear, are instrumental in the production of
debility*?debility inducing that alarm, consternation, terror,
which were held to be the first mental stage of this curious
malady. More recently Ave find in Feuchterslebenf that the
disease now under consideration has been distinguished as
(1) Melancholia, Errabunda; (2) Dull, Attonita. In restless
melancholv the patient is contented nowhere?he flies he
* Arnold on Insanity, J78G.
f 1847.
218 MANIA ERIIABUNDA.
knows not why or whither. It has even been suspected that
the constant desire for change of locality is itself morbid;
and, when affecting whole tribes or nations, where neither
conquest, nor pasture, nor any kind of profit tempt to migra-
tion, may be accepted as an epidemic psychopathy. In retreats
and military routs, such as that from Moscow, where the desire
to escape from impending danger, or to seek refuge of some
sort, actuates thousands or hundreds of thousands, to the utter
disregard of honour, order, and discipline, and even of safety
itself, there can be no doubt that the mind of each individual
of the vast mass of refugees is under the dominion of the
mono-ideaism of terror, and that neither external impressions,
nor the considerations which would affect conduct at other
times and under other circumstances, are received or consciously
appreciated.
In corroboration of that marvellous discrimination and
insight into the diseased as well as healthy elements of
human character, which were embraced in the penetration of
Walter Scott, and which was signalised in our last number,
we may here introduce the fact that in the " Fair Maid of
Perth " there has been depicted a striking illustration of Mania
Errabunda, in the case of Connacher, who, paralysed by his
native cowardice and by the slaughter of his clansmen in the
appointed combat, flies from the scene, crosses, as was neces-
sary, valleys and mountains and every impediment, until he
loses the consciousness of his all-engrossing panic, and, if we
remember, life itself in his vain flight.
It will, we think, be instructive to record that such aspects
of alienation are not confined to the pages of a romance, but
may be still, although rarely, met with. We were lately con-
sulted by a colonist, whose friends related the following chapter
from his recent history. He is a man of education, of strictly
moral, even abstemious, bearing, is active and correct in his
business habits, is married and has a family. In certain trans-
actions he was uncourteously and unfairly treated by one who
was his debtor, at least for good offices, and whose behaviour
inflicted a severe wound alike upon his feelings of friendship and
conscientious sentiments. This wound seems to have gangrened
or to have sunk deeply into his very heart, as he not merely
suspended all his relations and intercourse with the offender,
but betrayed indifference towards his former occupations;
became moody, depressed, even dejected, although his affections
underwent no change, and his intelligence, when suitably roused
and interested, was as acute and practical as before. He
recoiled from the persons, the engagements, and surroundings
connected with the insult or grievance, which had inflicted so
much pain and disturbance on his mental system; and this
MAMA ERRABUNDA. 219
estrangement amounted almost to timidity and apprehension,
although it was not panphobic, as his sensitiveness and irresolu-
tion were limited in range, as has been pointed out. The
observation of those around did not detect any marked depar-
ture from bodily health; in fact, the alteration noticed was in
his habits of thought and action, and not in discernible loss of
strength or health. One peculiarity attracted attention, and
this consisted in his tendency to somnolency, when not roused
or irritated by the recollection of the affront, which haunted
and harassed him, or when not checked or controlled by the
circumstances in which he was placed. Without any announce-
ment or communication with his family or dependents, and
without any known object, he left home, but was subsequently
discovered at the house of a friend, at a great distance, by
whom he had been encountered, wandering, or rather hurrying
forward, without any settled purpose, and with no intention, so
far as could be ascertained, of proceeding to the residence where
he found shelter and a home. This escapade was followed by a
profound and prolonged sleep, which might have been attributed
to fatigue and exposure, had not its duration indicated its morbid
character. On being joined by his family he vouchsafed no expla-
nation of his extraordinary conduct, nor did he appear to regard
the act committed as at all inconsistent with his own arrange-
ments and interests, or with those of others. On being questioned
and urged to confess his motive, and the object which he desired
to accomplish, he failed to do either; and it became obvious to
himself and to his friends that the period between his leaving
his own house and his reception in that of his acquaintance was
a blank; that his departure, direction, and subsequent course
had no meaning, and had left no explicable impression on his
own mind. Even now, when conscious that his actions must
have been dictated by disease, he was utterly incapable of
assigning any theory, conjecture, or speculation as to the ideas
or incentives which hurried him on in his wild and irrational
course. When recovered from the fatigues of this journey, he
displayed the same change in his original dispositions, the same
tendency to slumber at inopportune times, and it was noticed
that he often sat staring at a given point, or on the leaves of a
book or newspaper, while it could be demonstrated that he
really saw neither the one nor the other. Treated somewhat as
an invalid, and while, I think, under the care of his medical
attendant, he disappeared from tlie apartment where he had
been resting on a bed. He was clothed, but wore no hat, neck-
cloth, &c., made his exit through a window on the ground floor,
and was not seen or heard of during the day. Upon this occa-
sion he returned spontaneously, having recovered some obscure
220 MANIA ERIIAEUNDA.
degree of consciousness on reaching' a spot which he recognised,
about twelve miles from his home, and which must have been
reached by traversing copse, scrub, road, rough and unreclaimed
land, and every kind of surface which a new colony can present.
His awakening to the actual circumstances of his case was
produced, according to his own conception, by the voice of a
daughter, then at a great distance, requesting him to come
home. It is likewise necessary to state that lie supposed him-
self influenced by a desire to visit a sister, which was regarded
as of morbid origin. At this stage he was recommended to
make a voyage to his native country, in the expectation that so
great a revolution in the circumstances, scenes, and associates
of his life, as would be necessitated by such a course, might
expedite the expulsion of his dominant tendencies, and the
introduction of mental impressions under the control of his will.
On his arrival in Europe he was seen by me, when there
remained no discernible physical disturbance except occasional
muscular tremor, chiefly confined to the upper extremities, and
having no apparent connection with existing feelings or fancies.
He retained, however, the same shyness, sensitiveness, and
intolerance of crowds, companies, or even of strangers. He dis-
liked and dreaded recollections and allusions connected with the
land of his adoption, with his former employment, with the event
which had given so powerful a shock to his nervous system, and it
was observed that he avoided opening letters, even of commercial
importance, which reached him from his former abode. He
was suspected of still gazing steadily and continuously without
seeing, and was more curt and uncourteous in his manners than
previous to his illness. When consulted, the writer of these
lines was too much of an invalid to do justice to the case, and
the patient was recommended to place himself in the hands of
an eminent physician distinguished for his knowledge of mental
diseases, who emitted the following opinion, which may be read
with interest, as a pathological diagnosis, when compared with
the statement of the rational symptoms previously given :?
" I recognise in Mr. , who called on me this morning,
the early symptoms of cerebral atrophy?a disease obscure in
its origin and insidious in its progress. The curious seiziires of
impaired consciousness from which he has suffered, the dimi-
nished power of attention, the depression of spirits, the somno-
lency amounting on one occasion even to coma, the general
fibrillar tremor of the muscles, the intra-cranial sensations and
perspirations of the head and face, the sluggishness of the pupils,
or smallness of the irides, the diminished sense of equilibrium,
the enfeeblement of the circulatory and digestive organs?con-
stitute a group of symptoms, inexplicable only in its theory
MANIA ERRABUNDA. 221
that the highest centres are involved in changes, which, con-
sidering Mr. 's age and antecedents, are probably of an
atrophic character. But no irremediable damage has been done
as yet. If Mr. goes back to business and subjects himself
to work or worry, he will break down speedily and hopelessly;
signs of organic changes in the brain of a gross or grave
nature will soon show themselves, and his life will not be worth
five or six years' purchase. But if, on the other hand, he is
warned in time, imposes no further strain on an organ that is
on the verge of degeneration, but nourishes it carefully and
exercises it moderately, then wasting will cease, compensation
take place, and he may reasonably look forward to a long life,
and to a fair capacity for mental work. Reparative processes
are indeed now in progress, for it seems certain that he has
gained ground since leaving his business and taking rest.
" My advice, then, to Mr. is, do not think of returning
to your adopted country or work at present. Take at least
twelve months of complete repose of body and mind as is
attainable in this country. Don't let the intellect lie fallow,
but cultivate it in a new way. Take up some subject as alien
as possible to your old pursuits?history, or botany, or entomo-
logy ; be constantly in the open air, avoid excitement, live
plainly, take no stimulants, and follow out the course of medical
treatment indicated.
" As in all cases of cerebral atrophy, it is difficult to fasten
on the causes of Mr. 's illness. Probably constitutional
tendencies have had something to do with it (a brother of his
died of paralysis), and probably climatic conditions and busi-
ness anxieties have had a hand in it. The important point to
note is that the disease is still in its critical stage, and may be
arrested.
" I should recommend Mr. to take for some time I.
nitro-muriatic acid; IT. syrup hypophosphites; III. coca wine."
It is an agreeable close to this narrative to announce that,
after taking the remedies and following the recommendations
prescribed, the patient has been completely restored to mental
and bodily health; and that, with the exception of a slight
abruptness of manner, he presents the same characteristics as
previous to his indisposition *
PART IT. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES.
