The Mental Development of the Infant Of To-Day
================================================

62 Akt. v.?

If it be true that the mental phenomena of the infant have
been sometimes misunderstood and misinterpreted, and that
psychology has not always received the full benefit of the correction which a faithful observation of them would have
furnished, might it not conduce to the interests of that science
to put on record another attempt to carefully study the mental
development of an infant from its birth to the age of two
years ?

The aim in the education of this infant has been to watch
the direction of its mind, without coercing it; to strengthen
the brain by systematic gymnastic exercises, begun at the age
of four months; and in every way to attempt to act indirectly
upon the brain through the muscles, thus keeping up the true
equilibrium of the nervous system. The facts which have been
lately so powerfully brought forward by Dr Crichton Browne,
to show that the growth of a large district of the brain is apparently dependent 011 muscular exercise, and that if that be
withheld at the growth period the development of the brain
will be stunted, and perhaps the whole series of ideas connected
with form, distance, resistance, weight, &c., rendered faulty or
incomplete, were by no means realised in this experimental
essay in the physical education of infancy ; the dominant idea
rather was, that during the whole period of dentition tendencies
existed, more or less, in all children, to either congestion or
irritation of the brain, and that such a plan of exercise might
tend to keep it in a healthy and vigorous state. Success
seemed to attend the effort; the infant cut its first teeth very
easily at eight months, and then weighed 21 lbs.; it was very
muscular, stood firmly at nine months, and walked freely soon
afterwards ; it was always fearless in taking exercise ; disdained
all help in learning to walk, and grew exceedingly self-reliant.
Its height when nearly two years old was 2 feet 10 inches ; ihe
expression of its countenance was bright and intelligent, but
infantine, and by no means precocious.
It may be interesting to notice, first, the intellectual and
moral development of this infant, and then consider some of
its instinctive acts. Fair average intellectual powers seemed
easily discernible in it, even during the first week of its life,
THE MENTAL DEVELOPMENT OF TIIE INFANT, ETC. 63
and were recognised by tlie strong and healthy development of
its animal instincts and good muscular mechanism, and by its
ability to kick vigorously, to lift its head slightly from the
pilloiv, to clench its hand and grasp anything firmly, and to
drink easily out of a spoon. Its earliest intuitive perceptions
seemed to be of colour, odour, form (at two months), distance, and
combination (at four months). Some knowledge of numbers,
classification, recognition of places, a good memory, and articulate speech, including the use of pronouns, conjunctions, and
tbe inflections of verbs were all observed at ten months, and
even earlier, whilst imagination did not appear to come into
play until eighteen months, and logical reasoning was not
attempted until the infant was nearly two years old.
Warm affection was the moral faculty the earliest exhibited (four months), kindness of heart, love of animals, and of
other children at five months. Sympathy, bold truthfulness, selfesteem, and a sense of justice at nine months. Self-denial was
noticed at tbe same time as imagination.
By the end of the second month the infant showed decided
determination of character, perseverance, and strong will; it
would firmly hold down a hand to prevent its wishes being
interfered with ; it then for the first time noticed with delight
the colour blue, together with birds and flowers, and liked to
smell a hyacinth ; it was pleased with a toy bird; would feel over
the outlines of small animals in pictures, but especially loved
to feel the forms in bronze of a horse and of a dog; a little later
on it noticed much the latter animals when it was carried out
of doors. At four months it cried passionately when missing
its nurse towards evening, after she had been absent a whole
day : it looked all around its nursery and began to cry again
each time it had failed to find the familiar face. It also
showed at this age an unmistakable need for toys by the many
combinations it devised with boxes and all small objects, that
came within its reach, balancing them, and placing them in
novel and strange positions. Taken to a toy shop it chose its
toys, showing a strong preference for a horse and for a dog. At five
months it began to talk, using constantly its limited vocabulary of
six words of its own accord to express a want or an intention.
" Ning " was then its word to ask for milk, and it used it still
at two years old ; it said " going " when intending to get down
on to the floor or crawl to any given place. When allowed to
get off the lap, a sofa, or a bed, it was balanced by a sash firmly
tied around its waist; and its ability to judge distance, especially height, and the way in which it cautiously put out its
hand and watched how far it was from the ground before
trying to get down was most curious; it seemed able to
64 THE MENTAL DEVELOPMENT OF
measure distance with something like infallible accuracy. At
nine months, when it had returned from a drive, it told how it
had seen " pretty things," meaning cattle. At ten months it
told about " pretty men," and in the evening found pictures of
hunting scenes with men in pink coats, and pointed them out as
the " pretty men ' it had seen; it called itself "little kitten " gave
distinctive names to five dolls, one of which was " Pretty Baby "
another " Peter Piper," and a third " Didn't," a word it often
used when making persevering efforts after repeated failures to
carry its point or climb somewhere.
It talked a great deal at this age, saying: ? Take me, mama
take little kitten, take me with you," ? Give me little lime
(lime flower water), mama mine lime," "Show me prettv
picture of pretty baby," "Do let me," "I'm going," "Show
me that," " Papa gave that to me," &c. Delaroche's picture
of " Moise expose sur le Nil," it called ? Pretty baby tumbling
out of bed." At this age, too, it used to resent the absence of
its nurse or any prolonged absence of either father or mother
and show it by treating them with perfect indifference when they
returned, and this display of wounded affection was repeated
many times. It would always boldly avow any mischief it
had done, and seemed incapable of deceit in any form. It was
always fond of china and glass, and cried if by accident it
broke auy. It would take everything needed for tea from a
nursery cupboard and place them on the table, remove many
little objects from an etagere and place them again on the
right shelves and in order; missed one from its ninepins in
a moment. It was never allowed to use the right hand only
so always threw two balls at once, and learnt to feed itself
equally well with either hand. It was dexterous with its hands
and seemed to easily understand keys, handles of doors' &c'
Self-denial was shown by its feeding animals with sugar which
it greatly longed to eat. When wanting to wake the sleeping
cat it would patiently sit beside it, and do it very gradually
for five minutes; when feeding a doll with milk would hold the
doll's dress so that it might not get wet at the neck; both
these were actions it had never seen or felt. It imagined
little dramas amongst its animals. It would say " I'm a pretty
bird," and then pick up threads, pretending to make a nest or
else say, " I'm a fly." '
It divided all birds and animals whose names it did not
know into two distinct classes : ? bockies," those with large
box-like bodies?an elephant for instance? and " mongrels." On
being shown a little chicken a day old, and asked to name it
the infant instantly examined its feet carefully (it had seen
young ducks) and promptly replied " It is a mongrel." It
THE INFANT *0P TO-DAY. 65
would not listen to verses sung about the sky and stars alone,
but said " The sun and the moon must come first." It would
miss in a moment any one of its ten animals, and say " Where
is my cow ? it is such a funny cow to get away like that." When
wanting to show that its throat was sore, and that it would
like embrocation rubbed in, it took an animal, rubbed its
throat, and said " Mama, do as I do to my barkie." It could
say dog, but called all dogs " barkies," and all cats " minnies."
It talked to a tortoiseshellcat, saying" Unkind mama, wouldn't
come down on the floor to me; I get down to my dear ' minnie'
and to my barkie."
It was able to give long continued attention to the same
thing. Driving on several occasions a two-year-old cob for
nearly a mile, it held the reins very firmly, and touched it
lightly of its own accord with the whip when it shyed. It
showed its recognition of weight and resistance by saying when
the kitten had grown rapidly, " Minnie is so strong now, like
a barkie, too strong for me."
Many acts which might truly be called instinctive were
traced in this infant. At ten months it drank water from the
hollow of its hand, and recognised the sufferings and approaching death of a blind kitten, crying piteously at the
sight of it, and then coveriug it over with a cloth. It
sickened for an attack of scarlet fever at sixteen months on
the same day that it had for the first time tasted beef-tea, and
ever afterwards refused gravy altogether, however disguised.
A wasp it insisted was "only a minnie fly," so that although warned that they would sting, it would remain quite
passive eating fruit whilst six or more settled upon its clothes,
and would even stroke them on the window pane, with the left
hand ready to guard its eyes from attack, saying " I don't mind
them; I can catch them for you." It did not appear to be ever
stung by one, but had suffered much from the bites of gnats,
and saw everyone around it nervous and afraid of wasps, and
beating them off.
It seems probable that most infants who have inherited brains
at all well developed have distinct thoughts associated with the
language that they hear long before they gain much power of
audible articulation ; that there are, in fact, four stages in the
growth of an infant's knowledge.
1 st. The infant takes up unconsciously into its mind what it
sees and hears, much of this remaining there ready for future use.
2nd. The infant awakens to the consciousness of the possession of these thoughts and facts ; if intelligent, but unable to
speak, it is yet well able, by looks and gesture-language, to
convey its knowledge to other young children.
PART I. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES. F
66 THE mental development of
3rd. The infant makes its earliest attempts at nerve
action in the auditory perceptive centres, followed by an imperfect muscular action not sufficiently well combined or not
complex enough to form articulate utterance. This muscular
action or vibration of muscular feeling may be often noticed as
just visible when no word is audible, if the infant be closely
watched whilst some little rhyme is repeated to it.
4th. The infant attempts audible articulation, sometimes
the sounds appear to be meaningless jabber to those around,
but they are really the expression of perfect thought to the
child, who gives an immediate motor outlet to the words when
it fancies it has attained perfection through repeated mental
trials and failures.
It is a rapturous moment in an infant's life when it first
finds the power to articulate in words what it has so long done
as a mental process alone?a pleasure which probably surpasses
that which a great orator can feel from his grandest effort.
The infant who at eighteen months merely looked at its
animals, and said the name of the missing one, showed a little
later how it had been enabled to mentally do this so quickly, by
rapidly repeating aloud the names in a given order when it
wished to see if they were all together. It was evident, too,
how its meaningless sounds, with words here and there rhyming,
which seemed like mimic reading, were really associated with
distinct thought, for at two years of age it began to repeat very
many nursery rhymes, most of which no one in the house knew.
It had never been with other children, and said that it had
learnt them from a former nurse, whom it had not seen since
the time when it was twenty-one months old ; thus it was perfecting its power of utterance for several weeks before it was
understood. It showed its pleasure at its first recognised
achievement by saying to a horse, " White Nose, you can run
very fast, but you can't say Jack and Jill."
It was very noticeable that this infant's articulator}' capacity
was never confined to mimicking, that is to say, to repeating
such words only as had just been spoken to it; ^nd from this
several- curious questions arise. For instance, would it usually
follow that, articulate speech being a highly complex muscular
act, any system of infant exercise, which should carefully and
equally develop every muscle, would hasten on the more perfect
performance of the mental and motor processes involved in the
acquirement of language ? Or has speech really now become a
" truly automatic act for human beings, so that, if children do
not speak at birth, it is in main due to the fact that their
nervous systems are still too immature ?" And if the more
highly-wrought nervous system and rapidly increasing comTHE INFANT OF TO-DAY. 67
plexity in the nervous mechanism of the infant of to-day should
go on increasing in the ratio that it has done for the last fifty
years, may we naturally look for articulate speech at birth as
the result ?
The early ability of this infant to express its wants might
also be explained by a painful fact in its mother's history, as she
distinctly remembers that when eighteen months old she was
burnt on the neck by a red hot cinder which flew out of the fire
between the bars of a nursery guard, and that she was unable
to speak sufficiently to explain what was hurting her: for it
seems probable that a young child's nervous impression is no
momentary phenomenon that appears and disappears, but rather
a fact which leaves behind it a lasting result, something added
to previous experience and modifying it; and that the newlyattuned type of nervous mechanism may be ever afterwards
transmitted by inheritance as the true ancestral type.
A curious example of this was believed to be traced in the
infant under observation. At eighteen months it was shown
some gaily-dressed ugly wooden dolls, with shapeless noses
and inane features, but such as delight the hearts of most
children. At the sight of them it set up a shriek of agonised
terror, and it was several days before its trembling- and horror
at the mere sight of the room where it had seen them could be
quite overcome, and it induced to enter it. It was remembered that from the time the infant was very young it had
manifested a fear and horror of its most cherished dolls the
moment that they were in any way damaged or mutilated,
which was in striking contrast to its fearlessness with animals.
Its mother supposed that this was an inherited peculiarity, as
she knew that she had in her own childhood always shrieked at
every doll that lost an eye or arm, and had at once cast them
aside i the added dread of ugly dolls she attributed to having
when a young child herself been much frightened by seeing in
a garden a huge ugly doll, which the servants said had been
thrown there by an idiot, a man of 30, who played with it.
On further reflecting on the whole curious question of the
origin of so strong and unusual an antipathy, a family story
was remembered of the infant's grandmother having been
punished for quarrelling with a brother about a new and pretty
wooden doll, by having it cut up into small pieces in their
presence ; the girl, in whom the maternal instinct was the
strongest passion of her nature, thus received a nervous shock
so cruel as to quite account for the transmission of the
antipathy to her child and grandchild.
A similar example of inherited antipathy was mentioned by
Dr Huggins, in "Nature," February 1878. He has, it appears,
F 2
68 THE mental development of
a dog named " Turk," the son of an English mastiff of some
celebrity. He soon observed in this dog a most remarkable
aversion to all butchers, the antipathy extending even to
butchers' shops. Dr Huggins made careful inquiries, and
found that a similar antipathy existed in both the father
and grandfather of " Turk " ; other sons of " Turk " by different mothers also inherited the peculiarity. The original
owner of Turk narrated some curious facts about one of the
latter dogs named Paris. He would hardly go into a street
where a butcher's shop was, and would run away after passing it.
When a cart with a butcher's man came into the place where
the dogs were kept, although they could not see him, they all
were ready to break their chains. A master butcher, who had
changed his clothes, called one evening on Paris's master to see the
dog. He had hardly entered the house before the dog (though
shut in) was so much excited that he had to be put into a shed,
and the butcher was forced to leave without seeing the dog. The
origin of this antipathy, too, might be found in some cruel
shock to the nervous system given by a butcher, in his shop, to
one of the remote ancestors of these dogs long years before ;
for, undoubtedly, hereditary instinct may be modified and
moulded inca very remarkable degree by exceptional individual
experience.
Other interesting questions might also arise with regard to
this infant in relation to the laws of heredity : one of its greatgreat-grandfathers combined considerable mathematical and
linguistic powers with unusual ability in portrait-painting. Is
there always a strong probability that any special gifts or
defects shall reappear once in the fifth generation ? A curious
instance of this law (if it be really one) was not long since
observed in Norwich. A blind boy the only one in a family
so afflicted, whose grandfather relates that his own grandmother
was born blind, and that she was told many years ago by a
doctor, then resident in that city, that there would certainly be
one blind child in the fifth generation.
What, then, is the practical outcome of this ? Surely we
may venture to assert that, whatever be the true solution of the
mysterious questions such facts as these suggest, they have a very
important bearing on the earliest education of children. It seems
likely that sufficient importance has not as yet been attached
to this, as the basis for all that shall follow after. In vain shall
we look for the solid healthy work which might have been
yielded by a brain well developed from infancy to the dwarfed
and stunted mind of a child whose earliest mental efforts
have been crushed and thwarted. Many an infant's life-long
character may be made or marred between the time of its
THE INFANT OF TO-DAY. 69
birth and its attaining the age of one year. The lessons of
renunciation, self-control, and kindness must be taught then, if
they are ever to be well learned, and imagination or fancy, so
dangerous to the future strength and stability of its mind, must
be kept in abeyance by the most careful adherence to realities
in its pictures, toys, &c. If a thoughtful parent, who knows
that any tendencies his child has inherited from ancestors on
either side may affect later in life its physical health, carefully
guards against the first symptoms of such possibilities, will not
the same prudence dictate at least equal attention to its moral
and intellectual bias ? The ancestral peculiarities may, so far
as known, be studied with great advantage. The special form
in which the taint of evil or weakness shall exhibit itself may thus
be early guarded against, and the first germs of good be wisely
and tenderly fostered and encouraged. So, too, may it be with
regard to its intellectual capabilities. How many mistakes fatal
to a child's after-usefulness might be prevented if the gifts and
talents it may have inherited were duly allowed for and developed, and no vain attempt made to force from an ungenial
and unsuitable soil flowers and fruits which it was never intended to yield.
Wyma.
