144  Psychological Retrospect
==============================

Nothing of importance has occurred during the past half-year
regarding the progress of Psychological Medicine, either in its
medical or legal relations. The long-talked-of Act of Parliament,
dealing with the care and management of lunatics, has been again
shelved to make way for matters of greater importance to the
nation. The Bill has been altered so many times that it is impossible to give our readers any correct notion of what we are to expect
as a result of the vast amount of evidence printed in the Report
of the Select Committee of the House of Commons, appointed
to inquire into the alleged grievances of lunatics. It may be
mentioned that one of the chief instigators in getting up the
inquiry, and one of the chief witnesses, has now departed this
life for a better and a happier sphere; but it appears an extraordinary thiQg to us that any credence could have been given to
his incoherent and irrational story of his quasi illegal confinement in several asylums. The Habitual Drunkards' Act is an
entire myth, and is a lamentable failure ; we want a compulsory
Act, not a voluntary one, to check an increase in what is again
at the head of the statistical causes of insanity. We have
not heard so much of late of lunacy agitations or meetings, and,
perhaps, the propagators of these have now seen the error of
their ways. No important lunacy trials have taken place since
our last issue, and, in fact, there is nothing that can be called
sensational in the lunacy world. With regard to the Census,
and the preparation of the census papers in asylums, we may
mention here that only the initials of the patients are sent to the
office. This concession was made in consequence of an application
that was made by the late Editor of this Journal, Dr Forbes
Winslow, in 1851, to the Registrar-Greneral. This will doubtless
relieve the minds of those who have relatives confined in Asylums
and Institutions for the Insane. We give in extenso an interesting account taken from the Globe of March 2, describing " A
Turkish Madhouse " :?
A Turkish Madhouse.?Constantinople, February 23.?
Over the blue waters of the Bosphorus we start in a caique,
shooting between countless steamers and sailing vessels; by
PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT. 145
heavy barges, full of gentle, scared-looking oxen and thousands
of caged and cackling hens; past slim despatch boats, riding
at anchor; and under the towering stern of grim ironclads,
up whose wall-like black sides leaps the green, transparent
wave. From the deck of one float the sounds of a military band
braying forth a wild Turkish march?on over the buoyant sea
which reflects the clouds, and the seagulls as they swing about
on the fresh breeze. For a change has come, and the snow of
last week has departed, and with it the dull, grey shroud of murky
vapour which weighed on all. As we row on and on, away
from Europe, and heading towards Asia, the music on the manof-war grows fainter and fainter; the clang and bellow of the
Oriental melody, which, with all its barbarous cruelty and
grandeur, ever preserves its pulsating rhythm, becomes soft and
peaceful in the distance, and now reminds one only of the fitful
cacenoes of a " fantasia." The bo's'n's whistle from a gunboat
comes over the sea, and this, with the screech of the gulls and
the " whirr " of a mallard, as he flies along with his neck out
and his feet just skimming the water, is all we can hear. For
the Kaikjy has ceased rowing, being engaged in rolling a
cigarette, and the troupe of teal, which flit by at lightning speed,
move as silently as the clouds overhead. These strange birds,
for ever hurrying weirdly and noiselessly along the Bosphorus,
are believed by the Turks to embody the souls of those who
have perished in its limpid depths. There is no rest for them?
they cease not to fly up and down, up and down the broad waterway
between the two Continents?they are like the restless souls of
purgatory, to whom peace is denied. The boatman blows a
contented puff of smoke from the depths of his chest, stuffs his
tobacco back into his girdle, spits in the water reflectively, and,
as a sort of afterthought, resumes his oars. The jellyfish float
by in thousands?they also look contented?and between us and
the distant islands in Marmora Sea sport the black porpoises,
evidently in the same enviable frame of mind. We are all
content. There is Leander's Tower on its islet, and more to
the right rises the obelisk in the English cemetery, where sleep
gallant officers, soldiers, and nurses, who died for their country's
glory in the bloody days of Inkermann and Sebastopol. We
are now close to shore; in a few minutes Scutari is reached.
Why attempt to vie with the many great word-painters who
have borrowed every powerful adjective, and employed every
graphic simile, to portray the view from the railings of the
English cemetery, with its touching associations and sad stillness ?
or the peaceful quiet of the great Mussulman burying-ground,
its dark cypress groves, its dark subdued light, its countless
white-turbaned tombstones ? Let me describe what I came to
PART I. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES. L
146 PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT.
see?the native madliouse. Twenty minutes' ride through the
horribly-paved streets of Scutari, lined with wooden houses and
shops?as inflammable as picturesque?up a steep hill, past the
military training school, and we drew rein in front of an iron
gate in a high wall. My companion was a charming Englishspeaking Turk?a nine-medal man, who had served her Majesty
Queen Victoria in the Crimea, China, and the Indian Mutiny.
Of him, more anon ; suffice it for the present, that, although a
man of considerable standing, he very much doubted of his
ability to get me?a stranger and a Christian?into the madhouse. " If I set about it in the usual way," he had said a few
days before, " there will be endless 4 permits' and ' passes'
required, and the affair will take a week. Let us just ride
straight up to the gates and see what ' backsheesh ' and an oily
tongue will do." On the way he purchased 50 packets of
tobacco and some cigarette paper. It was a sight to see the
" thawing " process through which the gate porter passed under
the warm eloquence of my companion; frigid refusal became
by turn violent protest and querulous argument, which soon
gave place to remonstrance, melting into deprecating shouldershrugging, and at last unwilling consent. " I shall be beaten
and discharged, after ten years' service, if I am caught,"
grumbled the custodian. " You shall neither be beaten nor
discharged," answered my friend. At last the gate was unchained and we entered. We stood under a large dome, which
had evidently been a mosque, but now served as central hall,
from which opened out passages leading to colonnaded courts.
Sword and canes were taken from us, and then the porter looked
at me and said something in Turkish to my friend. " He says
you can never go in amongst the lunatics with a hat; one or
more are sure to fly at you." So the porter lent me his fez, and
with a couple of guards we turned down a passage and ascended
some steps. First we visited a vast dormitory, extending round
three sides of a court, and which was scrupulously clean, though
dreadfully bare ; dull grey walls, and no pictures at all, not even
gaudily-painted verses from the Koran, like one sees in Turkish
barracks and hospitals. There was not a soul in this ward, for
all the sufferers were in the court below. Looking down from
the portico into this quadrangle, a strange sight met our view.
Prowling about the open space, standing inanely passive and
motionless, huddled up in the corners, or crouching at the foot
of the wall, were some 200 men of all ages and colours?from
vigorous youths, blasted by hereditary insanity, with flashing
eye or vacant stare, to decrepid old age, lachrymose and
mouthing?from the deadly-white face and grey beard of a
Circassian, who had gone crazy of a fright, to the horrible
PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT. 147
grinning, coal-black Nubian, whose teeth shone like those of a
jackal, whose great tongue was now and again protruded with
fearful grimaces, and whose eyes flamed with the fierce fire of
dangerous madness. There was one little fellow?a Turk?who
kept on rolling along the earth at a great pace, laughing the
while, and snapping, dog-like, at the heels of those who came in
his way. There was another who remained huddled up in a
heap, his head low down between his knees, and a sack over his
shoulders. You might have looked long and not known tile
brown bundle to be a man, only now and again this ghastly
heap would spring up with a demoniacal shout, and stretch his
meagre arms above his head, wailing sadly the while. Then he
would collapse once more and remain motionless till another
paroxysm. They wore grey and brown stuff, which looked like
sacking?very coarse, but strong, warm, and clean; in fact, the
whole place was cleanliness and order itself. On their heads were
grey felt skull caps, and several were handcuffed, or rather a sort
of leather tube kept their hands together in front of them, as
though they were using a muff. Upon inquiry I heard that not a
single patient was isolated in the establishment; only when
they rave they get the " muff." When my companion said he
wished to go down amongst the madmen and distribute the
tobacco, our guards made some objection, but we went; eight
strong warders accompanied us, and at the entrance my companion announced in a loud voice that I was a great doctor
come to see them, and that if anyone behaved at all disagreeably,
I should inevitably order him to be " physicked "?a collective
term, it would appear, in madhouse parlance, including terrible
cold douches, leeches, terrific aperients, exhausting sweatings, and other drastic means of quieting the troubled mind.
Like magic the mighty word acted on the jabbering horde, and
I was astonished to see how much ratiocination remained in
this sad collection of wrecked brains. Of course, all heeded it
not; the drivelling idiot drivelled on, laughing and dancing
around ; and some, whose stony, fixed stare and set lips denoted
profound melancholy or idee fixe, stirred not, and paid no
attention. But the great majority of those who crouched
around us?and not a few looked threatening and wild?at
once altered their demeanour?some even prostrated themselves, and begged and sobbed not to be "physicked." But
one big, copper-coloured fellow behaved very differently. He
had been standing behind, and at my friend's announcement
plunged through the crowd, towering head and shoulders above
them. " Oh, madman," he shouted in Arabic ; " oh, dog, oh,
filth of the high road! you would usurp my place; you would
play the doctor amongst these poor wretches, when I?I,
148 PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT.
Allah's own physician?omnipotent to kill or cure, am here !"
The guards sprang forward just in time, for the giant would
have proved a very tough customer; his eyes glared and the
foam was at his lips. And now began the distribution of
tobacco; and the guards had enough to do to prevent our being
mobbed; eager claw-like hands sometimes snatched at. the
bundle, and were only kept in check by looking the offender
calmly in the face and saying "physic." One poor devil
sprang on my back and nearly strangled me, but was unceremoniously knocked off by a blow on the head from a warder.
Very soon the 50 packets, each broken in two, were all gone.
"You might have brought some sweets," said one man
rather ungratefully to my friend; " you see, being a camel, I
cannot smoke, but I love sugar." And so, promising to speak
to the Sultan about one, to bring " rah at lakum" to another,
to come sailing into the court and carry off a third in a
monster ship, and to accept ten million piastres and a thousand
slaves from yet a fourth, we made good our retreat. After
this we visited wards where lay the sick; we witnessed the
" physicking " of one poor fellow?he was having leeches applied
to his head, whilst hot fomentations were placed on the
stomach. At the sight of us he sprang up with an irresistible
bound, upsetting leeches, attendants, and everything. He
stopped close to us and began to tremble, and chattered something in an awful hooting voice I shall never forget. I was
told he always said the same thing, which was, " The beard of
the Prophet is long, but its hairs, placed on end, would not
enclose the sea of blood in my head." He stood there naked,
his face flushed dark red, his teeth chattering, the black leeches
hanging to his brow?a ghastly sight. Next instant the attendants had recaptured him.
Need I say that we were glad to take our leave, and depart
out of a place so rife with saddest sights and sounds. I may
mention that we also saw a room full of boys?lads ranging
from eight to fifteen?whose pitiful state was, perhaps, even
more touching than that of the men. The women's department we were not allowed to visit. Two things surprised me
much?-the scrupulous cleanliness of everything, and the fact
that no patients, even in the worst cases, are isolated?they
are merely muffled as described above. There are always
several guards in the courts and rooms, but accidents are not
uncommon for all that; and I saw. two or three injured
patients who were evidently the victims either of their own
mania or that of their fellow-sufferers. ? The great barred
gates swung to behind us, and we stood in the sunshine and
the afternoon breeze from the sea. It was with a feeling of
PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT. 149
relief that we sprang into the saddle and cantered downhill to
the landing-place.
Tests of Insanity.?Frederick John Woodfield, 32 years
of age, described as a clerk, was charged at the Mansion
House, on remand, with threatening to shoot his father, Mr.
John Samuel Woodfield, a shipping agent, at 106 Fenchurch
Street.?Mr. Herbert Alder Smith, medical officer at Christ's
Hospital, deposed that he had examined the prisoner, and
was of opinion that his mind was very weak and unsound,
and he had signed a certificate to that effect; but, having
conferred with Mr. Gibson, he thought that, in a case of
that kind, a second medical opinion should be had. He had
examined the prisoner on various topics, and he had stated
that his age was thirty-two and his father's forty-five. He
could not tell the Queen's age or the number and names of her
children; he was unaware who was Prime Minister, and he
knew nothing of the Naval Demonstration against Turkey,
though he had read the papers every day. These were a few of
his statements.?The prisoner, interposing, said he had not seen
the papers since he went to Newgate, and could not be expected
to be up in the latest news. Moreover, he took no interest in
politics, and made a point of never reading them. He protested
against a medical man being sent by the Chief Clerk (whom he
addressed as "Mr. Recorder") to examine him.?Dr William
Sedgwick Saunders, Medical Officer of Health for the City of
London, said he had had twenty minutes' conversation with the
prisoner that morning on religious, social, and political subjects,
and found that his thoughts were consistent and his memory
intact. He could not testify that he was of unsound mind, but
he thought he ought to be under observation in the workhouse
infirmary for some little time.?The Chief Clerk said the Court
had no power to send him there.?Dr Sedgwick Saunders said
they did it at Guildhall Justice-room.?The Chief Clerk said, if
they did, it was quite illegal.?Mr. Woodfield, the prisoner's
father, said the prisoner had no means of subsistence. He had
been wandering in his mind and violent for some time, but the
ast six months especially. Witness went in fear of him?in
fact, he expected that the prisoner would be the death of him
some day.?The prisoner complained that the Court had mixed
up two cases most illegally. He was originally charged with
threatening to shoot his father, which he denied, and now he
was being made out to be of unsound mind, a calamity which
he hoped would never befall him.?Sir Andrew Lusk said, looking at the very strong and pronounced opinions of Mr. Gibson
and Mr. Alder Smith, and at the statement of Dr Sedgwick
150 PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT.
Saunders that he required to be under observation, he should
send him to Stone, near Dartford.?The prisoner inquired what
was Stone ??Sir Andrew Lusk said a charming and healthy
place in Kent, where he would be well taken care of.?The
prisoner said, at all events, he hoped he should have some good
and wholesome food there. He then left the Court, and was
subsequently conveyed to the City of London Lunatic Asylum
at Stone.
A Meeting to consider the Prevention of Insanity.?
The National Association for the Protection of the Insane held
a meeting in Boston recently, which was notable in many ways.
There was a lar^ge attendance, and the audience and speakers
included the governor of the State and many prominent public
and medical men.
The interest in the work of the Association was shown by
the very full reports and comments published in the daily press.
The Society has of late been receiving many new members,
among whom are a dozen asylum superintendents, and two of
these latter spoke at the meeting referred to. This and other
facts tend to show that some impression is at last being made
upon the closeness and conservatism of the Association of
Insane Asylum Superintendents. The more liberal-minded in
that body seem quite ready to appreciate the spirit and aims
of the younger organisation.
But, while making additions to its membership in all parts
of the country, the remarks at the recent meeting indicated
that considerable progress had been made in exciting public
interest and securing practical reform. Governor Long, in a
recent message to the Massachusetts Legislature, urged a
number of new measures regarding the care of the insane upon
that body. Some action in the matter, especially of classifying
the insane, will undoubtedly be taken. A Bill has just been
prepared providing for a staff of visiting physicians to the
asylums. The work which has been done in Pennsylvania,
and the difficulties that have attended it, were pointed out
very forcibly by Dr Hiram Corson, trustee of the Pennsylvania
State Insane Hospital, in a letter read at the Boston meeting.
He says, referring to the Association of Insane Asylum Superintendents : " Your counsel would be of infinite service in
aiding our efforts to counteract the selfish, pernicious influence
of this Association. It may seem strange to you to hear me
talk thus, but let me ask of you what reform in management
of the insane has originated in that Society ? What but the
invention and use of closer confinement, more means of restraint
and seclusion of patients, and determined resistance to the
PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT. 151
reforms urged by philanthropists, who have witnessed how
greatly they have ameliorated the miseries and contributed to
the successful treatment of the insane ? I will not include all
superintendents in this class of hostiles. There are many
noble, humane, philanthropic men among them. . . . With
much effort we have succeeded in preventing this Association
from having any participation in the erection of the Eastern
State Hospital at Norristown, and in reorganising the hospital
at Harrisburg."
One of the topics of discussion, opened by a letter from Dr.
Joseph F. Parrish, was that of the etiology and prevention of
insanity. Dr Parrish referred to the fact that insanity arose
so largely among a wearied and restless class in whom bodily
and mental vigour were sadly disproportionate. He believed
that there ought to be more institutions for the treatment of
persons who are only on the border-lines of insanity, in the
" crazy circle" of Crichton-Browne. Dr H. B. Wilbur, referring
to the same subject, expressed his belief that insanity depended
on predisposing causes?hereditary, social, and individual?
rather than on exciting causes. While our civilisation increased
it, education and study did not, if applied in the proper way.
Dr Nathan Allen, speaking perhaps with the bias of a sanitarian, said that in his experience ill-health caused more
insanity than any other agency. Dr Allen and Dr Kenniston,
in a subsequent speech, asserted that intemperance was a
great cause of insanity, and that any diminution in the former
would equally affect the latter. Dr W. W. Godding feared
that we must accept brain disease as one of the penalties of a
higher development, hinting a possible future arrest of a growth
of mind aspiring to be god-like.
There were many other letters and speeches upon the above
and kindred subjects. The discussions contained much that
was suggestive, and the result of the meeting will undoubtedly
be the giving of a fresh impulse to a cause which deserves so
entirely the encouragement and support it is receiving.
The following excellent remarks are made by Dr Beard in
his "Problems of Insanity":?
General Defects of the Present Systems of Treating the
Insane.?The main defects in the present treatment of the
insane in Europe and America are these :
First: Neglect of the early stages. The best thing to do
with disease is to prevent it; the next best is to cure it when
it first appears; the last and least important of all is to
attempt to cure its later stages; and it is with this last and
least important duty that the asylums of the world are mainly
152 PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT.
occupied. When the time comes, as it will, when physicians shall
be taught in the schools and the text-books, both how to diagnosticate and to treat the premonitory and warning signs of insanity,
then the prognosis will be helped by a great percentage, and
the statistics of asylums will give, and indeed they give now,
but a most imperfect picture of what therapeutics of the modern
school in expert hands can do for the treatment of the insane.
The practical problem of the future is, how to educate physicians
in the study of insanity so that they shall know its premonitory
symptoms, and treat and cure it before it appears, or just after
it appears. Already they are doing this for other diseases of
the nervous system; they will in time do it for insanity.
Already physicians in this country, and to a limited degree also
in Europe, are beginning to study neurasthenia, which is the
door that opens into so many phases of mental disease, and
they are beginning to treat it and cure it, and to hold it in
check so that it cannot and shall not go beyond itself. The insane
must be treated before they are insane; we must arrest these
cases on their way to the asylum ; we must seize them in the
vestibule; we must snatch them away before the door closes
upon them. There are a large number of cases of neurasthenia,
of hysteria, and the allied disorders going on to insanity, and
a large number of cases of insanity itself, as melancholia, and
even mania, that can be treated, that ought to be treated, and
that will be treated at home under the eye of nurses and friends
in the direct and skilful charge of a family physician with the
aid, if need be, of experts in the nervous system, on the same
principles and by substantially the same methods as they now
treat other diseases of the nervous system. Already this is
being done ; already our best physicians in city and country are
curing insanity without thought of an asylum, and they will do
this far more in the twentieth century than noiv. The problems
of insanity are to be solved outside of asylums more than in
them. There is no prospect that the results of treatment with
the very chronic insane will ever be very much more satisfactory than they are now. In almost all organic nervous diseases
of long standing the cures are not very much more numerous
than they were centuries ago. Every day of delay diminishes
the chances. To treat the insane after they have become insane,
is like taking in sail after the cyclone is fully upon us. Threefourths of the cases in asylums are cured in the first nine
months.
Secondly. The second error in the treatment of the insane
is in depending on simple isolation?shutting indoors and out
of the sight of friends?negative without positive treatment.
This isolation, this confinement, this restriction, this deprivaPSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT. 153
tion of liberty is needful often, but not always, and it should
never be used exclusively except in old and hopeless forms. In
this respect, as in all respects, and as in all diseases, each case
must be studied by and for itself in the light of general
experience and on the principles of good sense. To decide this
question of removal or of non-removal, it is needful to make a
diagnosis not only of the patient but of the patient's friends,
and of his surroundings and of the psychology of the patient
himself aside from his disease; we must know what he was
in health, before he was taken down ; we must learn his intellectual and emotional qualities before we can tell whether
the best place to treat him is without or within asylum walls.
Just now there is a disposition, especially in France, but in this
country also, to rely too much on seclusion or isolation alone in
the treatment of neurasthenia and anemia and allied affections.
Thirdly. The third evil in the present system of the treatment of the insane, both in Europe and America, is too much
use of narcotics and sleep-forcing agents. This principle of
treatment is as good for insanity as it is for any other nervous
disease, but it is bad for all nervous diseases. These narcotics
and stupefiers?our opium and our chloral?are simply rafts on
which we step in an emergency; they are not the ships on which
the patient is to voyage towards health; they who depend upon
them will be likely to be cast upon the breakers and never reach
the shore ; for such agents contain little power, or capacity for
producing power; they are not tonics, but narcotics?useful,
necessary, indispensable, of the highest value at certain crises.
To systematically treat insanity in any of its phases, or neuralgia, or neurasthenia, or anaemia, or hysteria, or cerebral
congestion, with individual exceptions, by narcotics, is not
treating, but mistreating them, and the chief aim of the physician who understands these cases is to get them out of the
need of these agents, to so renovate the nervous system that
they shall not need them. That ideal, even though we fail to
reach it, as we must in some cases, is the true and the only
ideal in the scientific and successful treatment of diseases of the
nervous system.
Fourthly. Treating curable and incurable cases together
and excessive restraint; these evils are so obvious that they
need no discussion. Europe and America are now protesting
against them.
A very difficult practical problem of insanity is, hoiv to
diagnosticate it. In diagnosing other diseases?fevers, inflammations and local troubles of every grade?we usually have
time for quiet study, and repeated visits are oftentimes expected
PART I. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES. M
154 PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT.
and needed, and there may be required also delay perhaps of
days, before the physician arrives at a clehr and absolute conception of the nature of the disease from which the patient is
suffering; but in insanity there is ofttimes an imperative want
of a diagnosis at once on the spot, and this want must be met
in some cases by a physician who is a stranger to the patient,
and he is expected to decide the solemn question, whether the
patient is or is not insane, by a single interview, and, on the
facts gained from that interview alone, is to give his certificate
for commitment. There is no other disease where the diagnosis
is, as a rule, made so quickly, with so little study, or where the
results are so important for the patient; and there is no disease
where there is a greater need of study and time in order to gain
absolute certainty in the diagnosis. In the severest forms,
especially in the more violent forms of insanity, the diagnosis
can be made by the friends, by the neighbours, by any passerby in the street; but in these subtler, elusive, tricky, intermittent and masked forms, that appear to be increasing in frequency
in modern days, there is need of more facts and more study,
and more deliberation and delay, than is possible in a single
interview. In order to know whether a man is insane or not,
we must know what that man is when he is sane; for conduct
which is evidence of insanity in one man is simply sanity?<?
perhaps eccentricity?in another.
The three great difficulties in the diagnosis are: (1) the
determining where there is sufficient mental inco-ordination of a
serious character; \2) the detection of insanity m some special
directions on some particular themes, when there is perfect
sanity in all others; and (3) the detection of the intermittent
forms, where at times?perhaps the majority of the time?the
patient is absolutely sane, having, perhaps, no recollection or
suspicion of what he does or tries to do during his insane
moments. There is no doubt that crimes of violence are done
by persons who, at the time, are absolutely unconscious of what
they are doing, and as irresponsible as a somnambulist. There
is no doubt that excess in the use of certain stimulants and
narcotics, as alcohol and opium, and very likely chloral, may
induce a state of the brain where the condition of trance is
liable to appear, which may last, perchance, for several hours or
days; and while in this state the subject may commit crime, of
which, on emerging from his normal state, he has no recollection.
Some very remarkable cases of this have been lately published by my friend Dr T. D. Crothers, superintendent, of the
Inebriate Asylum of Hartford, Connecticut. To this form of
disease I have given the term "alcoholic trance," inasmuch as
PSYCHOLOGICAL RETROSPECT. 155
it is simply a form of trance induced by alcohol. Dr Crothers
has detailed eight cases of alcoholic trance, all of which are
interesting.
In one case the patient, from his own statement, which the
observation of others confirmed, would lose all consciousness,
and wake, after a day or two, suddenly, the time having been
to him entirely a blank; but during this interval he would
carry on business as usual, his friends noticing nothing. At
one time he acted as umpire at a sparring match, deciding correctly and giving satisfaction, yet had no recollection of what
he did. He stated that all he remembered was, there was a proposition that he should be the umpire. This was followed by a
glass of brandy, and then came a sudden forgetfulness of all
events. One day he went to Eochester, drank hard, and lost all
memory of what happened for three days, when he awoke in a
hotel in New York. During this time he made sales and
collections for his employer which were entirely correct, although
lie ate and drank very little. This man suddenly died of some
obscure affection of the brain.
