A Psychological Study of Shakespeare
======================================

193 Art. ITL?
By R. H. SEiirLE, M.D., F.E.C.P.L.
In order to prevent all misunderstanding as to the meaning
here attached to the above title, I must observe that I employ
in the present article the word " psychological" in its primary
signification as derived from the Grreek word yjrv^rj, variously
rendered in English as " breath," or " life," or " spirit," and
used in defining the mental qualities of human nature as
contradistinguished from its physical or corporeal features.
" Psychology " has in recent years been sometimes erroneously
supposed to refer only to morbid conditions of the mind; but
these should properly be represented as belonging to 'patho-
logical psychology, while the healthy or normal operations of
the thinking principle would be properly included under the
category of physiological psychology.
It is the more necessary thus to define the sense in which
the title is given as above, because, in venturing to offer any
opinions on the genius of Shakespeare, it cannot be too emphati-
cally stated that the great poet and dramatist seems to have
been himself entirely free from anything approaching to mental
alienation?a condition, alas ! unfortunately too common with
those on whom the brilliant but dangerous gift of genius has
been bestowed. Far from displaying any of those eccentricities
of conduct or behaviour which have marked the career of many
other gifted human beings, Shakespeare seems, from the rather
scanty records of his life which have reached the present age,
to have been a remarkably prudent, consistent, honourable, and
conscientious man. He married very early a lady some few
years his senior, and to whom he was deeply attached, and by
whom he soon had a family. He chose as his professional
sphere the fourfold domain of poet, actor, theatrical manager,
and dramatic author, and he is known to have acted in several
of his own pieces, but chiefly in rather subordinate parts, as the
Ghost in " Hamlet" and Adam in " As You Like It." He
was a genial companion, as is shown by the testimony of his
contemporary, Ben Jonson, and fond of the amusements of
London, but equally delighted with the rural beauties and the
seclusion of the country, whither he often gladly returned, and
where he purchased property. His biographers state that he
retired from London at 48 years of age, and fixed his permanent
194 A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF SHAKESPEARE.
residence at Stratford-upon-Avon, and died at the age of 52.
What a period of intellectual activity was thus embraced by
this extraordinary man within a few short years of human life !
What a profusion of characters, of sentiments, of reflexions,
of descriptions, emanated from his prolific pen! The minds of
ordinary mortals are bewildered in attempting to grasp the idea
of so much wisdom, so much invention, so much insight into
all the mysteries of man's existence, being crowded into so
narrow a space of time, especially amidst the ordinary pursuits
and amusements of common life, and the necessary labours
involved in the maintenance of a family and in the provision
of a moderate competence for support in advancing years.
In choosing as a title for this paper, "A Psychological
Study of Shakespeare," my object is to offer a few remarks on
the influences which seem to have acted on the great poet's
mind in the production of his immortal works; and while
professing myself utterly unable to explain the source of those
flashes of genius which turned into precious ore and into
polished shape the crude materials presented to his senses, it is
not presumptuous, I think, to inquire how far external circum-
stances may have operated in moulding into being those
imaginary forms which now strike the reader as living and
speaking pictures, presenting themselves as true representations
of all that is characteristic of human nature in all its aspects.
It would be an idle task to compare Sliakespeai'e with any
of his predecessors or contemporaries in the realms of poetry or
the drama, and for the best of all reasons, namely, that he is
incomparable. As for the British drama, it can hardly be said
to have been in existence before his time; and if the Greek
and Roman dramatists be consulted, it will be found that, great
and noble as are the dramatic compositions of iEschylus,
Sophocles, and Euripides, and fanciful and amusing as are
those of Menander, Aristophanes, Plautus, and Terence, yet
Shakespeare excels them all, individually and collectively, both
in expressing the grand, the pathetic, and the sublime, and in
delineating those lighter phases of human character and conduct
which meet the observer of the manners of ordinary life.
Before the time of Shakespeare the theatrical exhibitions
of England seem to have consisted chiefly of those " Mysteries "
or " Moralities," as they were called, in which religious subjects
were represented before the multitude, or of " Masques " in
which royalty sometimes indulged, and which consisted of a
mixture of verses, music, pageantry and revelling. It is stated
by Malone in his " Historical Account of the Kise and Progress
of the English Stage that there were in his time only thirty-
eight plays extant, which were written before, or in, the year
A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF SHAKESPEARE. 195
1592, when Shakespeare is believed to have commenced his
career as a dramatic author. The names of these plays and the
dates of their production are given by Malone, and few and
contemptible as they are, according to that writer, they were
the most popular dramatic compositions of the time and the
best that had been previously exhibited. The poverty of
dramatic literature at this period shows in yet stronger light
the brilliancy of Shakepeare's genius, because it is thus evident
that having no models to imitate, no standards of dramatic
taste to serve as guides, he himself became the model for future
imitation and the standard of excellence for all posterity.
In connexion with this subject, it cannot be too distinctly
stated, that not only did Shakespeare become the regenerator
and reformer, and indeed the founder, of the English drama, but
he was also one of the chief reformers of the English language,
which, in the time of Elizabeth, was emerging from the con-
fusion in which it had been involved during previous periods.
With a foundation of Anglo-Saxon, the English language had
been enriched, after the Norman Conquest, by a multitude of
French words, and of Latin words through the French or
Norman; but, during the Civil Wars of the Roses, the cultiva-
tion of literature had been necessarily neglected, and the lan-
guage, both written and spoken, had fallen into an irregular
and chaotic state. But in the time of Henry VIII., Edward VI.,
Mary, and Elizabeth, the Greek and Latin languages had been
extensively cultivated by the upper classes of society, and
words were introduced directly from those tongues instead of
being corrupted by their transmission through the French. The
consequence was that the English language now began to be
subject to fixed rules and to assume a definite construction, but
the spelling was still capricious and arbitrary, and forms of
speech, at the present day obsolete, were still retained. Of all
those who established the English language in the Elizabethan
age, Shakespeare was the foremost, and although it would be
doing injustice to many of his contemporaries to pronounce him
to be the only reformer in this respect, yet it must be observed
that Spenser and Ben Jonson and others of his contemporaries,
learned and distinguished as they were, contributed nothing
whatever to the grace and elegance of the literary style of
Shakespeare, who was their superior and their guide rather than
their imitator. Shakespeare, indeed, was alone in his skilful
management of our tongue; and although it must be admitted
that he was probably not acquainted with the poetical rules
adopted or invented by the classical writers, yet he possessed a
native taste of his own which enabled him to arrange his words
in the most harmonious order, and made his verses so smooth
19G A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF SIIAKESFEARE.
and mellifluous that, if written in the present day, they would
not only defy criticism but extort admiration.
How Shakespeare, with his imperfect education, was able at
once from his youth to write beautiful poetry, is one of those
mysteries which psychological science is powerless to penetrate.
The only explanation is that his well-organised mind saw in-
tuitively the graceful forms which our language is capable of
assuming, and that he wrought and wielded it at his pleasure,
just as the sculptor extracts from the rude and massive block
the lines and surfaces which cause the marble to breathe and
live. English poetry in the time of his predecessors was in a
most rough and uncouth condition; and, although the versifi-
cation of Chaucer is not so difficult of reading as is generally
supposed, yet it is fragmentary and unpolished for the most part,
being made up of a mixture of Anglo-Saxon and Norman and
classical roots not well blended together. It was Shakespeare
who fused all the discordant elements into uniformity, and,
with the potent crucible of his genius, converted them into the
pure golden streams which flow so brightly and so smoothly in
his poems and his plays, and constitute standards of excellence
for the imitation of all ages.
Although the inquiry has been often instituted, it is not
unprofitable once more to trace the influence which education
may have exerted on the development of Shakespeare's genius;
but the investigation is a somewhat unsatisfactory one. The
records of his early youth give little information beyond the
fact that he was educated at a grammar school in his native
town, and probably began his studies, such as they were at this
period, when he was about seven years old, and probably con-
tinued them till he was fifteen. The supposition that from the
latter period until he was eighteen he spent his time at the
University of Oxford or at that of Cambridge appears to be quite
destitute of foundation, and it is equally unproved that he was
during the same period a student of one of the Inns of Court.
But there is some evidence that during the years in question he
Avas on rather intimate terms with a lawyer's clerk at Stratford-
upon-Avon, from whom he probably picked up some of that
legal knowledge and became acquainted with much of the legal
phraseology which he exhibits in many of his plays. Indeed,
from the universality of his acquirements, and from his singular
power of putting appropriate language into the mouths of all
his characters, it might be asserted, upon internal evidence, that
he was educated as a doctor of medicine, or as a lawyer, or
as a soldier, or as a sailor; but I think the most probable
supposition is that he had no regular training in any of these
pursuits, and that, having had only a moderate education in
A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUD if OF SHAKESPEARE. 197
ordinary subjects, he applied his gigantic mind to perusing the
literature current in his time, and from this kind of laborious
but desultory reading, combined with an acute observation of the
human characters falling under his notice, and of the natural
objects submitted to his senses, he evolved from his fertile brain
those wonderful productions which have astonished and edified
mankind.
Notwithstanding all that some writers have suggested to the
contrary, I cannot agree that Shakespeare was what might be
called a learned man, or that he was regularly disciplined in any
consecutive course of study either in literature or science. It is
true that classical allusions very frequently occur in his writings,
and that he often uses English words in the happiest manner,
and in accordance with their etymological meaning; but there
are too many obvious mistakes made by him in the quantity of
proper names of Greek or Roman origin, and too much confu-
sion in matters relating to ancient history, to allow of the suppo-
sition that he was a profound, or even a moderate, Greek or Latin
scholar. It must be remembered, however, that he did not live
in a rude period of English history, but in an age when learning
was becoming more and more largely cultivated, and when, by
the influence of the art of printing, the facts described and the
theories invented by ancient and modern writers were diffused
over the community, the example of devotion to literature being
set by the highest in the land, and being followed, more or less,
by the classes below them. There was, in fact, almost a rage for
the cultivation of classical literature, and translations were made
of many of the most distinguished writers of antiquity, and of
many of the more modern poets and romance-writers of France
and Italy. In particular, the histories of Plutarch were thus made
known to English readers in the time of Elizabeth ; and the poems
of Homer and Virgil were likewise made available by means of
translations, however imperfect those versions may appear in
our own time ; and the writings of Ovid, and especially the
Metamorphoses, were eagerly read in their English dress. Besides
these, there were a multitude of stories and legends derived
from French, Italian, and perhaps Spanish sources, which were
among the popular writings of the day. Of all these channels
of information Shakespeare was evidently aware, and he cer-
tainly eagerly availed himself of the fascinating stories of the
poets, and the hardly less fascinating records of the historians.
But, familiar as Shakespeare certainly was with the fables of
Homer, Virgil, and Ovid, and with the biographies by Plutarch,
though in all probability only through the medium of transla-
tions, I can find no evidence in his works that he was well
acquainted with Horace or Terence or Cicero, or still less that
198 A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF SHAKESPEARE.
he was familiar with the Greek tragedians, or the Greek comic
writers, or with the Greek orators.
On the other hand, however, he must have devoured with
avidity all the translations existing in his time, whether from
Greek, Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French originals, as well as
the works of his own predecessors, especially Chaucer, and
from these heterogeneous materials he has developed, under the
magic touch of genius, those inimitable creations in attempting
to characterise which the language of eulogy is utterly poor in
expression.
The industry of some of Shakespeare's commentators,
especially Malone and Steevens, has succeeded in making out
a list of the ancient translations from classic authors, which the
great dramatist might have seen, and some of which he certainly
saw, in the course of his extensive though discursive reading.
The dates of these translations are given by the commentators,
who show that many of them were printed before Shakespeare
began his career as a dramatist. Among these are some of the
books of Homer's Iliad, ten of them being translated into English
from the French, a play of Euripides, some books of Herodotus
and Thucydides, several editions of Plutarch's Lives, the Ethics
of Aristotle, some of the books of Xenophon, the Aphorisms of
Hippocrates and Galen's two Books of Elements, a great
number of versions of Yirgil's works, in prose, in Scottish metre,
in rhyme, in blank verse, and in English hexameters, only two
books of Horace together with his Art of Poetry, the Epistles
and the Satires, a great number of Ovid's works, including the
Metamorphoses, the Epistolse Heroidum, the Elegies, the
Eemedium Amoris, the De Tristibus, the Mencechmi of Plautus,
some plays of Terence and Seneca, and several books and
Epistles of Cicero.
That Shakespeare was acquainted with Homer, and with
the history of the Trojan War, and with the individuals who
play so conspicuous a part in the immortal poems of the
Iliad and the Odyssey, is beyond all doubt; but it is almost
demonstrable that he was conversant with them only through
the medium of the translations existing in his day. At the
same time it must be admitted that he displays his extraordinary
powers in seizing upon the peculiarities of each of the characters
and putting into their mouths the very same kind of language
and the same sentiments which were invented by Homer. The
play in which his knowledge of the great Greek poet is most
conspicuous is " Troilus and Cressida," a very poor production,
although undoubtedly emanating from his pen. In this piece,
the main plot and some of the incidents, which are in very
questionable taste, are derived from a poem of Chaucer's,
A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF SHAKESPEARE. 199
while what may be called the subordinate characters, who
fill up the scene, are the illustrious warriors and heroes and
heroines of the Iliad, and the place of the action is Troy and
the Grecian camp before it. Besides the principal characters
Troilus and Cressida, and Pandarus the uncle of the latter, a
whole multitude of Greek and Trojan worthies are introduced
upon the stage, namely Priam, King of Troy, and five of his
sons including Hector and Paris; iEneas, the hero of the
iEneid; Agamemnon, the General of the Grecian host, and his
brother Menelaus; Achilles, Ajax, Ulysses, Nestor, Diomedes,
and Patroclus, the Greek commanders; Thersites, the scurrilous
and deformed vituperator; Helen, the fatal cause of the war;
Andromache, the noble wife of Hector; and Cassandra, the
prophetess. Now, as I have just observed, there is very ap-
propriate language put into the mouths of all these characters;
Agamemnon is royal, Achilles is fierce, Hector is magnanimous
and brave, Ulysses is cautious, Nestor is sagacious, Thersites is
abusive, Andromache is tender, Helen is weak and childish,
and so on of the rest; but I cannot believe that a poet could be
well acquainted with the original language and the sublime de-
scriptions of Homer who could huddle all these characters upon
the stage merely in order to form a group of figures to fill up a
picture, the prominent objects of which are an ordinary pair of
lovers, together with the lady's uncle, who plays a kind of comic
part, and who is of such immoral tendencies and occupation
that his very name has become familiar in the English language
as a type of the most degraded and disgusting phase of vice. Let
us contemplate Pandarus commencing the play, together with
Troilus, and concluding it in a kind of humorous epilogue ad-
dressed to the lowest and basest class of frequenters of a theatre,
and I confess that, notwithstanding my profound reverence for
Shakespeare's genius, I think that Homer's heroes are degraded
by the association, and that the writer who could so associate
them in the same play could never have been duly impressed
with the pure and lofty conceptions of the old Greek poet.
Here it may be not inappropriate to observe that, making
allowance for errors like that above noticed, the influence of
education, valuable as it is, may sometimes tend to cripple the
efforts of genius rather than to develop them ; and it is not un-
reasonable to suppose that, if Shakespeare had been constrained
to submit himself to a long course of academical discipline,
the result might have been the loss to the world of some of
his most brilliant productions, which derive much of their
charm from the unbounded licence they display, their freedom
from all conventional rules, and their wonderful originality.
He might have been an accurate Greek or Latin scholar;
200 A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF SHAKESPEARE.
he might have composed faultless Latin or Greek hexameters
and pentameters; he might have written Greek choruses, or
imitated the lyrics of Pindar or Horace: but what would have
become of Macbeth, Othello, Lear, Falstaff, Prospero, Caliban,
and a host of other creations, which, in their entire originality,
are unsurpassed and unequalled in the whole range of ancient
or modern literature ?
If, again, Shakespeare had been trammeled with a regard
for what are called the unities in dramatic composition, what
a world of fancy would have been withheld from mankind!
Unlike his great Greek and Roman predecessors, whose theatrical
scenery was composed of the mountains and the sky and the
foliage of the neighbouring trees, or at most represented only
the exterior or interior of some temple, or palace, or dwelling-
house, and whose notions of time and place limited them to a
very short duration of the former and to a fixed position of the
latter, his great mind, disdaining the boundaries of time and
space, and of earth itself, was, to use his own words, " of
imagination all compact," and
Glanced from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven ;
or, to use the words of Johnson, he
Exhausted worlds and then imagined new ;
Existence saw him spurn her bounded reign,
And panting Time toiled after him in vain.
If he had dramatised the great fables of antiquity in the time of
iEschylus and his successors and contemporaries, he would not
have been satisfied, for instance, to represent Prometheus chained
to a rock of Mount Caucasus, uttering his complaints to the sea,
the air, and the mountains, and receiving the compassionate
addresses of the ocean nymphs or the sympathy of earthly or
unearthly visitors, but he would have carried us into the depths
of Tartarus, or to the heights of Olympus, would have revealed
to us the councils of the Gods or the decrees of the Fates, or,
what is more, he would probably, representing what often occurs
in real life, have introduced some coarse or vulgar character upon
the scene to relieve or throw into deeper shade the ghastly horror
of the scene, and to vary the monotonous complaints uttered
by the presumptuous mortal who stole the fire from heaven, and
whose liver was being devoured by the rapacious vulture.
Descending for a moment from these speculations, and
tracing, however feebly, the influence of external agencies on the
psychological development of Shakespeare, it is especially worthy
of notice that he was married at eighteen, that his first child was
born within a year of his marriage, and that twins, boy and
girl, followed in little more than a year afterwards. These par-
A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF SHAKESPEARE. 201
ticulars, trivial as tliey might be in the life of an ordinary
mortal, must be considered as very important in moulding the
character, directing the pursuits, and determining the course of
life of such a man as Shakespeare. In contracting such an
early alliance, and being so soon involved in the cares of a
family, he must have been necessarily interrupted in a sys-
tematic course of study or professional pursuit, if he ever
entered upon any; and, in the absence of definite information
on the subject, it is fair to assume that he spent his time in
extensive though desultory reading, and in observing men and
things such as he saw around him. That he was an ardent
admirer of nature and of natural productions is evident from
innumerable passages in his writings; and that he also made
himself acquainted, as far as his opportunities extended, with
pictures and statues and other works of art is equally manifest
from intrinsic proofs. But being, as he no doubt was, a man of
strict integrity and prudence, as well as of great industry, he
must have begun to feel that as his family, though highly
respectable, was by no means rich, it was necessary for him to
look around for some means of living. Circumstances, which
may be regarded as accidental, threw him in the way of some
players who happened to be performing at Stratford, and hence
he seems to have derived his love of the stage and his determi-
nation to adopt the theatrical profession as a means of sub-
sistence.
Regarded in a psychological light the early marriage of
Shakespeare was attended by the most happy results, not only
as regarded his own worldly prosperity, but also the intellectual
light with which he was able to irradiate his country and the
whole world. Such a union of a boy of eighteen with Anne
Hathaway, must have been looked upon, considering the circum-
stances of their respective families, as a most imprudent step,
and likely to lead only to poverty and unhappiness; but in the
case of Shakespeare the alliance was in every respect fortunate
and auspicious. His novel position as a young man, under
twenty, finding himself already the father of three children,
appears to have stimulated him to turn his education, such as it
was, and his desultory reading, to material profit for the support
of his family; and although it is doubtful whether he gained
his living at this period as an actor or as a dramatist, there can
be no question that he was making himself acquainted with
theatrical life, and with the mechanical and conventional
requirements of the stage, which became of so much use to him
in his subsequent career.
In the character of the lady, also, who became his wife and
who survived him, he must have found a congenial and loving
202 A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF SHAKESPEARE.
partner; and although her history is very little known, and
although he makes no mention of her in his writings, yet her
virtue and her constancy, and, perhaps, her patient endurance
of privations in their early married life, would have made a deep
impression on the mind of the youthful husband, and no doubt
laid the foundation of those exquisite portraitures of female
characters which constitute some of the principal charms of his
writings, and have attracted the admiration of all cultivated
minds. It is universally admitted that, notwithstanding the
licentious habits and sentiments of the times in which he lived,
Shakespeare's female characters are generally models of purity
and virtue, and it is only necessary to allude to such creations
as Desdemona, Imogen, Miranda, Hermione, in proof of this
position. It is true that all these and other of his female
characters are not cast in the same mould, or the result would
have been the tameness and insipidity which are traced in the
works of most authors who have attempted to delineate the
attributes of woman. As occurs in real life, the female charac-
ters of Shakespeare exhibit great variety, and the virtues of his
unmarried and his married heroines although of course of a
different stamp, are equally conspicuous ; the devotion and the
unmerited sufferings of Hermione, the ardent and impetuous
love of Juliet, the perfect innocence of Miranda and Desdemona,
the playfulness of Rosalind and Beatrice, being beautifully con-
trasted, and painted with the skill of the most accomplished
artist in female portraiture.
That Shakespeare himself had the utmost reverence for
female purity and virtue is evident in all his writings; and
although undoubtedly he has, according to the manners of his
time, indulged very often in a warmth of expression which
would be unsuitable to the present age, he has always drawn a
broad distinction between the pure and ideal love, which is
founded upon esteem and affection, and that material develop-
ment of the passion which is common to man and the brute
creation. In the " Sonnets," in " Lucrece," and even in the
very beautiful though amorous poem of " Venus and Adonis,"
there are abundant illustrations of the above remarks; as, for
instance, where, in the last-named work, the youthful and
really virtuous huntsman declares, in answer to the impassioned
addresses of the Paphian Queen :
Love comforteth like sunshine after rain,
But Lust's effect is tempest after sun ;
Love's gentle spring does always fresh remain,
Lust's winter comes ere summer half be done:
Love surfeits not, Lust like a glutton dies ;
Love is all truth, Lust full of forged lies.
The marriage, then, of Shakespeare, although only in his
A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF SHAKESPEARE. 203
eighteenth year, was unquestionably a great cause, if not the
chief cause, of the development of his marvellous intellectual
qualities. The copious well of his imagination required only
some power to draw up its overflowing waters, wherewith to
irrigate the barren fields of dramatic literature in the sixteenth
century, and the necessity of obtaining a livelihood was the
engine which evolved the latent streams.
Full many a gem of purest ray serene
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
and the pure gem of Shakespeare's genius, which might have
remained concealed had not circumstances revealed its beauty
and its brilliancy, was rescued from obscurity by his marriage
with Anne Hathaway and his meeting with strolling players at
Stratford-upon-Avon.
To a mind like Shakespeare's, looking at this period of his
life in a psychological point of view, it is quite conceivable that
not only the easy and jovial manners of the actors presented
great and irresistible attractions, but that the very poor condi-
tion of dramatic literature in his time fired his ambition to
produce something better than the trash then deemed good
enough to be presented to the public. No authentic par-
ticulars have been handed down as to the manner in which he
spent his time from the age of twenty-one to twenty-five, which
must have been in him a period of the greatest intellectual
activity, in which he was no doubt occupied either in writing
plays himself or in adapting and improving the works of his
predecessors or contemporaries. But from internal evidence it
is plain that the representations of the stage, crude and coarse
as they were in his youth, inspired him with many of those
lofty thoughts which breathe and burn throughout his writ-
ings, and which, deriving their source from a microcosm seen
in actual life, expanded into those boundless regions of thought
and invention in which time and space are annihilated, and in
which man and nature are depicted in all their multitudinous
aspects, in beauty and deformity, in light and in darkness, in
gaiety and in despair, in sunshine and in storm, in space and
in infinity, in time and in eternity. " All the world's a stage,"
as he beautifully expresses it,?
And all the men and women merely players ;
They have their exits and their entrances,
And each man in his turn plays many parts;
and, again, when Macbeth, at length weary of life and deserted
by his friends, exclaims:
Life's a mere shadow, a poor player
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,
And then is heard no more.
204 A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF SHAKESPEARE.
How well can we understand that the representations on the
stage (sometimes probably in a barn) at Stratford-upon-Avon
inspired Shakespeare's mind with the grandeur and at the
same time the weakness and vanity of human things! The actors
repeating high-flown and bombastic lines, attired as kings or
heroes, putting off for a time their ordinary dresses, and attired
in glittering but tawdry colours, and again resuming their
shabby habiliments, would readily convey to his mind a picture
of the changeful condition of mankind in actual life ; while the
stage, glowing with artificial light and scenery, or perhaps
only tenanted for a time by walking puppets, terminating their
brief career of a few hours to sink into darkness and silence,
would be to him a type of life and death, not only in man, but
in the great scheme of Nature herself, and would shadow forth
the beauties of creation, the monuments of art, the symmetry
of the universe, as the things of an hour, and perishable as the
scenery of a stage-play!
These our actors,
As I foretold you, were all spirits, and
Are melted into air, into thin air;
And, like the baseless fabric of this vision,
The cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces,
The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve,
And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,
Leave not a rack behind.
A fertile subject of discussion among metaphysicians once
was whether there exist in the human mind certain innate
ideas which grow and expand simultaneously with the growth
and development of the bodily organs, or whether the mind is
originally a mere blank, a tabula rasa, like a sheet of white
paper, and receiving impressions from external objects by the
agency of the senses. Without entering into the metaphysical
examination of the question, it is perhaps allowable to
suppose that the conflicting theories on this subject may be
reconciled by admitting that both views are to some extent
consistent with what is observed in human nature. On the one
hand, it is useless to argue that, if a human being were absolutely
excluded from all external influences?for instance, if he were
deprived of light, and isolated from all objects which are
capable of conveying sensations?his mind could develop itself
so as to conceive and communicate ideas. On the other hand,
it is equally absurd and irrational to suppose that any external
influences whatever could inspire ideas where no capability of
forming those ideas existed. Hence it is evident that what is
called education is like the seed thrown into the soil, which, if
congenial, will expand and nourish the embryo till it attains
maturity, but which, if barren or unsuitable, will arrest its
A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF SHAKESPEARE. 205
progress, impair its vitality, and cause it to wither and decay.
Thus, taking the average of human minds, they clearly
contain within them a certain power of apprehension and con-
ception which, seizing upon visible or tangible images, or
receiving sounds or odours, or affected by mental impressions,
converts all these materials into ideas which become communi-
cable to other living beings by the organs of expression.
But how different is this power, which, in a certain sense,
is innate in the human soul, in different ranks and conditions
of existence ! Take a school of a hundred boys or girls, and
give them the same advantages of mental culture, and how
different will be the result! Much of this diversity may be, of
course, accounted for by accidental circumstances; but, when
all allowances are made, it is obvious that in some of the minds
there is a quickness in receiving and retaining knowledge, and
in expressing ideas, which is wanting in many of the others ; and
hence, notwithstanding the most elaborate efforts on the part
of teachers, some human minds will remain undeveloped, or only
partially developed, during life, while others will, and in many
cases quite unexpectedly, astonish their friends or the world at
large bv the extent of their accomplishments, the brilliancy of
their imagination, and their ascendency over their fellow-
mortals. Again, admitting the beneficial influence of education
(using the word in its common acceptation), how many men,
and women too, have become distinguished without any ordinary
education at all! In such cases?and they are very numerous?
the mere scholastic routine has been unnecessary ; poets have
composed the most pathetic lines who have never studied the
rules of versification ; orators have swayed the minds of multi-
tudes although they were unskilled in the language of Cicero
or of Demosthenes ; musicians have charmed the ear with melo-
dious cadences before they were acquainted with the principles
of harmony; painters with boyish fingers have drawn graceful
figures before they learned the fundamental rules of art; and
even mathematicians have solved some of the most intricate
problems without having been previously tutored in Algebra or
in the books of Euclid. In all such instances the native forces
existed in the mind, and although education may serve still
further to develop the innate germs of thought and imagination,
and to systematise and arrange the scattered elements of mental
power, yet, without that subtle metamorphic essence usually
called genius, external influences would effect little or nothing
beyond the ordinary result of developing what is commonly
known as " talent," which differs as much from genius as the
Highgate and Hampstead hills differ from the chain of the
Alps or the Andes, or as the fountains of Versailles from the
cataracts of Niagara.
PART II. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES. Q
206 A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF SHAKESPEARE.
Pursuing, although with a rapid glance, the career of
Shakespeare, and tracing, with however imperfect materials,
the influence which external circumstances and objects exerted
on his psychological development, we find that at the age of 25
he repaired to London to seek his fortune as an actor and a
dramatist, and became a partner in the theatre then situated at
Blackfriars. Engaged in this new sphere of activity, and
exchanging the limited society and the rural scenes of a country
town for the intellectual assemblies and the crowded streets of a
metropolitan city, he must have found abundant scope for that
acute and accurate observation of mankind which his writings
everywhere display, while, at the same time, the teeming litera-
ture of the period, then becoming enriched not only with original
works but with translations from ancient and modern languages,
must have supplied him with copious materials for the expansion
of his rich imagination and his fertile.fancy. His responsibilities
as a theatrical manager no doubt compelled him to consult the
popular taste in the composition and production of his plays,
and hence, I think, may have arisen many of those blemishes
which some of them certainly exhibit. The coarse and vulgar
language put into the mouths of many of his clowns (for so he
calls them) are attributable to much the same causes as those
which influence managers in the present day, such as the desire
to achieve popularity even at the expense of good taste; and the
grossness of a few of his plots, so different from the chasteness of
the majority of his productions, must be attributed to the same
motive. But looking at the results, I can easily conceive how,
in the composition of his plays, while weaving out plots and
incidents likely to seize the fancy of the multitude, sudden
flashes of inspiration illuminated his mind and were transferred
to his paper?gleams of splendour which he probably did not
foresee when he took up his pen, and which burst upon himself
with the force of a revelation.
It is quite admitted, and the remark implies no reproach,
that none of his plots are original, but are founded on various
tales, romances, or histories which fell in his way, but which lie
embellished or amplified with the richest fancy, the most charm-
ing descriptions of scenery and of natural objects, and the most
astonishing inventions of human character. Where he obtained
some of his special knowledge of localities and pursuits?as, for
instance, of the sea and of sea-faring life?it is difficult to dis-
cover, and although his delineations of rural scenes and employ-
ments, in which he evidently delighted, were derived from the
reminiscences of his birthplace and the haunts of his youth, and
revived by his frequent visits to those familiar spots, yet there
is no evidence that lie travelled much even in England; and it
A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF SHAKESPEARE. 207
is mere matter of conjecture that he ever visited or resided in
foreign countries. In fact, asfar-as can be ascertained, beseems
to have spent his life chiefly between London and Stratford-
upon-Avon ; in the former, associating as a genial companion
with all sorts and conditions of men, alternating extensive study
of books with the ordinary amusements of the day ; and, in the
latter, devoting himself to those domestic cares or pleasures, or
enjoying the calm tranquillity and repose, to be met with in the
life of a country town.
Yet, while so employed, what a profusion of intellectual
wealth did he bestow upon mankind, himself, in all probability,
unconscious of the priceless treasures he was lavishing by his
pen ! Unlike the majority of great authors, but resembling
his prototype, Homer, he lias left no description of his own
individual character, which is entirely merged in the creatures
of his fancy. The personal history and opinions of Homer are
lost in the mists of antiquity, while Achilles and Hector,
Agamemnon and Priam, Ulysses and Nestor, Andromache and
Penelope, stand before us as living realities, depicted in their
habits and language as they lived, or as they might have lived,
drawn from the recesses of the poet's imagination, but marked
with the stamp of Nature and of truth. So the Bard of Avon
intrudes none of his personal sentiments, whatever they may
have been, upon the attention of his readers, with the exception,
perhaps, of some obscure and vague allusions in the " Sonnets."
He threw himself into the characters which he drew, and lost
his own individuality in theirs ; and though Shakespeare himself
were a shadow or a myth, yet Othello and Shylock, and Lear,
and Macbeth, and Falstaff, are the living and breathing repre-
sentative types of human character, of which the faithfulness
to nature is universally conceded, the pictures of which are
impressed upon the minds of all, and their language familiar in
every mouth " as household words."
Regarding the pursuits of Shakespeare in connexion with
his psychological development, it must be admitted that the
exciting motive which gave birth to his marvellous productions
was the necessity of the acquisition of property by means of his
dramatic powers. The precise circumstances under which each
play was produced are at present quite unknown, and the
dates at which they were respectively written are only matters
of ingenious conjecture; but in all probability the composition
of most of them was generally suggested by the emergency of
the moment, as in the dramatic compositions of our own time.
The public demand for novelty, the appearance of some romance
or tale which seemed fit to be adapted for dramatic purposes,
the suggestions of some aristocratic patron, and even the
Q 2
208 A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF SHAKESPEARE.
peculiarities or caprices of the players, may have influenced his
choice of subjects, and may also in some instances have crippled
or perverted his genius. If it be true that Queen Elizabeth,
by wishing to see Falstaff represented as in love, was the motive
power in the production of the " Merry Wives of Windsor," the
inferiority of the Falstaff in this play, as compared with
the same character in the First and Second parts of
" Henry IV.," receives a reasonable explanation, and proves
how widely literary compositions " made to order " differ from
those which spring spontaneously from the author's mind ; for
there is the most marked distinction between the genuine
humour, the overflowing geniality, and, we may add, the gentle-
manly bearing of the Falstaff in " Henry IV.," and the coarse and
vulgar language, the absurd adventures, and the pantomimic
horseplay of the hero of the " Merry Wives." So, too, the
beautiful lines put by Shakespeare into the mouth of Oberon in
the "Midsummer Night's Dream" in reference to the " fair vestal
throned by the west," were obviously intended as a delicate
compliment to his royal patroness ; and the odious and, in fact,
overdrawn picture given by him of Richard III. may be traced
to the desire on the poet's part to depreciate the House of
York, and thereby indirectly to flatter that of Lancaster, from
which the Queen was descended.
A remarkable instance of the influence of external cir-
cumstances on the psychological constitution of Shakespeare is
to be found in the play of Henry VIII. The reign of that
monarch, regarded at a distance of more than three hundred
years, presents apparently an excellent theme for the powers of
the dramatist. Without recalling in detail the history of that
period, its prominent features were the character of the King
himself, a compound of selfishness, vanity, generosity, meanness,
cruelty, scholarship, pedantry, and other heterogeneous and
conflicting qualities; the circumstances attending the Refor-
mation in religion and the controversies on the subject; the
relations existing between the King and the Pope, and the
divorce from Queen Katharine; the murders (for so they
were") of the King's wives, including Anne Boleyn, the mother
of Queen Elizabeth ; and the rise and fall of Cardinal Wolsey.
Now, if Shakespeare had been a free agent, unfettered in the
choice and management of his subject, what a splendid play
might he have written on so copious a theme as Henry VIII. !
But, writing as be did, in the reigns of the King's daughter
and of James I., and anxious, as he evidently was, to secure
or retain the favour of the reigning sovereign, he has pro-
duced only a second-rate play, in which King Henry's bad
qualities are thrown entirely into the background, and his
A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF SHAKESPEARE. 209
good ones, it must be admitted, are not very prominently dis-
played. The characters of Queen Katharine, however, and of
Cardinal Wolsey, are admirably drawn, and form the redeeming
features of the drama. The date of this play is not exactly
known, but from psychological reasoning it is inferred that it
was begun in the reign of Elizabeth, and finished in that of
James I., and the reasoning is as follows:
The chief part of the play being devoted to developing,
though not very forcibly, the good qualities of the King, and the
circumstances of his divorce from Katharine and his marriage
with Anne Boleyn being smoothed over with great tact, the
last scene represents a gorgeous pageant attending the christen-
ing of the infant Elizabeth, when Cranmer takes the oppor-
tunity of delivering a prophetic speech on the future destinies
of the. royal child; and the most fulsome flattery is really
bestowed upon the then aged Queen of England by Shakespeare.
But it is to be observed that in the middle of his speech
Cranmer, or rather Shakespeare, bestows equal flattery on
James I., who is to rise " star-like " and " great in fame," as
herself, and " reach his branches like the mountain-cedar to all
the plains about him " ; and then changing the pronoun " he "
into " she," the praises of Elizabeth are resumed, though it is
admitted " she must die, she must, the saints must have her?
yet a virgin, a most unspotted lily." There can be very little
doubt that the eulogy of James was interpolated by Shake-
speare after the accession of that monarch, and was introduced
to flatter the rising sun, and at the same time to neutralise the
extravagant encomiums lavished on the deceased queen, who,
as is well known, entertained no great regard for her successor.
He, on the other hand, had no regard for her, and on the con-
trary probably held her in detestation as the murderess of his
mother, as no doubt she was, whatever views may be entertained
as to the execution of the unfortunate Queen of Scots and the
causes which led to that event.
Transcendent as were the psychological energies of Shake-
speare, there can, I think, be no question that the plays were
written and produced mainly with the immediate object of
making money; and it is quite certain that Shakespeare him-
self paid little regard to them after they had once served his
purpose. About the year 1612 he quitted London, and spent
the last four years of his life at Stratford-upon-Avon, where he
passed his time in easy circumstances. So far was he from
employing his leisure in correcting or modifying his immortal
works, that his plays were left behind him at the theatre when
he left London, and these were not always correct copies, but
in many cases consisted only of fragmentary scraps or sheets
210 A PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF SHAKESPEARE.
made out for the use of the actors. Seven years after his death
the plays appeared in a collected form in a folio volume, edited
by two of his fellow-actors ; hut, valuable as this collection un-
doubtedly was, it was necessarily imperfect in many particulars,
and hence the innumerable corrections, or supposed corrections,
of the poet's words, and the uncertainty, in too many instances,
of his real meaning in many passages.
Imperfectly as his works have reached the present day, there
are yet amply sufficient materials to prove the colossal nature of
his intellectual powers, although the attempt to form definite con-
clusions as to the psychological processes by which such gigantic
results were achieved must necessarily be abortive. The same
bent of inclination which makes a sign-painter in one case,
develops in another a Leonardo or a Correggio; the appre-
ciation of harmonious versification which is struggling for
expression in the ballad-monger inspires in another instance the
pathetic or humorous strains of a Burns oranEttrick Shepherd;
the ear for music which draws melody from the fiddler on the
village green or the rustic ale-house, becomes, under cultivation
and favouring circumstances, the animating principle of a Mozart
or a Beethoven; and the necessities of the play-house and the
occupation of what may be called dramatic tailoring may pro-
duce little or nothing from thousands of ordinary playwrights,
but they have once, and once only in the history of mankind,
called forth the genius of a Shakespeare!
The psychological study of Shakespeare himself is a difficult,
but a restricted subject, from reasons which have been given in
the above pages; the psychological study of Shakespeare's
characters is a very different and far more extensive theme,
which cannot even be glanced at within the present limits.
