On the Construction, Organisation, and General Arrangements of Hospitals for the Insane
========================================================================================

With some remarks on Insanity and its Treatment.
By Thomas S. Kirkbride,M.D., LL.D., &c. Second Edition. Philadelphia: J. B.
Lippincott & Co., 1880.
122 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.


This valuable work is a perfect encyclopaedia of every matter
connected with the arrangements of hospitals for the insane.
It is thoroughly practical and comprehensive, and the author
has minutely detailed every requisite for the health and com-
fort of the iumates of an asylum.
We quite agree with the writer, that the insane are more
effectually and more economically treated in a well-regulated
asylum than in private care ; and we feel confident that our
contemporary would have no sympathy with the popular
clamour against lunatic asylums in this country. He objects
to very large asylums, and thinks two hundred and fifty patients
the utmost number that can receive the necessary care and
supervision. We have at various times, in our defence of
private asylums, insisted on this principle. It must be ad-
mitted, by every candid observer, that when the patients are
very numerous, it is scarcely possible they can have the same
minute attention as they would if the inmates were fewer.
The first edition of this work, the author informs us, was
published twenty-six years since; and the substance of it had
previously appeared in the pages of the American Journal of
Insanity. His experience of asylum work extends over a
period of forty-five years, which has given him ample opportu-
nities for extensive observation.
The author makes the following good remarks as to the
enclosures and ventilation of asylums :?
" It is desirable that the pleasure grounds and gardens should
be securely enclosed, to protect the patients from the gaze and
impertinent curiosity of visitors, and from the excitement
occasioned by their presence in the grounds. This, therefore,
becomes a matter for consideration in the selection of a site.
" This enclosure should be of a permanent character, about
ten feet high, and so located-that it will not be conspicuous,
even if it is at all visible, from the building. The site, as
well as the position of the building on it, should have some
reference to this arrangement. If sufficient inequalities of
surface exist, the wall or fence, as it may be, should be placed
in the low ground, so as not to obstruct the view ; but if the
country is too level to admit of this, the same end may be
attained by placing the wall in the centre of a line of excava-
tion of sufficient depth to prevent its having an unpleasant
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 123
appearance, and yet to render it entirely effective. Although
the first cost of a wall will be about double that of a fence of
the proper kind, still its durability and greater efficiency in
every respect, will make it cheaper in the end."
" Although a forced ventilation is deemed indispensable in
every hospital for the insane, still a natural ventilation should
never be neglected. In most parts of the United States, during
one-half the year, there is a comfort in the fresh, cool breezes
which may often be made to pass through the wards, that can
not be too highly estimated, and every precaution should be
taken to derive full advantage from them. The darkest, most
cheerless, and worst ventilated parts of such establishments,
will generally be found to be where a wing joins the centre
building, or where one wing comes directly in contact with
another running at right angles to it. The first of these
defects, however, is easily and effectually remedied, by leaving
on each side an open space of ten or twelve feet, with movable
glazed sash extending from near the floor to the ceiling, and
which may either be accessible to the patients, or be protected
by ornamental open wire work on a line with the corridor;
this arrangement gives nearly every advantage of light, air,
and scenery. Behind such a screen, even in the most excited
wards, may be placed with entire security, the most beautiful
evergreen and flowering plants, singing birds, jets of water,
and various other objects, the contemplation of which cannot
fail to have a pleasant and soothing effect upon every class of
patients. To remedy the other difficulty alluded to, instead of
allowing a second wing to come directly in contact with the
first, it should be placed on a parallel line, but made to recede
just so far as will allow its corridor to be open at both extrem-
ities, or as much more as may be deemed desirable, and these
ends should also be furnished with movable glazed sashes,
terminating in a bay window, accessible to the patients, or
protected and ornamented as already suggested, according to
the class by which it is to be occupied, and other circumstances.
If the second range of wings is placed at right angles to the
first, the same arrangement is required, as that suggested
where the first wing joins the centre building. I deem this
mode of finish of great importance, and one of the most valuable
features of the plans under notice. These open arrangements,
where one ward joins another, give all possible advantages
of light and air, and are infinitely preferable to structures
entirely detached, which, besides being more expensive, with-
out having compensating advantages, have many inconve-
niences, that must be obvious to those who are practically
familiar with the management of hospitals.
124 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
" The character of the ground must often decide whether the
building shall be in one extended line, or whether the second
or third range shall be at right angles to the first or second, as
the case may be. If the building is but for one sex there can
be no objection to either of these, and of both plans, outlines
are given."
These remarks on security from fire are well deserving of
attention:?
" In constructing a hospital, every precaution should be taken
to provide against accidents from fire, and the building should
be made as nearly fireproof as circumstances will permit. Iron
girders and brick arching between the different stories would
be desirable everywhere, but the first cost will probably mostly
lead to counter ceiling and other substitutes; or better, the
kitchens and bake-rooms, in which rooms alone it will be
necessary to have fires of any size, should be arched above and.'
below, and the flues leading from them should be constructed
with great care. Instead of making the entire structure fire-
proof, it will answer to have the parts just alluded to and the
passages between the different ranges of wings made positively
fireproof. These last also should be arched, their side walls
should run up from the cellar to the roof, and they should have
stone floors, and iron doors on one side, that can be closed
whenever desired. By this arrangement, a fire commencing
in one section of the wings, could easily be prevented from
spreading to any other, and it might lead to the preservation
of all parts of the structure, except the range in which the fire
originated.
" The buildings should be heated by steam, and the fires for
generating the steam should always be in a fireproof detached
structure, from fifty to one hundred feet from the hospital.
This mode of heating and this locality for the large fires, will
remove the greatest source of accidents from this cause in
nstitutions for the insane."
Also what he says on windows and window-guards is note-
worthy :?
" When, in order to give a proper architectural effect to the
building, the rooms in its centre must have lofty windows, the
lower sash may be guarded as hereafter described, while the
upper may be left as in an ordinary building. This is sufficient
for rooms not regularly used by patients ; but if constantly
occupied, more attention must be paid to security. Inside
shutters, with the upper half permanently closed, and the
lower sash properly guarded, sometimes make a very neat
arrangement in such rooms, and this, or something equivalent,
is necessary for adequate safety.
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 125
" More care, however, must be observed in reference to pa-
tients' chambers and ordinary ward windows. A window
about six feet six inches by three feet, will be found of a con-
venient size, and this will give two sashes, each containing ten
lights 5^ by 18 inches. The window seats may be like those
in common dwellings, and the window should be placed low
enough to make it pleasant to a person sitting in the room.
The upper sash should be of cast or malleable iron, and well
fastened into the frame, while the lower sash, of the same size
and pattern, may be of wood, and hung so as to rise and fall
throughout its whole extent. The cord may be entirely con-
cealed. The space opposite the lower sash should be protected
by a wrought-iron window guard, which, if properly made,
and painted of a white colour, will not prove unsightly. This
kind of guard is always to be very strongly secured to the
window frame, and in such a manner that the screws may not
be accessible to the patients. It should reach to within five
inches of the upper sash, and to within the same distance of
the frame below and at the sides. When of a tasteful pattern
and neatly made, it will be found very preferable in appearance
and quite equal in security, to the unglazed cast-iron sash
occasionally used, and which after all, when the sash is raised,
has to one in the room very much the appearance of two sets
of iron bars, placed at right angles, while the wrought-iron
screen is no more than what is every day seen in certain front
windows of some of the best houses in our large cities.
" Those who recommend unguarded windows, would seem to
have little appreciation of the risks, which are sure to occur,
or of the fatal results, that sooner or later will scarcely fail to
happen. Within a very brief period, without this protection,
three casualties would have taken place in a single institu-
tion, each of which must have ended in most serious, if not
fatal results. Such windows may be safe for certain patients,
but the great difficulty in taking care of the insane, is to know
who are to be trusted and who are not, so many of their actions
come from sudden impulse. The kind of patients for whom
ordinary windows are safe, might really be treated elsewhere
than in hospitals. So of doors left unfastened and unguarded ;
every superintendent can judge for himself of the safety and
propriety of such a course, and the amount of responsibility he
is willing to assume."
Dr. Kirkbride is opposed to the expediency of providing
separate asylums for recent and chronic cases, or those sup-
posed to be incurable. He says if the latter are confined to
special institutions, there is a danger that, after a time, they
will deteriorate mentally and physically
