Lunacy In" England (England's Irren-Wesen)
===========================================

174 Art. II.? 
The Address read at the opening of Section VIII. Mental Diseases of the International
Medical Congress, by C. Lockhart Robertson, M.D., Cantab., F.H.C.P., Lord Chancellor's Visitor
in Lunacy, President of the Section.
Gentlemen,?In now opening the eighth section of this
great International Medical Congress, and in offering to the
alienists of Europe and America our cordial welcome to London,
I must ask leave to explain to you that it is only by the
accident of official position as senior physician to the Lord
Chancellor, who, under the Royal prerogative and by statute,
lias in England the guardianship of all lunatics and persons of
unsound mind, that .1 occupy to-day this presidential chair.
But for the desire of the Executive Committee thus to recognise
the paramount authority of the Lord Chancellor in our department of medicine, I cannot doubt that the place I now fill
would have been allotted to our most distinguished English
writer on lunacy, Dr. J. C. Bucknill, one of the vice-presidents
of this Congress, whose writings and whose name are a household word in all the asylums where the English tongue is
spoken. Called from my official position rather than on personal
fitness to preside in this section, I may the more venture to ask
at your hands a generous interpretation of my efforts, so to guide
your deliberations here that they may advance the science and
practice of this department of medicine in which we are all
enrolled.
I think I shall best use this occasion by laying before you
a brief statement of the present condition of the insane in
England, and of the manner and method of their care and
treatment. In the German tongue the word Irren-Wesen
exactly expresses the subject of this address.
The number of the insane in England of whom we have
official cognisance is about 71,000, being in the ratio of 27*9
per 10,000, or 1 in 350, of the population. Of these no less
than 63,500 are paupers chargeable to the rates and maintained
at the cost of the community. The remaining 7,600 are
private patients, whose means vary from ?50 to ?50,000 a year,
much the larger number being nearer ?50, for insanity necessarily tends, by arresting the power of production, to the
impoverishment of its subjects. Thus, of the total of the
insane in England, 90 per cent, are paupers maintained at the
LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 175
public cost, and 10 per cent, only are kept by their own
resources.
There has, since the passing of the Lunacy Act of 1845, been
a great yearly increase in the registered numbers of the insane,
an increase chiefly if not solely among the pauper class, which
admits of satisfactory explanation, as I have elsewhere* endeavoured to show, without accepting the popular fallacy of an
increase of insanity ; a theory which, if carried to its logical
conclusion, leads us to the result that as the registered lunatics
in 1845 were as 1 to 800 of the population, while in 1880 they
stand, as I have just stated, as 1 to 350, therefore lunacy in
England has more than doubled during the last thirty years,
which is a manifest fallacy. I only regret that my present
limits preclude farther reference to this interesting problem.f
My first table exhibits the number of the insane in England,
with their place of residence and their proportion to the population in the decenniums 1860, 1870, and 1880. This table
shows that the total registered number of the insane has risen
from 38,000 in 1860, to 71,000 in 1880, and the ratio to the
population from 19*1 per 10,000 to 27'9. It is evident from
my figures that this increase is mainly in the pauper class.
The private patients in 1860 numbered 5,065, in 1880 they
were 7,620, and their ratio to the population 2-5 and 2*9 respectively, an increase of *4 only, as compared with the increase
of 8*8 among the pauper lunatics, on each 10,000 of the
population.
Table I.
Showing the number of Lunatics in England and Wales in the several decenniums
1860, 1870, 1880, with their Place of Residence and their Proportion to the
Population.
Where detained
(Place of Residence)
In Public Asylums.
In Private Asylums.
In Workhouses . .
In Private Dwellings
Totals . , .
Ratio per 10,000 of )
the population J
1860
Private Pauper Total
2,000
2,948
None
117
5,065
17,442
1,352
8,210
5,980
Private Pauper Total
19,442
4,300
8,219
6,097
32,993 j 38,058
2,780
3,144
None
356
6,280
28,229
1,760
11,358
7,086
48,433
31,009
4,904
11,358
7,442
54,713
18S0
'rivate Pauper Total
3,754
3,398
None
4G8
39,986
1,141
16,464
5,980
7,620 63,571
43,730
4,549
16,464
6,448
71,191
* The alleged, Increase of Lunacy, Journal of Mental Science, April 1869. A
Farther Note on the alleged Increase of Lunacy, Journal of Mental Science,
January 1871f In the Report of the Scotch Commissioners in Lunacy for 1880, this question
o 2
17 G LUNACY IX ENGLAND.
Table IT. gives tlie distribution per cent, of the 71,000
registered lunatics in England and Wales, and I have here contrasted the same with that of the 10,000 lunatics registered in
Scotland.
Table II.
Showing the Distribution per cent, of all Lunatics in England and Wales and in
Scotland in 1880 (January \st).
In Public Asylums* .
In Private Asylumsf
In Workhouses^ . .
In Private Dwellings?
Total . . .
Distribution per Cent.
In England and Wales
Private Fauper Total
5-0
50
None
?5
56*5
1-5
23-0
8561-5
65
23-0
90
100
In Scotland
Private Pauper T otal
14 6
1 6
None
1-1
610
None
7-0
14 7
75*6
1*6
7-0
15-8
? 100
Table II. is interesting as contrasting the total distribution
of lunacy in England with that of Scotland. In England 61*5
per cent, of the lunacy of the country is maintained in the
public asylums. In Scotland it reaches 75-6 per cent., while, on
the other hand, the proportion of patients in private asylums
is 6*5 per cent, in England as against 1*6 in Scotland. In
England 9 per cent, only of all lunatics are placed for care in
private dwellings; in Scotland the proportion rises to 15*8. In
England we have 23 per cent, in workhouses; in Scotland
there are only 7 per cent.
Table III. gives the relative distribution per cent, of private
and pauper lunatics respectively in England and Wales, and in
Scotland.
of the apparent increase of insanity is ably discussed, and dealt with in a careful
statistical inquiry. I can only here give their conclusion :?" We have frequently
pointed out that the difference in these rates of increase is not necessarily due to
an increasing amount of mental disease, but is probably due in a large measure to
-what is only an increasing readiness to place persons as lunatics in establishments."
* Including County and District asylums and Scotch Parochial asylums,
lunatic hospitals and Scotch chartered asylums, naval, military, and East India
asylums, Idiot asylums, Broadmoor Criminal Asylum, and Perth Prison wards,
f Including provincial and metropolitan licensed houses.
j Including the metropolitan district asylums.
? Including 208 Chancery lunatics residing in the private houses of " the committee of the person."
LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 177
Table III.
Showing the Distribution per cent, on their several Numbers of the Private and
Pauper Lunatics respectively in England and Wales and in Scotland in 1880.
Where Maintained.
In Public Asylums
In Private Asylums .
In Workhouses .
In Private Dwellings .
Total .
Distribution per Cent.
In England and
Wales.
Private. Pauper.
49-0
43 0
None
80
100
63 0
1-6
26-0
9-4
100
In Scotland.
Private. Pauper.
84-0
9-5
None
6 5
100
73-7
None
85
17-8
100
Table III. brings strikingly before us the existing difference
in tlie method of care and treatment of the insane in the two
kingdoms. In England 43 per cent, of the private patients are
in private asylums, while in Scotland the proportion is 9*5 only.
The public asylums, on the other hand, have 84 per cent, of the
Scotch private patients under treatment as against 49 in England.
In England, owing to the traditional preference of the Court of
Chancery for private dwellings for the care of its wards, we find
the proportion of patients so placed stands as 8 to 6*5 in
Scotland, while with pauper lunatics these figures are reversed,
the proportion in England being 9*4 as contrasted with 17'8 in
Scotland.
I. Public Asylums.
There are 43,700 patients in the public asylums of England,
or 60*5 per cent, of the whole lunacy of the country. Of
these 40,000 are pauper lunatics, and 3,700 are private patients.
The former are maintained in the county and borough asylums,
the latter are divided between these and the registered lunatic
hospitals.
(a) County ctncl Borough Asylums.?The county and
borough asylums of England,* sixty in number, contain 40,000
* A return was ordered by llie House of Commons to be printed August 14, 1878,
of the cost of construction of each of the county asylums, the number of beds, the
annual and weekly maintenance rate, the percentage of recoveries, deaths, &c.
Unfortunately it has been, as regards England, carelessly prepared, and no abstract
or summary of its contents or averages aro given. It is impossible to make out
178 LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
beds, varying from 2,000 to 250. They have been built and
are administered under the provisions of the Lunacy Act of
1845. The average cost per bed has been under ?200; the
weekly maintenance of each patient is 10s., to which must be
added the interest on the cost of construction and the yearly
repairs of the asylum, which are borne by the county rate,
bringing the yearly cost for each pauper lunatic maintained in
the county asylums to nearly ?40.
The government of the English county asylums is entrusted,
by the Lunacy Act, 1845, to a committee of the justices of the
peace, under the control of the Secretary of State for the
Home Department. The administration is in the hands of the
resident medical superintendent. A yearly inspection of the
asylum is made by the Commissioners in Lunacy, and a yearly
medical and financial report is presented by the committee and
medical superintendent to the quarter sessions, and published.
The proportion of cures (discharged recovered) in the
county and borough asylums in the last decennium, 1870-80,
was 40*28 per cent, on the admissions, and the mortality 10'59
on the mean population. In Scotland, during the same period,
the recoveries were 41*6, and the deaths 8. The only private
patients admissible under the statute are those bordering on
pauperism, and whom the law requires, as to classification, diet,
clothing, &c., to be treated as the paupers. Herein the English
county asylums differ from those on the continent of Europe and
in America, where alike, and I think most wisely, special and
often excellent provision exists for the care and treatment of
private patients. At the public asylums near Rouen, at Rome,
at Munich, and at Utica, in the States, I have seen extremely
good accommodation provided for private patients.
In Mr. Dillwyn's Lunacy Law Amendment Bill, 1881,
which was read a second time on May 25, but has since been
withdrawn for this session, there was a clause (section 4)
enabling the visitors of county asylums to provide there suitable
accommodation, by additional buildings or otherwise, for private
patients. I regard this proposal as one of the most important
reforms, since the Lunacy Act of 1845, in the treatment of the
insane of the middle class, providing as it would for the small
ratepayers, at a cost within their means, such care and treatment
as they cannot obtain in the cheaper private asylums, where the
clearly in "which asylums the yearly repairs are included in the total cost of construction, and in which they are omitted. The quarter sessions of Warwickshire
have made no return at all! In contrast, in the same Parliamentary paper, stand
the cle ir tables and summary relating to the public asylums of Scotland. From
the English return we can only gather an approximate estimate of the cost of construction, amount of land, salaries, cures, &c., no averages being given.
LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 179
accommodation and comfort are absolutely below that of the
county asylums, not to refer to the superior acquirements of the
medical superintendents of the latter.
I do not feel called upon from this chair (nor does time
admit) to enforce and illustrate the now incontestable superiority
of public asylums, even in a financial point, for the curative
treatment of the insane poor as contrasted with the private
licensed houses, to which, before the Act of 1845, they were
farmed out by their respective parishes. " Our present business
is to affirm that poor lunatics ought to be maintained at the
public charge. I entertain myself a very decided opinion that
none of any class should be received for profit; but all I hope
will agree that paupers, at any rate, should not be the objects of
financial speculation." These words, spoken by Lord Shaftesbury
in the House of Commons when he introduced the Lunacy Act
of 1845 (the Magna Charta of the insane poor), settled this
question once for all. Whose voice will speak similar words of
comfort and healing to the insane of the upper and middle classes,
and declare with authority which shall no longer be questioned,
" that all insane captives whose freedom would not be dangerous
should be liberated, and those who remain be surrounded with
every safeguard of disinterestedness, humanity, and public
responsibility " ?
In here recording the success which has attended the Act of
1845?a success that led my friend Dr. Paget, in his Harveian
Oration, to call the sight of one of our English county asylums
" the most blessed manifestation of true civilisation that the
world can present,"?I cannot refrain from adding a word of
tribute to the memory of my revered friend John Conolly, whose
work of freeing the insane from mechanical restraint, and of
thereby founding our English school of psychological medicine,
preceded the legislation promoted by the Earl of Shaftesbury,
and ensured the success of these enactments.*
* In June, 1839, Dr. Conolly was appointed resident physician at Hanwell.
In September he had abolished all mechanical restraints. The experiment was a
trying one, for this great asylum contained 800 patients. But the experiment
was successful; and continued experience proved incontestably that in a wellordered asylum the use even of the strait-waistcoat might be entirely discarded.
Dr. Conolly went further than this. He maintained that such restraints are in all
cases positively injurious, that their use is utterly inconsistent with a good system
of treatment; and that, on the contrary, the absence of all such restraints is
naturally and necessarily associated with treatment such as that of lunatics ought
to be, one which sxibstitutes menial for bodily control, and is governed in all its
details by the purpose of preventing mental excitement, or of soothing it before
it bursts out into violence. He urged this with feeling and persuasive eloquence,
and gave in proof of it the results of his own experiment at Hanwell. For,
from the time that all mechanical restraints were abolished, the occurrence of
frantic behaviour among the lunatics became less and less frequent. Thus did the
experiments of Charlesworth and Conolly confirm the principles of treatment
180 LUNACY IX ENGLAND.
Dr. Conolly's four annual reports of tlie County Lunatic
Asylum at Hanwell for 1839,'40, '41, '42, still form the groundwork of our treatment of the insane poor in the English county
asylums, while these asylums themselves?whose fame, I may
be permitted to say, based as it is on the successful application
of the English non-restraint system, has gone forth into the
whole civilised world, and brought rescue to the most suffering
and degraded of our race?stand throughout this fair land
imperishable monuments of the statesman to whom they owe
their origin, and of the physician who asserted the great
principle on which the treatment within their walls is founded.
"The system as now established," Dr. Conolly writes, " will
form no unimportant chapter in the history of medicine in
relation to disorders of the mind. It has been carried into practical effect in an intellectual and practical age, unostentatiously,
gradually, and carefully, and is, I trust, destined to endure
as long as science continues to be pursued with a love of truth
and a regard for the welfare of man." *
We have made arrangements whereby you will have the
opportunity of visiting and inspecting two of the best of the
English county asylums, that for Sussex at Hay wards Heath,
and for Surrey at Brookwood; the State Asylum for Criminal
Lunatics at Broadmoor, as also the four great metropolitan
asylums, with a joint population of 6,600 lunatics, at Hanwell,
Colney Hatch, Banstead, and Wandsworth. There has since
the Lunacy Act of 1845 been a steady increase in the number
of pauper lunatics placed in the county asylums. In 1860 the
proportion was 57 per cent., in 1870 it rose to 61 per cent.,
and in 1880 it was nearly 65 per cent, of their number. I
think this continued increase is most injurious alike to the
insane poor and to the due administration of the county
asylums. The accumulation in such large numbers of harmless
and incurable lunatics in these costly asylums is, moreover, a
needless burden on the rates.
We may now, with an experience of thirty-five years, assert
inaugurated by Daquin and Pinel; and prove that the best guide to the treatment
of lunatics is to be found in the dictates of an enlightened and refined benevolence.
And so the progress of science, by way of experiment, has led men to rules of
practice nearer and nearer to the teachings of Christianity. To my eyes a pauper
lunatic asylum, such as may now be seen in cur English counties, with its pleasant
grounds, its airy and cleanly wards, its many comforts, and wise and kindly superintendence, provided for tho?e whose lot it is to bear the double burden of poverty
and mental derangement?I say this sight is to me the most blessed manifestation
of rrue civilisation that the world can present."?The Harveian Oration, 1866, by
George E. Paget, M.D. Cantab., Regius Professor of Medicine in the University of
Cambridge.
* "The Treatment of the Insane without Mechanical Restraint," by John
Conolly, M.D Edin,D.C.L. London: Smith, Elder, & Co. 18o6.
LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 181
that the utmost limits within which the county asylum can
benefit or is needed for the treatment of the insane poor is 50
per cent, of their number,* and that a further accumulation of
lunatics there serves no practical purpose, and hence is an
unjustifiable waste of public money. The workhouses contain
16,500 pauper lunatics, or 26 per cent, of their number. A
recent statute facilitates the adaptation of wards in the county
workhousesf for the reception of lunatics ; and if these arrangements were properly carried out, I think another 14 per cent.,
or 40 per cent, of the incurable and harmless pauper lunatics
and idiots, might be provided for in the workhouses. That this
is no fancy estimate I may quote the parish of Brighton, long
distinguished for its wise and liberal administration of the
Poor-law, which has already 36 per cent, of its insane poor in
the workhouse wards, and 55 per cent, only in the county
asylum. The transfer of twenty chronic cases?no impossible
feat?from Ilaywards Heath to the Brighton workhouse wards
would at once bring the Brighton statistics up to my ideal
standard for the distribution of pauper lunatics?viz., in county
asylums, 50 per cent.; in workhouse wards, 40 per cent.;
leaving 10 per cent, for care in private dwellings.
(b) Lunatic Hospitals {Middle-class Public Asylums).?
Besides the county asylums for the insane poor we have in
England fifteen lunatic hospitals, including the idiot asylums
at Earlswood and Lancaster, where the principle of hospital
treatment followed in the county asylums is applied to the
insane of the upper and middle class with the most satisfactory
results.
The following table gives a list of these asylums, with the
* There is a unanimous concurrence of opinion on the part of the Lunacy
officials nnd the Visiting Justices, that the grant from the Consolidated Fund of
4s. a week made by Lord Beaconsfield's Government in 1874, for every pauper
lunatic detained in the county asylums, has led to a needless increase in the admission there of aged lunatics and idiot children, who were and can with equal
facility be kept in the workhouses. This grant has risen year by year, and in the
estimates of 1881-82 is placed at ?425,000. Instead of relieving the lauded
interest, as this ill-considered attempt to shift part of their burden on the
fund-holders was intended, it has actually increased the county rate by the
forced enlargements and extension of the county asylums. The editor of The
Times, in 1874: and 1878, allowed me at some length to direct attention to this
yearly increasing misdirection of the public funds. It is to be hoped that when
the heavy local taxation of England is readjusted, this outlet of wasteful expenditure
may not be overlooked.
f The success ot the metropolitan district asylums at Leavesden, Caterham,
and Darenth, -which contain 4,470 chronic lunatics maintained at the rate of 7s. a
week, shows how, even in so difficult a place as London, the treatment of chronic
and harmless pauper lunatics in workhouse wards is to be accomplished, with a
large saving to the ratepayers and a relief to the crowded wards of the county
asylums, which are thus made available for the curative treatment of acute and
recent cases.
182 LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
date of their foundation, their present accommodation (number
of beds), and their average weekly cost of maintenance.
Table IV.
The Registered Lunatic Hospitals (Middle-class Asylums) in England, with the
Date of th'ir Foundation, the Number of Beds, and the Average Weekly Cost
of Maintenance in 1880.
Name and Site of Asylum.
(Registered Hospital.)
Date of
Foundation
Number
of
Beds
Average
Weekly
Cost *
Bethlem Royal Hospital
St. Luke's Hospital ...
York Lunatic Hospital
Friends' Retreat, York
Wonford House, Exeter
Lincoln Lunatic Hospital ...
Bethel Hospital, Norwich ...
Warneford Asylum, Oxford ...
St. Andrew's Hospital, Northampton
Cheedle Asylum, Manchester
The Coppice, Nottingham ...
Coton Hill, Stafford ...
Barnwood House, Gloucester
Earlswood Idiot Asylum
Albert Idiot Asylum, Lancaster
1400
1751
1777
1792
1801
1820
1825
1826
1836
1819
1859
1854
1860
1847
1864
300
200
160
150
100
to
70
70
300
180
70
150
110
570
350
? s. d.
1 11 7
0 19 3
1 1 1
1 12 6
1 11 0
1 S 2
0 15 2
1 2 7
1 10 1
2 2 0
1 10 4
1 12 10
1 14 3
0 18 2
0 14 0
These asylums have nearly 3,000 beds, and the average
weekly cost of maintenance is ?\. 10s., or, including the fabric
account, .?1. 15s.
There are 7,828 private lunatics registered in England, who
are thus distributed :?
In registered hospitals   2702 or 36 per cent."l In public
In county asylums     484 or 6 ? > asylums
In state asylums   558 or 7 ,, J 49 p. c.
In private asylums   3408 or 43 .,
In private dwellings   676 or 8 ?
The existing lunatic hospitals, or middle-class public asylums,
thus already receive 36 per cent, of all the private patients.
The advocates of this method of treatment of the insane, as
opposed to the private asylum system, may now fairly say that
by thus providing for the care and treatment of 36 per cent, of
the private lunatics they have demonstrated the practicability
of this method as applicable to the other 43 per cent, now in
private asylums.
They can also appeal to the official statistics to show their
* The fabric charges are not included in these figures. Another 5s. a week
must be added to complete this estimated weekly cost of maintenance.
LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 183
superiority as regards results over the private asylums. In the
last decennium, 1870-80, the average recoveries per cent, on the
admissions in the registered hospitals was 46'84 ; in the metropolitan private asylums it was 30-5 ; and in the provincial
private asylums 34*7. The mean annual mortality during the
same period was in the registered hospitals 8*12 ; in the metropolitan private asylums it rose to 11*01; and in the provincial
private asylums it was 8*81. They may, moreover, point to
Scotland and say that while in England 49 per cent, of the
private patients only are provided for in public asylums, 84 per
cent, are so cared for in Scotland. What has been accomplished
in Scotland may surely be done in England. And certainly, as
their strong and final argument, they may challenge a comparison of these asylums, conducted at half the cost, with the
best of the private asylums in England. We have made
arrangements for your visiting Bethlem* and St. Luke's in
London, and also the middle-class asylum, St. Andrew's Hospital,
Northampton. I should very much like you to see St. Andrew's
Hospital, which now contains 300 private patients of the upper
and middle classes, from whose payments it derives a revenue
of ?40,000 a year, of which ?10,000 was saved last year for
further extensions. It would be difficult to over-praise the
power of organisation which has enabled Mr. Bayley, the
medical superintendent, to achieve this great result in the last
ten years only. I can from frequent visitation speak of the
order and comfort which reign throughout this asylum.
Mr. Dillwyn's Select Committee, in their Beport (March 28,
1878), suggested " that legislative facilities should be afforded
by enlargement of the powers of the magistrates or otherwise
for the extension of the public asylum system for private patients,"
and in his Lunacy Law Amendment Bill, 1881, read a second
time in May, Section 1 enables the justices to provide asylums
for the separate use of private lunatics in like manner as the
county pauper asylums were built. There can be no doubt, after
the experience I have just related of St. Andrew's Hospital,
Northampton, that, especially in the populous Home Counties,
where no public provision for private lunatics exists, several such
asylums, with 300 beds, might be built on the credit of the rates,
and would in 30 years repay the capital and interest sunk out
of the profits, and without, therefore, costing the ratepayers one
penny. This clause alone would have made of Mr. Dillwyn's Bill a
great gift to the insane of the upper and middle class.| I cannot
* In the Journal of Mental Science for July, 1876, there is a very interesting
sketch of the History of Bethlem Hospital since 1400, by Dr. Hack Tuke.
f I brought this whole subject before the Brighton Medical Society in 1862, in
a paper on The want of a Middle-class Asylum in Sussex, subsequently inserted
in the Journal of Mental Science for January 1863.
184 LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
but regret that so valuable a measure had to be withdrawn from
want of time. It is already a well-worn complaint that home
legislation is in England sadly impeded by the weary Irish
agitation and debates.
Another method of providing public accommodation for
private patients was laid by me before Mr. Dillwyn's Select
Committee, in a Memorandum on the Establishment of three
State Asylums for Chancery Lunatics, signed by Dr. Bucknill,
Dr. Crichton Browne, and myself. The insane wards of the
Court of Chancery pay upwards of ?100,000 a year for care and
treatment in private asylums. Certainly no loss could be
incurred by the Treasury in advancing sums to build these
asylums, where the yearly profits would, as at St. Andrew's
Hospital, ensure the regular repayment of capital and interest.
As the Court of Chancery controls in every detail the expenditure
of the income of its insane wards, it is not an unreasonable demand
to require that Court to provide fit public asylum accommodation,
and such as the visitors deem necessary, for the Chancery patients
now placed in private asylums, in the selection of which their
official visitors have no voice, and over the conduct and management of which they exercise no control.
II. Private Asylums.
There are 3,400, or 43 per cent., of the private patients in
England confined in private asylums, of whom 1,850 or 54 per
cent, are in the thirty-five metropolitan licensed houses which are
under the sole control and direction of the Commissioners in
Lunacy, who diligently visit them six times a year. The remaining 1,550, or 46 per cent., are in the sixty-one provincial licensed
houses which are under the jurisdiction of the justices in quarter
sessions, but are inspected twice a year by the Lunacy Commissioners. I cannot?even did I so desire?avoid, in an address
like the present, stating to you my opinion of this method of
treatment of the insane. The tenor of my remarks, when referring
to the extension of the lunatic hospitals (middle-class asylums),
has already shown the direction towards which my opinions and
feelings tend. John Stuart Mill, the strenuous advocate of
freedom of contract, nevertheless, in his Political Economy,
in treating of this subject, observes that " insane persons should
everywhere be regarded as proper objects of the care of the
State," and, in quoting this authority, I must add, from long
personal observation, my opinion that it would be for the
interests of the insane of the upper and middle class to be
treated as are the paupers in public asylums, where no questions
LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 185
of self-interest can arise, and where the physician's remuneration
is a fixed salary, and not the difference between the payments
made by his patients for board and lodging and the sums he
may expend on their maintenance. " Is there not," writes Dr.
Maudsley, " sufficient reason to believe that proper medical
supervision and proper medical treatment might be equally well
if not better secured by dissociating the medical element entirely
from all questions of profit and loss, and allowing it the unfettered exercise of its healing function ? Eminent and accomplished physicians would then engage in this branch of practice
who now avoid it because it involves so many disagreeable
necessities."
Probably all not directly interested in this system, and many
who, to their own regret, are so, will concur that, if the work
had to be begun anew, the idea of licensed private asylums for
the treatment of the insane^ of the upper and middle class
would be, by every authority in the State, as definitely condemned as was in 1845 the practice of farming out the insane
poor to lay speculators in lunacy. It is, however, a different
matter dealing with an established system, and I am not of
those who call for the suppression of all private asylums. The
friends of many patients in England distinctly prefer them to
public asylums, and some patients, who have had experience of
both, contrast the personal consideration and study of their
little wants which they receive in private asylums with the
discipline and drill of the public institutions. I sae no reason
why private asylums should not continue to exist side by side
with the public middle-class asylums. Time and competition
will show which system shall ultimately gain the approval of
the public. I am glad to find this opinion supported by Dr.
Arthur Mitchell, Commissioner in Lunacy for Scotland, in his
evidence before the Parliamentary Committee of 1877.
" I think," he said, " there should be no legislation tending
to the suppression of private asylums. I would let the principles of free trade settle the matter. If the public have
confidence in private asylums, and encourage them, I would let
private asylums exist. I would give them no privileges, and
would simply take care that the inspection and control over
them are sufficient."
The verdict of public opinion in Scotland has been definitely
against the private asylum system. While in England 43 per
cent, of the private patients are confined in private asylums,
the proportion in Scotland falls to 9*5.
If private asylums are to continue, there should be entire
freedom of trade in the business. The Lunacy Commissioners
have for many years placed endless impediments in the way of
186 LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
licensing new and small asylums in the metropolitan district.
I entirely differ from this policy, and I think that small
asylums for four or six patients, licensed to medical men, would
tend to lessen the existing evils of the larger private asylums.
The monopoly which the Commissioners have established in
the metropolitan district has certainly not raised the asylums
there to a higher standard than those of the provinces, where
free trade in lunacy prevails. I am tempted to say that it has
had the contrary effect.
III. The Insane in Private Dwellings.
Further reform in the treatment of the insane is not merely
a question of whether and how they shall be detained in public
or private asylums, but rather whether and when they should
be placed in asylums at all, and when and how they shall be
liberated from their imprisonment and restored to the freedom
of private life. This is the reform in lunacy treatment which
is beginning at last to take hold on the public mind in England,
and has received a new impulse by the recent publication of an
essay by Dr. Bucknill On the Care of the Insane and their
Legal Control.*
It is more than twenty years ago since the question of the
needless sequestration of the insane was first raised in England
by my friend Baron Jaromir Mundy, of Moravia. He spoke
then to dull and heedless ears. I remember well I thought
him an amiable enthusiast, and I said there was no fit or proper
treatment for the insane to be found out of the walls of an
asylum. I have since learnt a wiser experience. Well did he
say, on leaving us, arbores serit diligens agricola quarum
fruetus nunquam aspiciet. I am very glad to have this
opportunity of doing honour to the zeal and far-seeing wisdom
of the first preacher of this new crusade; would he were here
with us to-day to accept my formal adherence to his cause.
There is, I believe, for a large number of the incurable
insane, a better lot in store than to drag on their weary days in
asylum confinement:?
The staring eye glazed o'er with sapless days,
The slow mechanic pacings to and fro,
The set gray life and apathetic end.
In my evidence before Mr. Dillwyn's Select Committee in
1877 I was examined at some length on this question, and I
stated that, but for my experience as Lord Chancellor's Visitor,
* Macmillan & Co., second edition. London, 1880.
LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 187
and if I had not personally watched their cases, I could never
have believed that patients who were such confirmed lunatics
could be treated in private families in the way that Chancery
lunatics are. I also said that one-third of the Chancery patients
were already so treated out of asylums, and I added that I was
of opinion that one-third of the present inmates of the private
asylums might be placed in family treatment with safety. In
support of this opinion I put in this table :?
Table V.
Showing the Proportion per cent, in Asylums and in Private Dwellings of the
Chancery Lunatics and of the Private Patients (Lunatics not Paupers) under
the Commissioners in Lunacy in England and Wales and in Scotlan d.
Chancery Lunatics
English Private Lunatics
Scotch Private Lunatics
Proportion per Cext.
In Lunatic
Asylums
654
94-1
93-8
Under Home
Treatment in
Private Dwellings
34-G
5-9
6-1
This table deserves your attention. If 34*6 per cent, of the
Chancery lunatics are successfully treated in private dwellings,
while only 65-4 per cent, are in asylums, it is evident that of
the private patients under the Lunacy Commissioners, of whom
94 per cent, are in asylums, some 30 per cent, are there needlessly, and hence wrongly confined. I see instances of such
cases every visit I pay to the private asylums.
Another convert to his cause, made by Baron Mundy, is one
of the distinguished vice-presidents of this section, Dr. Henry
Maudsley, who, in 1867, in the first edition of his work on the
Physiology and Pathology of the Mind, strenuously condemns
the indiscriminate sequestration of the insane in asylums,
observing:?" the principle which guides the present practice
is, that an insane person, by the simple warrant of his insanity,
should be shut up in an asylum, the exceptions being made of
particular cases. This I hold to be an erroneous principle. The
true principle to guide our practice should be this: that no one,
sane or insane, should ever be entirely deprived of his liberty,
unless for his own protection, or for the protection of society."
Dr. Maudsley (to strengthen his argument) pointed to the
condition of the numerous Chancery patients in England who
188 LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
are living in private houses. " I have," lie writes, " the best
authority for saying that their condition is eminently satisfactory, and such as it is impossible it could be in the best
asylum," and he concluded an elaborate defence of this method
of cure with this remark:?" I cannot but think that future
progress in the improvement of the treatment of the insane lies
in the direction of lessening the sequestration, and increasing
the liberty of them. Many chronic insane, incurable and harmless, will be allowed to spend the remaining days of their
sorrowful pilgrimage in private families, having the comforts of
family life, and the priceless blessing of the utmost freedom
that is compatible with their proper care."
In his recent essay on The Care of the Insane, Dr. Bucknill
has a chapter entitled " Household Harmony "?
After many moody thoughts,
At last by notes of household harmony
They quite forgot their loss of liberty.
I give you therefrom his final and weighty conclusions in his
own words :?" It is not merely the happv change which takes
place in confirmed lunatics when they are judiciously removed
from the dreary detention of the asylum into domestic life ; it
is the efficiency of the domestic treatment of lunacy during the
whole course of the disease which constitutes its greatest value,
and of this the author's fullest and latest experience has convinced him that the curative influences of asylums have been
vastly overrated, and that those of isolated treatment in
domestic care have been greatly undervalued."
What I have hitherto said under this section applies to the
home treatment of private patients. The treatment of pauper
lunatics in private dwellings is another part of this question,
and in which important financial results are involved. The
system takes its origin from Grheel, and has been adopted in
Scotland with great success. No less than 14*7 per cent, of the
insane poor in Scotland are placed in private dwellings, under
the official inspection of the Lunacy Board. I)r. Arthur
Mitchell's evidence before Mr. Dillwyn's Select Committee and
the several annual reports of the Scotch Commissioners give
details of this method of treatment, which my limits only allow
me now to refer you to. Financially the cost of this treatment
does not reach Is. a day; in the county asylums (including the
cost of the fabric) it is not less than 2s., a difference of 100 per
cent, in expenditure.
With regard to England, 6,000 pauper lunatics, or 8-5 per
cent, of their number, are registered as living with their relatives, or boarded in private dwellings, under the authority of
LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 189
tlie boards of guardians, whose medical officers visit the patients
every quarter, and make returns to the Visitors of the county
asylums, to the Lunacy Commissioners, and to the Local Government Board. None of these authorities, however, take much
notice of the returns, and little or nothing is known of the condition, care, or treatment of these 6,000 pauper lunatics. Any
further amendment of the Lunacy Law should certainly, in some
way, bring them within the cognisance and inspection of the
Lunacy Commissioners, as is done in Scotland.
A successful effort further to extend this system in England
is related by Dr. S. W. D. Williams, the Medical Superintendent
of the Sussex County Asylum, Hay wards Heath, in his evidence
before Mr. Dillwyn's Select Committee, and also in a paper,
Our Overcrowded Lunatic Asylums, published by him in the
Journal of Mental Science for January 1872. My limits
compel me to be satisfied with this brief reference to the
important questions included in this third section of my
address, " The Insane in Private Dwellings."
IV. Tiie English Lunacy Law.
Lastly, I would say a few words on the Lunacy Law of
England, which, setting aside the special statutes, dating from
King Edward II., regulating the proceedings in Chancery, are
the result of the legislation of 1845, and consist chiefly of Acts
amending other Acts. They form a large volume, which has
been carefully edited by Mr. Fry.* A Bill for the general consolidation and amendment of these several statutes is an urgent
need. The Government of Lord Beaconsfield announced, in
Her Majesty's speech from the throne on the opening of Parliament in February 1880, that such a measure was in preparation;
and although the political necessities of the Irish question have
this year unfortunately absorbed all the energies and time of
the Government, we have assurance, in the extreme solicitude
which the Lord Chancellor on all occasions so markedly shows
for the welfare of the insane, that the Government will be prepared to give the question of Lunacy Law Reform their early
and careful attention. I am disposed to think that, previous to
such legislation, a Eoyal Commission should be issued to investigate and report on the working in detail of the Lunacy Law,
and to make suggestions for its consolidation and amendment.
* "The Lunacy Acts: containing the statutes relating to Private Lunatics,
Pauper Lunatics, Criminal Lunatics, Commissioners of Lunacy, Public and Private
Ajylums, and the Commissioners in Lunacy; with an Introductory Commentary,
&C." By Panby P. Pry, of Lincoln's Inn, Barrister-at-law. Second Edition.
London, 1877PART II. VOL. VII. NEW SERIES. P
190 LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
It is exactly twenty-one years since a Parliamentary Committee reported to the House " On the Operation of the Acts of
Parliament and Regulations for the Care and Treatment of
Lunatics and their PropertyMany changes have passed
over this department of medicine since the date of that report,
and the temporary amendments of the Lunacy Law of 1845,
which resulted therefrom, have almost served their purpose.
The chief of these enactments " the Lunacy Acts Amendment
Act 1862," passed the following year, and embodied the various
suggestions of the Lunacy Commissioners, based on their experience of the working of the Act of 1845, and from an official
point of view was a valuable contribution to the Lunacy Law,
but it failed to give effect to many of the recommendations of
the Select Committee of 1860. In the same year passed "the
Lunacy Eegulation Act 1862," which led to considerable amendment of the proceedings in Chancery. The important requisite,
however, of a cheap and speedy method of placing the property
of lunatics under the guardianship of the Lord Chancellor has
yet to be attained. One of the most experienced officials in
Chancery, Master Barlow, in his evidence before Mr. Dillwyn's
Committee, in 1877, said :?"I am a great advocate for a great
reform in Lunacy (Chancery) proceedings; I would facilitate
the business of the procedure in the office, and shorten it in
such a way as to reduce the costs."
After the evidence given by Dr. Arthur Mitchell before
Mr. Dillwyn's Select Committee of 1877, it is evident that in
the consolidation and amendment of the English Lunacy Laws,
the Scottish Lunacy Law and practice must be carefully considered. It is in Scotland alone that the whole lunacy of
the kingdom is under the control and cognisance of the Lunacy
Board.*
Again, the relation of the Lunacy Commissioners to the
county asylums under the County Financial Boards (whose
advent is nigh at hand) is a difficult question, the final solution of which will influence for good or evil the future of these
asylums. Herein also falls the question I have before referred
to, of the annual Parliamentary grant for pauper lunatics
maintained in asylums, and reaching now to half a million
a year. Is the central government to check, through the
distribution of this grant, the county boards ; or are they to
retain the same authority over the county asylums as is now
exercised by the justices in quarter sessions? The whole
* I may be pardoned, if I venture here to refer to the annual reports of the
Commissioners in Lunacy for Scotland, as containing an amount of well-digested
statistical information regarding the lunacy of the kingdom, which we search for
in vain elsewhere.
LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 191
future efficiency of tlie English county asylums depends upon
the right adjustment of the relative control given to the local
authorities through the new county boards, and to the central
government through the Commissioners in Lunacy.
There is also for consideration, as in contrast with the
Lunacy Laws of Scotland, the divided jurisdiction of the Local
Government Board and the Commissioners in Lunacy over
pauper lunatics in workhouses, of whom 17,000, or 26 per
cent, of their number, are there and in the metropolitan district
asylums under the control of the Local Government Board
with the merest shadow of inspection by the Lunacy Commissioners. Again, to what extent is the credit of the ratepayers to be used in the establishment of public asylums for
private patients ? I have already said how much I desire to
see the public asylum system, as now existing in the registered
lunatic hospitals, extended, more particularly in the Home
Counties, by this method. Then the wide question of official
asylum inspection. Is the present amount of it enough, and
the method of it sufficient for the needs and protection of the
insane, or does the Lunacy Commission require both extension
and remodelling?
These are but a few examples of the difficulties besetting
the question before us of the consolidation and amendment of
the English Lunacy Law, and which lead me to the opinion
that the whole subject, now ripe for solution, requires skilful
and scientific sifting by a Royal Commission, previous to any
consolidating and amending Act being laid before Parliament.
I am glad to have this occasion to express my personal confidence in the ability, industry, and integrity with which the
existing Lunacy Law is administered by the Commissioners. If
I were disposed to criticise their policy, I might say that they
trust too much to their one remedial agent, the extension of
the county asylums, for meeting all the requirements and
exigencies of the insane poor, while as regards the private
asylums, with 54 per cent, of the private asylum population
under their sole control in the metropolitan district, that they
have from the first, since 1845, been content to enforce the
remedying of immediate shortcomings, rather than endeavoured
to place before the proprietors any standard of excellence to
which they shall attain.
In concluding my remarks on the last section of my subject?the Lunacy Law of England?I would say that no mere
amending Act like that of 1862, embodying simply the further
suggestions of the Lunacy Commissioners, will satisfy the requirements of the medical profession or of the public. In the
evidence taken before Mr. Dillwyn's Select Committee in 1877
p 2
192 LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
will be found many suggestions for the further amendment of
the Lunacy Law of an important character, one or two of which
Mr. Dillwyn embodied in his Lunacy Law Amendment Bill of
this year, which, as I have already said, has been withdrawn.
It is impossible for any private member of Parliament, actuated
though he be by an earnest desire to remedy grave evils, to
deal with so wide and complicated a question as the consolidation and amendment of the English Lunacy Law. No one is
more fully aware of this impossibility than is Mr. Dillwyn, and
no member of the House is prepared more heartily to support
the Government in passing a wide and comprehensive measure
of Lunacy Law Eeform.
I fear, gentlemen, that I have exceeded the limits of an
opening address. Yet the wide subject which I selected?
Lunacy in England (England's Irren- Wesen)?did not admit of
shorter treatment or of further compression. It is, after all, but
a bare outline that I have to-day been able to sketch, of the
present condition of the insane in England and the manner and
method of their care and treatment. I may claim to have
endeavoured to give you a truthful picture of our present state,
and I certainly have not desired to hide our many shortcomings
from you. Indeed, my object in selecting this subject for my
address, is the hope, that the position I fill to-day in this great
International Medical Congress, may gain for my ideas on lunacy
reform, which I have thus brought before this section, a practical
recognition such as I could not, under other circumstances,
expect my humble opinions to command. If such a result
should follow, I truly believe that the use I have made of this
great opportunity, may be the means of extending to the insane
of all classes in England that further measure of protection
and liberty, which the experience of the past working in the
County Asylums of the Lunacy Act of 1845, on the lines of the
non-restraint system, has now shown to be alike practicable and
safe.
