Codification of the Common Law as to Insanity
==============================================

211 Art. IV.?
By EDWARD C. MANN, M.D., Physician-in-Chief to Sunnyside Retreat for Mental
and Nervous Diseases, New York, U.S.A.

I am sure that the acute minds of many of our most distinguished lawyers have not failed to perceive the incongruities
and deficiencies of the present law, and yet there are many
who seem adverse to any attempt to make the law of insanity
more conformable than it is with medical science. Lord
Justice Bramwell told the Select Committee on the Homicide
Bill: " I think that, although the present law lays down such a
definition of madness that nobocly is havclly ever really mad
enough to be within it* yet it is a logical and a good definition."
He farther stated that, in his opinion, the law was right,
because it might deter many insane persons from crime by the
threat of punishment. Lord Justice Blackburn, in his testimony before the Select Committee on the Homicide Bill, said:
" On the question of what amounts to insanity that would
prevent a person being punishable or not, I have read every
definition which I ever could meet with, and never was satisfied
with one of them, and have endeavoured in vain to make one
satisfactory to myself. I verily believe that it is not in human
power to do it. You must take it that in every individual
case you must look at the circumstances and do the best you
can to say whether it was the disease of the mind which was
the cause of the crime, or the party's criminal will." He also
said : " But we cannot fail to see that there are cases where the
person is clearly not responsible, and yet knew right from
wrong" He then goes on to give the case of a woman he tried
who had killed one child and was going to kill another, but who
fortunately dropped the second child and went to a neighbour,
telling her what she had done. This woman clearly knew the
difference between right and wrong, and knew the character of
her act, and, on the definition in the M(Naughten case in 1843,
was guilty. Lord Justice Blackburn, however, as the woman
was a raving maniac, so charged the jury on the ground of
exceptional cases that the jury found her " not guilty, on the
ground of insanity," and rightly. The Lord Chief Justice of
England, in his criticism of Sir Fitzjames Stephen's plan of
* Italics are mine.
212 CODIFICATION OF THE COMMON LAW AS TO INSANITY.
codifying the law of insanity, said : u As the law as expounded
by the Judges in the House of Lords now stands, it is only when
mental disease produces incapacity to distinguish between right
and wrong that immunity from the penal consequences of crime
is admitted. The present Bill introduces a new element?the
absence of the power of self-control. I concur most heartily in
the proposed alteration of the law, having been always strongly
of opinion that, as the pathology of insanity abundantly
establishes, there are forms of mental disease in ivhich,
though the patient is quite aware he is about to do wrong, the
will becomes overpowered by the force of irresistible impulse;
the power of self-control, when destroyed or suspended by
mental disease, becomes, I think, an essential element of
responsibility.'''' The Lord Chief Justice of England, in his
weighty and truly scientific opinion, the intrinsic weight of
which is immense, deserves the admiration of both the legal and
medical profession all over the world. Lord Moncrieff, the Lord
Justice Clerk of Scotland, has said from the bench that "m
point of fact there are very few lunatics who do not know
right from wrong" an opinion which I have myself insisted on
before the New York Medico-Legal Society in two different
papers read there. If we have the absence of self-control
produced by disease of the body affecting the mind, in any
given case of homicide on trial, it seems to me that every fairminded lawyer in America will concur in acknowledging that
we have here a philosophic or scientific principle on which to
found the plea of "not guilty, on the ground of insanity," and
one which includes the cases of all insane criminals. It does
not seem to me that in the question of what constitutes insanity
the members of the two great professions of law and medicine
should, or at all need to, entertain essentially different and
irreconcilable views, or that on the question of the irresponsibility of criminals who are supposed to be insane there should
be such a diversity of opinion as exists to-day. The physician
naturally studies the whole history of his patient and his
ancestry, and searches for the causes of any bodily and mental
changes that he finds, and thus arrives at the true pathology of
the disease; while the lawyer and jurist is mainly interested in
the existence of mental disease, its degree and its influence on
conduct. We know far more about insanity than they did in the
last generation, and it is obviously unfair that laws pertaining
to insanity, when the knowledge of that disease was comparatively in its infancy, should not be amended to keep pace with
our increased knowledge of the pathology of mental disease In
that form of homicidal monomania where the patient is
possessed of a sudden, blind, motiveless, unreasoning impulse
CODIFICATION OF THE COMMON LAW AS TO INSANITY. 213
to kill, I do not think that there is any desire, motive or reasoning intention to commit such a deed, the true pathology of this
form of insanity consisting, it seems to me, in a vis a tergo
received from the diseased action of the brain. We have here
a diseased state of mind with absence of self-control. We
have in suicidal monomania also a vis a tergo received from the
diseased action of the brain, in which, while perhaps our patient
exhibits no other mental derangement, with no delusion or
other intellectual disorder, the blind, motiveless, unreasoning
impulse to suicide which, alike with the homicidal impulse, is
the joint result of undoubted insanity. In both these cases the
impulse is long enduring, and gives rise to actions of patient
deliberation, and of cunning contrivance. The lawyer and
physician are willing alike to recognise disease in the suicidal
act; why, then, the apparent unwillingness to recognise disease in
the homicidal act ? We must not look at these questions socially
and ethically, but by the aid of the light of modern pathology, as
the Lord Chief Justice of England has done already. There are
many persons born with a predisposition to madness, and
symptoms indicating that disease display themselves at frequent
intervals through the whole course of life, but for many years
may never reach such a pitch as to induce those in contact with
such persons to treat them as insane. When an overt act is
committed by such persons, can anyone question the value of a
careful study of the past life and acts of the accused ? His
life has exhibited the natural history of insanity, and with our
present accurate and trustworthy method of investigation, a
careful and experienced physician in nervous diseases can clearly
point out to the lawyer and jurist the unmistakable evidences of
mental disease which the latter, necessarily, alone and unaided,
could not discover. The lawyer and physician should naturally
aid each other in such investigations, impartially and by the
light of science. I have elsewhere pointed out that epileptics
are to be classed in the most homicidal group of all, also that
puerperal women and women at the climacteric period are
subject at times to dangerous delusions, and also that kleptomania is a peculiarity of a certain number of cases of general
paralysis. These facts are classical, and should be so accepted
by the judiciary and by the legal profession generally. In a
paper on " Mental Kesponsibility and the Diagnosis of Insanity
in Criminal Cases," read before the New York Medico-Legal
Society and subsequently published in the English Journal of
Psychological Medicine and Mental Pathology, I suggested a
series of eight questions which, it seemed to me, if adopted by
jurists in criminal cases, would form a most efficient and just
test in any given case. Perhaps the legal profession may prefer
214 CODIFICATION OF TIIE COMMON LAW AS TO INSANITY.
the simpler proposition which, as the result of Sir Fitzjames
Stephen's attempt to codify the common law of England on
insanity, may be briefly summed up as follows, viz., homicide is
not criminal if the person by whom it is committed is, at the
time when he commits it, prevented by any disease affecting
his mind from controlling his own conduct. This is very
simple and very comprehensive, and therefore the legal profession may very properly prefer it to my own. The eight questions which I proposed in my paper are as follows, viz.:
1. Have the prisoner's volitions, impulses or acts, been
determined or influenced at all by insanity, and are his mental
functions?thought, feeling, and action?so deranged, either
together or separately, as to incapacitate him for the relations
of life ?
2. Does the prisoner come of a stock whose nervous constitution has been vitiated by some defect or ailment calculated
to impair its efficiency or damage its operations ?
3. Has the prisoner been noticed to display mental infirmities or peculiarities which were due either to hereditary
transmission or present mental derangement ?
4. Has the prisoner the ability to control mental action,
or has he not sufficient mental power to control the sudden
impulses of his disordered mind, and does he act under the
blind influence of evil impulses which he can neither regulate
nor control ?
5. Has the act been influenced at all by hereditary taint
which has become intensified so that the morbid element has
become quickened into overpowering activity, and so that the
moral senses have been overborne by the superior force derived
from disease ?
6. Was the act effected by, or the product of, insane
delusion ?
7. Was the act performed without adequate incentive or
motive ?
8. Does the prisoner manifest excitement or depression,
moody, difficult temper, extraordinary proneness to jealousy
and suspicion, a habitual extravagance of thought and feeling,
an inability to appreciate nice moral distinctions, and finally
does he give way to gusts of passion and reckless indulgence of
appetite ?
Some or all of the characteristics in number eight are found'
generally in connection with transmitted mental infirmity.
In closing this perhaps too lengthy paper, I desire to speak
briefly upon the subject of testamentary capacity. In my
opinion the mental unsoundness of a man, if unconnected with
the testamentary disposition, ought not to destroy testamentary
CODIFICATION OP THE COMMON LAW AS TO INSANITY. 215
capacity. If the will of a person is not affected by, or is not the
product of, an insane delusion, it should be regarded as valid.
Delusions per se should not, I think, void a will. A person
may be a monomaniac and yet have sufficient mental capacity
to make a valid will. In such a case the mental faculties are
often unimpaired and undisturbed. The most important point
to be looked into is whether the testator has ignored natural
affection and the claims of near relationship in the making
of the will in question. The testator's mental faculties must
be so far normal that he shall understand the nature of the act
and also the consequences of it, and he must also have a clear
idea as to the amount of property which he is disposing of.
There must be a clear, sound moral sense, and the human
instincts and affections must be intact. There must be no
insane suspicion or aversion, and no loss or impairment of
reason and judgment. A person should not be considered
capable of making a valid will if the act in question has been
the product of, or has been actuated or influenced at all by?
first, hereditary taint which has influenced his volitions,
impulses, or acts; or, second, by mental disease or insanity
which has weakened, perverted, or destroyed the mental
functions.
