Opium-Eating Teetotallers
===========================

74 Art. VII.?
A dark veil of obscurity enshrouds the vice of opium-eating in
England. In what class of society must we seek for those most
addicted to the pernicious habit ? and to what extent do they
yield to the fascinations of the wonderful drug ? Accurate
statistics are not easily available. Vast quantities of the opium
annually imported into England are undoubtedly consumed in
other ways than in the legitimate manufacture of its alkaloid
for exportation, the prescriptions of physicians, patent medicines, or the drugging of ales and spirits. Much has been said
and written against the facilities for secret potations afforded by
grocers' licenses?bottles of gin, said to be entered as tea or
candles?but what about the penny postage facilities for the
receipt of opium in the neat disguise of cough lozenges ? The
unsuspecting husband or wife would hardly take the trouble to
verify on every box the facsimile of the signature as the patentee
so earnestly entreats. There is nothing new in Narcotism, for
in the East, with the rise of Islamism and the rapid spread of
abstinence from alcohol, this vice, which is even more demoralising than drunkenness, became almost universal. The question
has often been asked, where do some of the teetotallers get their
intense and enthusiastic excitement ? They point us to the
delicious water, so rich in animal organisms, as supplied by our
water companies, and tell us that the crystal spring suffices for
all their needs. It may be well for those teetotallers who exact
no pledge against narcotics, to wait and see what increase there
may have been in the amount of such drugs* imported into
England recently, before too eagerly congratulating themselves
upon the temperance of our epoch.
Doubt and darkness have almost always enshrouded the
practice of opium consumption; only a few distinguished
names, such as W. Wilberforce, Dean Isaac Milner, Coleridge,
and De Quincey, have been openly mentioned as opium-eaters;
with these very rare exceptions, the practice of the opiumtaker, all the world over?China not excepted?has ever been
to keep the habit as secret as possible. And this secresy has
been always maintained when its votaries took it in so-called
moderation, and even in all the earlier stages ; but when the
irresistible craving has been fairly established, then indeed
* In 1872 the amount of opium received in this country was 356-211 lb.,
valued at ?361,503.
OPIUM-EATING TEETOTALLERS. 7 5
all sliame at the hideous and unnatural vice disappears, and its
devotee becomes lost to all sense of honour, truth, honesty, selfrespect, and self-control; a slave to a tyrant so inexorable, that
had his crouching victim any such power of volition left, his
first effort to totally cast off the poppy-chains might end in
death. This inability to live without it is usual; a new constitutional idiosyncrasy, the second nature, demands continuous
relays of the supply ; a sudden imprisonment for theft, or any
other opium-produced crime, may end in death from the frightful shock to the constitution on the sudden cessation of the
habit. Young, successful, and vigorous men are at first spellbound by opium's charms, soon to find, as did De Quincey, all
its intensely exhilarating influences fade into the dim past, and
then they may begin to know what the fearful craving means.
As with the excessive indulgence in alcoholic drinks, so with
the morbid appetite for opium, the taint must be surely
inherited in an impaired power of volition, likely to lead
the descendants to weakly yield to that or any similar narcotic
fascination, chloral for instance. Although the opium-eater is,
as an almost universal rule, a liar, who denies his vice, yet it
can be recognised, even in the earlier stages, by a certain
expression, or rather cast of countenance, and by the contrast
between the dull, unimpressive, sunken, lustreless eye, and the
same under the influence of opium, for then its clear, sparkling
restlessness tells its own tale to the practised on-looker, though
it does not even arouse suspicion in the generality of mankind.
There is an unmistakable " opium look " alike seen in infants
and adults always to be remembered if once learnt, but it
cannot well be described.
And when opium gets into the nursery, alas for the moral and
intellectual faculties of the infant opium-eater. It may be
the very highly-recommended monthly nurse who initiates the
tiny atom of humanity into the mysteries of poppy juice in one
or other of its multiform combinations. It is " such a good
baby," passes most of its time in sleep, just as an infant should
do. A relative?perhaps struck by something " uncanny " in
those persistent slumbers?watches, and is at length rewarded by
seeing through the crack of a door ajar a linger with powder upon
it, stealthily introduced from the nurse's pocket to the baby's
mouth, this followed by a long death-like sleep. Or, the secret
delinquent may be the nurse engaged afterwards for the infant,
young, pretty, neat, clean, and orderly. No haggard looks nor
sallow countenance, nor dirty, untidy ways, as yet bespeak the
trail of the opium serpent. She is sure to be a staunch teetotaller,
and much prefers beer-money to any poisonous alcohol. She
takes the bright, promising, healthy little one, and a mysterious
76 OPIUM-EATING TEETOTALLERS.
change soon passes over her infant charge. Weighty words of
wise physicians on the moral management of infancy trouble
the parents. The baby gets very pale, and white-looking, its
slumbers are often unnaturally heavy and prolonged. Few
parents are exactly mental philosophers, or, if they are, they
are scarcely interested or wise in brain symptoms. Could their
eyes be opened they would see strange changes taking place in
that very delicate and frail organism, baby's brain. Opium is
working upon it in some marvellous way, and if not saved in
time, it will soon sleep on, a long sleep, and need a lower
bed than the cot with its daintily belaced draperies that tender
mother-fingers put so carefully aside to watch the tiny sleeper.
What a bluish pallor of countenance ! How strangely do the
scorched and swollen eyelids quiver as it sleeps ! Now one hand
twitches, then a slight convulsive movement can be seen in the
face; teething, all kinds of infantile ailments, are supposed to
amply account for it all. Bye-and-bye there is noticed in the
baby's expression " a little sly look " as the servants call it, an
almost idiotic look, the parents hardly dare to think, but yet
fear. There is no time to be lost, that child must be saved
instantly; or over the fibres of the brain which are perchance
of an unusually fine texture, a subtle change will but too soon
have fatally swept, and a few years hence a drivelling idiot,
probably the first ever known in the family, will be all that
opium has left of that highly wrought, beautiful organism,
and good moral beginning, the heritage from a long line of
gifted ancestors. Epilepsy will sometimes more suddenly and
visibly show the ruin and the havoc the drug has wrought, but
rarely, if ever, does a physician suspect the cause, except in
cases where the child dies at once from an overdose, and is seen
to be under its influence. The nurse is often an opium-eater
or laudanum-drinker herself, with all the moral obliquity of
the race, and knows only too well how to time her potion
that no doctor may be able to see the baby actually under its
effects.
It is said that in some of the agricultural districts of
England, where laudanum is freely indulged in by teetotallers,
and there is a large and steady consumption of crude opium,
mothers are less addicted than formerly to the baneful practice
of administering it to their children, because more enlightened
views are now prevalent upon the subject. It might be well if the
wives of our spiritual pastors and masters, officers in the army and
navy, and civil servants, would emulate the intelligence of their
humbler sisters, and unite to efface from the price lists of their
respective stores " Quietness," still advertised at tenpence per
bottle. The Chinese or Persian mother goes to work in a more
OPIUM-EATING TEETOTALLERS. 77
open and systematic way. She has no wish to be burdened
with too many children ; she knows that all idiots will be
kept at the expense of the state, so she uses opium, her infallible recipe for artificially producing idiocy. She begins by
giving her infant at a very early age small doses, and gradually
increases them, until the development of its mental faculties
is safely, surely, and thoroughly arrested, and then hands over
the carefully-manufactured idiot to the care of the state. Are
English lovers of " Quietness " much more tenderhearted ?
Wyma.
