A Clinical Study of Twenty-Six Pairs of Twins
===============================================

By Kenneth B. White, M.S.
Rutgers University
Introduction
The first serious study of twin resemblance was made exactly
fifty years ago (1883) by Sir Francis Galton.1 On the basis of
written and verbal reports of thirty-five pairs of similar twins and
twenty pairs of dissimilar twins, Galton concluded that heredity
is more important than environment in determining adult char-
acteristics. Thorndike in 1905 2 first attempted to discover the ex-
tent of twin resemblance by means of a number of mental and
physical measurements. Since that time, a growing realization of
the importance of studying twin resemblance to determine the rela-
tive influence of heredity and environment, has led a large number
of investigators to turn their attention to this problem. Rexroad,3
in a recent article, has assembled the results of fifty-seven studies
of twin resemblance, which have been conducted within the past
decade.
In measuring twin resemblance in intelligence, none of these
recent studies makes use of the Kuhlmann-Anderson Intelligence
tests, nor do they give any data on form board performance. It
is the object of this study to supply this data in a tentative way,
and to augment the evidence on twin resemblance already amassed,
by means of other clinical tests, and information gained from
replies to a questionnaire and from personal interviews.
The subjects for this study were twenty-six unselected pairs of
twins living in or near New Brunswick, New Jersey. Their ages
ranged from five years to sixteen years and five months, with a
median age of nine years and one month. They all attended ele-
mentary school with the exception of one pair who were in the
1 Galton, Francis, Inquiries into Human Faculty. New York: Macmillan,
1883.
2 Thorndike, E. L., Measurement of Twins. J. of Phil., Psychol,
Scientific Methods, 1905, 2, 547-553.
3 Rexroad, Carl N., Eecent Studies of Twin Resemblance. Psychol. Bull.
1932, 29, 204-217.
243
244 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
tenth grade. They represented eight different nationalities and a
great disparity of economic and social advantages. Twenty-one
pairs were of like sex; in twelve pairs both members of the pair
were girls, in nine pairs both were boys. The remaining five pairs
were of unlike sex. It is a matter of regret that a larger number of
pairs of unlike sex were not available.
Procedure
In every case both members of a pair of twins were examined
at the Rutgers Psychological and Mental Hygiene Clinic on the
same afternoon. In so far as the age and ability of the twins al-
lowed, the following tests were administered and were used for
comparative purposes in this study: The Stanford-Binet, Kuhl-
mann-Anderson Intelligence tests, Witmer Form Board, Witmer
Cylinder, and Healy A. For the most part, the examinations were
conducted by two examiners. Dr. Anna S. Starr administered the
form boards to each twin individually and the Binet to one of them;
the writer gave the Kuhlmann-Anderson to both twins at the same
time and the Binet to the other twin.
In addition to these clinical tests, specimens of handwriting were
secured from fifteen pairs of twins. Further information concern-
ing the twins was secured from the parents, by means of a standard
questionnaire, and in many cases, by an interview with them.
Twin resemblances will be reported in terms of correlation co-
efficients. It was ascertained from the parents which of the twins
was born first, or was the older. This twin is referred to as "twin
A." The younger or last born in each pair is known as "twin
B." Scores made on a given test by twins A can then be corre-
lated with scores on the same test made by twins B. Since all
correlation coefficients must be looked upon as only suggestive due
to the small number of cases, all except in the case of memory span
and quality of handwriting were determined by the method of
rank-differences rather than by the product-moment method. It
would be desirable to divide the twins into identical and fraternal
and to report the resemblance found in each group. Among our
cases there were only ten pairs considered, on the basis of sex and
physical appearance, to be identical twins, and seven pairs fra-
ternal. The others we were quite uncertain about. Consequently,
we will not consider this interesting question in this paper.
CLINICAL STUDY OF TWINS 245
Intelligence Quotients
The average intelligence quotients and the variability as de-
termined by the Stanford-Binet and the Kuhlmann-Anderson In-
telligence tests, for all of the twins studied, for twins A, and for
twins B, are shown in Tables IA and IB.
Table IA
Intelligence Quotients of Entire Group of Twins
No. Cases
Average
Range
S.D.
Binet
Kuhlmann-Anderson
52
48
99 ?1.3
103.8?1.5
62-141
70-135
14.4
15,
Table IB
Intelligence Quotients of Twins A and B
Twins A
No.
Cases
Average
Range
S.D.
Twins B
No.
Cases
Average
Range
S.D.
Binet
Kuhlmann-
Anderson
26
24
98.2?2.
103.6?2.
62-141
70-129
15.4
14.3
26
24
99.7?1.7
104 ?2.2
67-122
70-135
13.2
15.7
An analysis of Tables IA and IB suggests some conclusions re-
garding the intelligence quotients of the sample of twins included in
this study.
1. The twenty-six pairs of twins, considered as a group, were of
average intelligence when compared with Terman's study of the
intelligence of a large number of school children. The average in-
telligence quotients, of the twins here reported, was in close accord
with the findings of Merriman, Lauterbach, Wingfield and Hol-
zinger, all of whom used a larger number of subjects.4
2. The average I.Q. and the variability of the twins who were
born first (Twins A) were approximately equal to that of the twins
who were born last (Twins B). The Binet and the Kuhlmann-
Anderson both indicate this equality. In order to take account of
the slight difference in the average between the two groups, Pear-
son's Coefficient of Variation was used to get the relative va-
riability of each group. ("F = 100 S.D./Average.) It turned out
4 Bexroad, Carl N., op. cit.
246 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
that this measure was almost equal for twins A and twins
B on both intelligence tests. For this group of twins, then, order
of birth seemed to have no consistent effect on the average intelli-
gence quotient or the variability of the group.
3. The Kuhlmann-Anderson gave a slightly higher average I.Q.
for the twins as a whole, and for each of the smaller groups, than
did the Binet.
The degree of resemblance in intelligence quotients between the
twins as a whole, between members of the younger thirteen pairs,
and between members of the thirteen older pairs, may be seen in
Table II. In both the younger and older groups there were five
pairs who were judged to be identical twins. The results of both
intelligence tests are shown in Table II, resemblance being indi-
cated by coefficients of correlation.5
Table II
Resemblance of the Twins in I.Q.
All Twins
No.
Pairs
Younger Twins
Age 5 to 9-1
No.
Pairs
Older Twins
Age 9-1 to 16-5
No.
Pairs
Binet
Kuhlmann-Anderson.
26
24
.82?.05
.93?.02
13
12
.52?.14
.94?.02
13
12
.97?.01
.96 ?.02
The correlation coefficients presented in Table II are based on
only a few cases, and must therefore be considered only suggestive
of the following tendencies.
1. There was a marked correlation between the twins with re-
spect to intelligence quotients, when determined by either the Binet
or Kuhlmann-Anderson tests. These coefficients were slightly
higher than most investigators have reported for all twins taken
together. They indicated a higher degree of resemblance between
twins than is usually reported for ordinary siblings.6
s Rank order coefficients (p's) were changed to corresponding values of r
by reference to Table XX in H. E. Garrett's Statistics in Psychology and
Education. The probable error of the r's found from the p's was determined
by the formula PZ?r = .7063(1 ? r*)/\/N.
e Hildreth, in summarizing the results of several studies of sibling re-
semblance, states that "siblings show on the average less resemblance than
twins. The amount appears to be on the average about .50, though it may
vary greatly from this figure." Hildreth, Gertrude H., The Resemblance of
Siblings in Intelligence and Achievement. Teachers College Contributions to
Education, 1925, No. 186, p. 20.
CLINICAL STUDY OF TWINS 247
2. The correlation between the twins was higher on the Kuhl-
mann-Anderson than on the Binet. This may be due to the fact
that the Binet was given and scored in most cases by two different
examiners, for each member of a pair separately. The Kuhlmann-
Anderson, on the other hand, was given to both twins at the same
time, thus assuring standard conditions, and is not subject to indi-
vidual interpretations in scoring.
3. The comparison of the correlations found in the younger and
older twin pairs, each group containing five pairs judged to be
identical twins, gave conflicting results. The Kuhlmann-Anderson
correlations suggest that there was no significant difference be-
tween the resemblance of the younger and older twin pairs. The
results of the Stanford-Binet, on the other hand, would indicate
that the members of the older twin pairs were much more alike than
the members of the younger twin pairs. In view of the small num-
ber of cases in each group, and the high probable error of the Binet
correlation, these results are not very significant.
Form Boards
The correlation between the twins as shown by their perform-
ance on three form boards is shown in Table III. Correlations are
based on time in seconds for each trial. Only those individuals who
finished the trial without help are included. For this reason there
are more cases considered in the second trial of the Witmer Cylinder
and the Healy A, than in the first.
Table III
Twin Resemblance on the Form Boards
Name of Test
First Trial
No. Pairs
Second Trial
No. Pairs
Witmer F.B.
Witmer Cyl.
Healy A....
25
19
17
.59?.09
.31?.15
.33?.15
25
22
20
.82 ?.05
.75 ?.07
.06?.15
In considering the first trial on these form boards, it is to be
pointed out that the subjects were here confronted with a new
problem. The common factor of school knowledge, which is involved
in the above mentioned intelligence tests, is of little consequence in
form board success. The results show a much lower correlation
between the twins on the form boards than on the Binet or the
248 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Kuhlmann-Anderson, a condition which might be expected from the
nature of the problem. In fact, the correlation on the Witmer Cyl-
inder and the Healy A might even be negative, in view of the high
probable error. The Witmer Form Board, which is standardized
at the four year level, was quite easy for most of the twins. On
this test we find a fairly high degree of resemblance between the
twins, when the time taken to solve the problem is taken as the
criterion of success.
One would expect to find a greater degree of resemblance be-
tween the twins on the second trial of the form boards. The ele-
ment of novelty and strangeness is then absent, and the time taken
by a pair of twins might feasibly be more nearly alike. On the
second trial of the "Witmer Form Board and Witmer Cylinder, we
find this to be the case. The correlations are much higher than on
the first trial and are quite significant. In the case of the Healy
A, on the other hand, the correlation on the second trial is not
only insignificant, but even considerably less than on the first
trial. This contrasting result may be due to chance factors in the
solution of this problem, which are not taken account of when the
time for a single trial is used as measure of the subject's ability.
Qualitatively, the performance of some of the twin pairs on the
form boards was very much alike. Their method of attacking the
problem, their attitude toward it, and even the errors they made
were often strikingly similar. There were other pairs whose per-
formance was qualitatively very dissimilar. The individuals of
the same pair showed a wide difference in the rate of discharge of
energy, in foresight and analytical ability, and the hand they pre-
ferred to use. We were able to observe no general resemblance
characteristic of all the twin pairs, with respect to qualitative per-
formance on the form boards.
Memory Span for Digits
The forward memory span for digits of the twenty-six pairs of
twins considered, ranged from 4 to 8. In twelve pairs the forward
memory span of each member was the same. In the remaining
fourteen pairs it differed by one or two digits. The correlation
between the memory span for digits of the twenty-six pairs of
twins (Pearson formula) was .68 ? .07. Members of the younger
twin pairs were found to have an identical forward memory span
for digits twice as often as members of the older twin pairs. Eight
of the thirteen younger pairs had the same memory span; in only
four of the thirteen older pairs was this true.
CLINICAL STUDY OF TWINS 249
The Reverse Memory Span for digits shows even a closer re-
semblance between the twins than the forward span. Both mem-
bers of three pairs of twins and one member of a fourth pair failed
to grasp the idea of reversing the digits, so were unable to repeat
even two correctly in the reverse order. The Reverse Memory Span
of the remaining twenty-two pairs ranged from 2 to 7 digits. The
members of sixteen pairs of twins had the same reverse memory
span for digits, including the three pairs who were not able to
reproduce any. In only ten pairs, did one member have a different
reverse memory span than the other. The correlation between the
reverse memory span of the twenty-two pairs of twins who were
able to do the problem (Pearson Formula) was .87 ? .04.
The reverse memory span was more often alike for the younger
twin pairs than for the older. In only three of the thirteen younger
pairs was the reverse memory span of the two individuals un-
equal. The remaining seven cases of unequal reverse memory spans
were found among the thirteen older twin pairs, ranging in age
from 9 years, 1 month to 16 years, 5 months. This observation is
in close agreement with the result already noticed in connection
with the forward memory span.
Handwriting
A short sample of handwriting was obtained from fifteen pairs
of twins. After the specimens were well mixed, each was given a
quality rating by comparing it with the samples given in Thorn-
dike's handwriting scale.7 In four pairs, the handwriting of both
members received the same quality rating. Individuals in most
of the pairs differed by only one point and in two pairs by two
points. The correlation between thes<? quality ratings of the fif-
teen pairs of twins, although only suggestive, was .68 ? .09.
Another method was used to get a rough measure of the similar-
ity of the handwriting of the twins. Six judges were asked to match
up the handwriting of the twins on the basis of similarity of gen-
eral appearance and size and shape of the letters. By means of a
number system, unknown to the judges, the writer was able to check
their accuracy. The number of specimens successfully matched
ranged from five to eight, the average being six. This result indi-
cated that in slightly less than half the cases, there was enough
similarity between the handwritings of the twins to enable inex-
7 Tliorndike, E. L., Handwriting. Teachers College Eecord, 1910 11
83-175.
250 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
perienced judges to pick them out. A certain similarity was fur-
ther indicated by the fact that after the correct selections had been
removed, all of the judges were able to select from two to four more
pairs which were similar. In all, there were eleven different pairs
which were correctly matched by the judges as a whole.
In six of the pairs consistently matched, the age of the twins
was above nine and a half years. This might suggest that the hand-
writing of older twins is more similar than that of younger twins,
possibly due to the longer period of similar training and practice
in this trait, enjoyed by the former group.
General Observations Concerning the Twins
In fourteen of the twenty-six pairs of twins, there is one twin
who seems to be more aggressive than the other. In five pairs they
take turns being leader, and in one of the pairs it is reported that
they exchange this trait about every six months. In six pairs,
neither twin is reported as being the more aggressive. "Where one
twin is more aggressive than the other, there seems to be no causal
connection with priority of birth, intelligence or health.
Of the twenty-six pairs of twins, members of seventeen pairs first
walked at the same age and of four pairs, within a month of each
other. Data on this point are not available for the other five pairs.
Individuals of seventeen pairs first talked at the same age, and
of three pairs, within three months of each other. One pair is
reported as having talked a language of their own, which no one
could understand but themselves, before they began to talk in the
usual way.
In none of our cases was there any report of similar diseases
or illnesses, other than contagious diseases such as measles, afflict-
ing both twins at the same time?a report which is quite frequent
in the literature of twins.
In three pairs of twins, or 11.5 per cent, one is righthanded, and
the other lefthanded. This percentage showing symmetrical re-
versal of handedness is considerably lower than that reported by
Danforth, 19 per cent8 and Lauterbach, 35 per cent9 and may be
due to the small number of cases investigated or inadequate de-
termination of handedness. Of the fifty-two individual twins, five
8 Danfortli, C. H., Resemblance and Difference in Twins. J. of Hered.,
1919, 10, 399-409.
9 Lauterbach, C. E., Studies in Twin Eesemblance. Genetics, 1925, 10,
525-568.
CLINICAL STUDY OF TWINS 251
or 19+ per cent were lefthanded. Hirsch found that 25 per cent
of 202 individual twins were lefthanded.10 AVhen it is realized that
only about four per cent of the population at large is lefthanded
and that twins comprise less than two per cent of the general popu-
lation, it is suggested that lefthandedness is in some way connected
with twinning.
The median age of the mothers at the time of the birth of the
twins, calculated with respect to twenty-one pairs, was 30 years.
The ages range from 19 to 38 years.
The average number of children in the twenty-five families
represented in this study, including the twins, is four. The birth
of twins seems to be in no way connected with the number of pre-
vious births in the family or to have any influence on the number
of subsequent births. With seventeen pairs there were from one
to seven previous births and 11 pairs have from one to seven
younger brothers and sisters.
In all but seven cases there are twins reported in either the
maternal or paternal side of the family, or both. This observation
would suggest a definite hereditary tendency toward twinning in
certain families.
Conclusions
Since the statistical treatment of data obtained from only
twenty-six or fewer cases is apt to lead to unwarranted conclusions,
due caution should be employed in referring the conclusions of this
study to the twin population in general. With the results of tests,
used to measure twin resemblance by other investigators, our re-
sults are in fairly close accord. With respect to the other tests used
in this study, concerning the results of which there are few if any
other reports available, such as the Kuhlmann-Anderson and the
form boards, the conclusions presented here must be considered
as only suggestive until these tests are applied to many more cases.
1. The group of twenty-six pairs of twins studied, were as a
whole, of average intelligence, when measured by the Stanford-
Binet or Kuhlmann-Anderson Intelligence tests. The order of birth
of the twins seemed to have no effect on the average intelligence
quotient or on the variability of the group.
2. There was a marked resemblance in the I.Q. between the
twins when measured by the Binet or Kuhlmann-Anderson Intelli-
gence tests. There was also a high resemblance between them in
io Hirseh, Nathaniel, Twins, Heredity and Environment. Harvard Uni-
versity Press. 1930.
252 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
the case of the forward and reverse memory span for digits. There
was much less similarity between the twins on the first trial of
three form boards, the Witmer Form Board, Witmer Cylinder and
Healy A. On the second trial of the first two form boards, the
resemblance was marked, while on the latter test there was no
significant resemblance whatever.
3. The Kuhlmann-Anderson showed a higher average I.Q. and a
closer resemblance between the twins than did the Binet.
4. The handwriting of some of the twins was very much alike.
