Concerning School Psychologists
===============================

:Author:  Rose G. Anderson
Psychological Service Center, New York City
At a recent New York dinner meeting of the Association of
Consulting Psychologists, the topic "Every School Should Have
a School Psychologist" was presented both from the side of the
psychologist and the side of the school. Dr Percival Symonds
represented the psychologist and a number of school officials from
the metropolitan area, the schools. It is significant that the discussion resolved itself into a debate in which the contribution of
the school-men consisted predominantly of a bombardment of arguments on the negative side, characterized by two trends, that the
schools were quite self-sufficient in handling their own problems
and that even when they had looked to the psychologist for help
they had been disappointed. Some of the bombs of the school-men
proved to be duds, but in spite of this their attack was forceful
enough, so that there was some question as to the condition of the
school psychologist. The result of the meeting was not a greater
mutual basis for cooperation, but a raising of issues which must be
met before a desirable quality of cooperation is possible. The school
psychologist was placed on the defensive.

There are two ways of meeting this situation. The school psychologist may uphold his ego by picking flaws in the arguments of
the school-men. There were loop-holes enough in their criticism,
if we turn our attention to them exclusively, to enable us to convince ourselves that a vigorous educational campaign for school
people as to the value of the school psychologist is the fundamental
need.

We can, for example, point out a number of things to the school
principal who emphatically asserted that he had no need of us because he was more able to adjust his own problems than any clinic
he had consulted. We can suggest that his whole argument convinced us that his inability to be helped by the psychologists or
psychiatrists he had consulted lay in his own reaction patterns
1 Read at the annual meeting of the Association of Consulting Psychologists, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, May 6, 1933.
rather than in their incapacity to help him. We could also explain
that the case he cited?curing the sex-delinquent girl by reading the Bible to her?illustrates one of the fundamental differences
between the approach of the lay person and the psychologist,
namely that he has treated the symptom rather than the cause and
has been content when the socially unacceptable manifestation of
the cause has been eliminated although the root of the difficulty
has been untouched and may in fact be more firmly entrenched by
the method of treatment.

This same principal asserted that the number of problem cases
in his school was so insignificant that they were hardly worthy of
consideration. Yet he gave us the figures of problems coming to his
attention over a period of two years from which we were able to
deduce that these cases represented 3 per cent of his total enrollment. If this 3 per cent were actually representative of all his
problems is this number so insignificant? Let us compare it, for
example, with another known problem group. Authorities variously
estimate the proportion of feeble-mindedness as 2 to 4 per cent.
There is no need to enlarge upon the magnitude of the problem
which this group of individuals creates for schools, social agencies,
feeble-minded, penal and corrective institutions, etc. We cannot
wave them aside because they may be a mere 3 per cent. But are
the principal's problems represented by a mere 3 per cent?
Wickman's2 study of Children's Behavior and Teachers' Attitudes has shown that teachers are most concerned over the types of
problems which represent transgressions of their moral sensitivity
and authority and infractions of school regulations and class-room
discipline. Teachers of 874 pupils listing their problems spontaneously mentioned shyness 8 times, over-sensitiveness only 2
times, and day-dreaming no times. When asked to specify the number of such problems, these same teachers reported that over onethird of these children, i.e., over 291 compared with 8, were shy,
unsocial, and withdrawing, that one-fourth, 218 compared with 2,
showed traits of over-sensitiveness, and nearly a third were daydreamers. So we hesitate to accept the estimated per cent as representing the proportion of children in this school who need help in
making a more satisfactory adjustment.

A case in point is a high school boy recently referred for study
by his tutor. This boy, submissive and retiring, is mal-adjusted
2"Wickman, E. K., Children's Behavior and Teachers' Attitudes. New
York, Commonwealth Fund Publications, 1928.

both educationally and emotionally. The tutor had visited the
school to get information to help him in his work with the boy and
had found that his teachers hardly know who he is.

The school principal asserts that his experience in consulting
with specialists on problem cases has been unsatisfactory because
he has been able to get only a diagnosis with no help as to what can
be done about the problem, whereas he already knew the diagnosis,
and what he needed was help in remedying the situation. The
example cited was a case of dementia praecox. "We might point
out that we have been stressing for some time the need for preventive mental health and that, could we sensitize schools to the
importance of such problems mentioned above, shyness, withdrawing, over-sensitiveness, etc., in the lower grades and the value of
helping the child showing these and other unfavorable traits in the
earlier years, we could be more helpful than after these traits have
developed to a morbid degree.

A school official states that the solution of the whole problem is
for every teacher to be a psychologist. No one deplores more than
the psychologist the meagerness of this part of the teacher's training. Where teachers lack such training, much of the value of the
psychologist's work is lost because the teacher lacks the background
to appreciate the significance of the interpretations of the child's
behavior and to cooperate in carrying out the necessary remedial
measures. Contrary to the implication that such training of teachers would make it possible to dispense with the services of the
psychologist, our experience is that such teachers are on the whole
most eager to utilize the help and suggestions which the psychologist can give and the readiest to recognize their own limitations
to handle their problems unassisted.

This does not exhaust the possibilities of the suggested method
of meeting the situation. But if we are primarily interested in
our own growth and increased usefulness, is this approach the most
profitable? And might we not be guilty of analyzing ourselves in
''vanity rather than in accuracy" as Dr Lillien Martin indicates
has often been the case in individuals who come to her for help. In
her analysis of the individual an important requisite for progress
is that he should become "fully aware of the handicapping quality
of his reaction pattern." As a step toward this end a careful
analysis of his life history is necessary. Dr Martin states that
"the life history narrative is at once diagnostic and therapeutic."
Might it not be profitable to examine more closely into the life
history of the school psychologist ? Are there handicapping qualities in his reaction pattern ? Might such an analysis prove to have
diagnostic and therapeutic features?

With exceptions, notably Dr Witmer's clinic, the clinical psychologist was first employed in the institution for the feeble-minded,
the first research centers in the development and use of intelligence
tests. He was next used in the public schools where his function
was a feeder for special classes for retarded children. About the
same time he was used by social agencies dealing with problem individuals of all kinds, and in corrective and penal institutions. In
all of these cases the function of the psychologist was the identification of the mental defective to provide special education or to
determine mental responsibility. The few cases during the earlier
period where children were selected for gifted classes did not
counteract the idea that the psychologist was, as one individual has
characterized him, a 'nut-pick.' We still have in many quarters
this identification of the psychologist with the problems of subnormality, which in the lay mind is not distinguished from abnormality. And because the stock in trade of the psychologist was
and is tests, and the distinctive result of the test is an I.Q., we have
the concept of the psychologist as a 'tester' who attaches a label
and passes on.

In the earlier years of the development of intelligence tests,
there was on the part of the psychologist himself and still is in
many instances, an exaggerated importance attached to the purely
intellectual factors, i.e., the general intelligence level or I.Q. as the
basis for accounting for or solving individual problems. In those
schools where the psychologist's function was or is a feeder for the
special classes we find the tendency to refer a child presenting any
kind of difficulty to the psychologist as a candidate for the special
class. An analysis of 911 such referred cases showed that over a
third of them were children whose intellectual capacity was above
the level for special classes where this was placed at the arbitrary
level of an I.Q. of 80. They represented disciplinary, personality,
health problems, etc. These were the children on whom the psychologist should have concentrated his attention. Whatever his
capacity or interest in working with these children might be, waiting lists and impatient principals necessitated his hurrying to the
next list of potential eliminees. The examination reports of these
children have been returned to the teacher too often merely labelled
'transfer to special class' or 'remain in regular grade' those reCONCERNING SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGISTS 45
maining in the grade continuing to be as active problems as previously. The chief result is an exasperated and thwarted teacher
who naturally projects some of her irritation on the psychologist
for failing to relieve her of such problems.

"With the development of group-tests, testing has become the
popular thing and since tests are relatively easy to administer after
a course or two or "even observing a test or two," much of the
testing has fallen into the hands of inadequately trained people
who are mere 'testers' in fact and who are limited to attaching a
label, often erroneous, to a child. Standards have not been established for the training of psychologists and these testers pass as
school psychologists. The result has been a lack of respect for and
a limited conception of the contribution which the psychologist can
make to school problems.

Inherent then in the development of the applications of psychology to school problems has been the tendency to stress diagnosis, and to put too exclusive reliance and emphasis on testing
techniques. In instances where objective test results have been at
variance with other known facts and these results have been dogmatically upheld without attempting to relate them to or reconcile
them with all phases of the situation, the attitude has arisen that
the psychologist is in the clouds, that he is a theorist, that practical
common sense and judgment will go further than the psychologist's
findings. This same feeling has arisen when the child has been
studied by a clinic outside of the school, not conversant with the
intricacy and urgency of school problems.

The school principal is right in demanding more than a diagnosis. The future of the school psychologist rests upon his demonstrated ability, to make a real contribution to the adjustment of the
problem as diagnosed. In many instances the contribution of the
testing techniques is a negative one, i.e., it shows where the difficulty does not lie. Although important and even in these instances
indispensable, it is not sufficient. The psychologist must go further and inquire into the emotional, social, and physical factors as
ascertained by himself and others, and their bearing on the problem. "Where a psychologist is most needed is in assisting in making
adjustments which involve an orientation in all these fields, the
integration of the information from these sources, its interpretation in terms intelligible and acceptable to the school, and helpful
to both the school and the child. It has been emphasized that the
psychologist must be able to interpret the test. He must go fur46 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
ther. He must interpret the child,?to his teacher, his parent, his
associates, himself, and often the parents and teacher to the child.
This means a greater breadth in training and experience which
touches on another matter which needs emphasis. In addition to
the high order of intelligence and the comprehensive psychological
training, required for teaching or research, the clinical psychologist
needs the orientation emphasized above and specific personality
qualifications. I could best illustrate this by the statement made
by four school-men in regard to psychologists employed by them,
all incidentally members of this association. Time forbids my doing
this but the statements made indicate that the difference between
the one failing outstandingly to make a contribution and another
who has made a decided contribution is not one of level of intelligence or of adequate use of testing techniques. It is a difference in
approach, one theoretical and academic as opposed to a practical
one oriented in the fields discussed; and a difference in personality,
one which seeks ego-satisfaction through dominating others and
arouses antagonism instead of cooperation, and one whose egosatisfaction comes from winning cooperation and adjusting difficulties.
This raises another question, whether too large a part of the
training of the clinical or school psychologist is not dominated by
the academic viewpoint which has only a theoretical acquaintance
with the practical problems which arise in such work and their
solutions, and whether a larger part of the required training as
well as the supervised experience should not be given through the
kind of situation where work is to be done and where realities are
dealt with rather than problematical situations and theoretical
solutions.

Experience in supervising the prescribed practice work of students who had completed their required courses for the M.A. degree
led me to the conclusion that they were well versed in the generalizations which can be made in many situations, but were quite
unaware of the many exceptions to these generalizations and that
the knotty problems in clinic practice are often the exceptions;
that their verbal responses would indicate their adequacy to administer a test, but when the child on the other side of the table
proved not to be a robot, responding according to pre-conceived expectations, their lack of resources in adapting themselves would
have been amusing had it not been appalling in view of the fact
that these individuals after 30 hours of such practise work are
supposedly prepared to go out, and have gone out, to do independent work.
Summarizing briefly, we conclude that there are handicapping
qualities in the reaction pattern of the school psychologist. Some of
these this association and the New York State Departments of Education and Mental Hygiene are undertaking to remedy in their
sponsoring of standards for the training and certification of psychologists; also this association, the Psychological Corporation,
Institute of Child Guidance and others, in encouraging internships
of trained but inexperienced psychologists under approved supervision. A "job-analysis" of the school psychologist as a basis for
both broadening his training and relating it more closely to the
challenges he will meet in his work and an analysis of and insistence upon the requisite personality qualifications are suggested as
likewise having fruitful possibilities in furthering this end.
