An Elementary Psychology of the Abnormal
=========================================

By W. B. Pillsbury.
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 19d2. 675 pp.
Perhaps in no field of psychology is there such urgent need for a critical,
yet appreciative and unbiased text as in that of abnormal behavior. There is
no dearth of treatises written from the orientation of the psychiatrist, but too
few, indeed, are those written from that of the psychologist. One need not
look far for information covering adequately those cases whose maladjustment
is of the type requiring hospitalization, but one wonders why the consulting
psychologist has been so slow to publish texts based upon his findings in those
patients with whom his practice is concerned and presenting his orientation
toward the problems involved.
In some respects the present volume marks an advance in this direction,
in many it is disappointing. We are given to understand that the "incentives
for the collection of the material of the book were furnished through teaching
classes in abnormal psychology ..." and this source is evident throughout
the volume which bears, in its discussion and argument, to too great an extent,
the stamp of the classroom and armchair rather than that of the clinic.
The book is divided into twenty chapters and its major contribution lies
in the fact that after an introduction, twelve chapters are devoted to the
psychoneuroses and allied phenomena before the psychoses are treated, com-
pletely reversing the procedure followed in most texts on the subject.
The text opens with a discussion of hypnotism, following which are
presented the theories of Janet, Freud, Jung and Adler. The author then
takes up the problems of the war neuroses, dissociation, the unconscious, sleep,
sex and speech disorders. Five chapters on the psychoses follow. A chapter
is devoted to the mentally deficient, to the classification of the normal on the
basis of analogies with the abnormal, to genius and insanity, and finally to
mental hygiene.
Outstanding in the book is the chapter on "The Phenomena of the
Neuroses and the Theoretical Interpretation of Them" which in both style
and content is excellent. The treatment of '' Sleep in Relation to Abnormal
Phenomena" is quite good, while that on "Sex and Mental Pathology,"
although beginning badly, ends in a vein which can only be commended.
One is quite unfavorably impressed by the extremely emotional antagonism
displayed toward the doctrines of Freud, resulting not only in a biased account
of the latter's doctrines and work but, more unfortunately, in not a few mis-
statements concerning psychoanalytic theory and practise. Thus we read (p.
77) that "The drive element or will is furnished by the libido or sexual desire
in the narrower sense," while at the same time the author gives as one of his
four references the excellent work of Healy, Bronner, and Bowers ('' The Struc-
72 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
ture and Meaning of Psychoanalysis") who, quite to the contrary, quote Freud
as stating "The force by which the sexual instinct is represented in the mind
we call libido" . . . ''the energy ... of those instincts which have to do
with all that may be comprised under the word 'love' " and "The nucleus
of what we mean by love naturally consists ... in sexual love with sexual
union as its aim. But we do not separate from this ... on the one hand, self
love, and on the other, love for parents and children, friendship and love for
humanity in general, and also devotion to concrete objects and to abstract
ideas." This is certainly not sex in any narrow sense.
Again he asserts (p. 75) that "The method of psychoanalysis involves
primarily a vigorous questioning of the patient." Peculiarly enough we find
here no notion of free association which is the crux of Freud's method?as
11 vigorous questioning'' is not, as witness again the statement of Healy, et al.:
"The patient reclines on a couch out of sight of the analyst, and tells just
what comes into his mind, quite uncensored by consciousness. Jones says
Freud ' . . . asked his patients to refrain from concentrating on any par-
ticular idea and from consciously guiding their thoughts.' " The author is
particularly disturbed over the concept of the unconscious but finally does no
more than substitute a neurological unconscious for a psychic one.
In his chapter on '1 Feeblemindedness'' Professor Pillsbury has completely
forgotten that in the formula for the Intelligence Quotient as accepted through
the clinical world, the quotient obtained by dividing the mental age by the
chronological age is multiplied by one hundred. Thus his statement (p. 290)
that "Terman asserts that all individuals who have an I.Q. of less than 0.70
are feebleminded, between 0.50 and 0.70 are morons, between 0.30 and 0.50
are imbeciles and below 0.30 idiots" is inexcusable. Also, such a statement
concerning the constancy of the intelligence quotient as "Many later workers
have found a considerable shift" is extremely unfortunate in its vagueness
and implications.
In discussing the causes of feeblemindedness, Dr. Pillsbury asserts (p. 291)
that '' Some cases have a very small cranium and consequently a small brain.''
The causal implication here is obvious and quite erroneous inasmuch as the
size of the cranium is consequent upon and not causal to the development or
lack of development of the encephalon. Again we find the description of the
cretin (p. 292): "They are very short, usually heavy set and with a large
swelling in the neck due to enlargement of the thyroid gland. This swelling
is known as a goiter." The fact is that goitre is not characteristic of cre-
tinism and is, indeed, seen only in the endemic type?which more precisely
can be said to exhibit both cretinism and goitre. Oddly enough, even the
cretin whose photograph illustrates the chapter lacks this "characteristic."
Again, in his description of the Mongolian, we find the statement (p. 293)
that: '' The skin is yellow and dry . . . etc.'' Unfortunately for the accuracy
of the text, the skin of the Mongolian is not necessarily yellow?despite the
name.
It will be noted, however, that these inaccuracies center around Freudi-
anism and mental deficiency. They do not represent the general quality of the
book which, while seldom brilliant, is superior to these sections. In the hands
of one qualified by clinical experience to recognize the limitations of the text
it will probably be found of some value as a reference to special topics.
Thomas J. Snee
University of Pennsylvania
