A Reorientation in Psychotherapy 
================================

By A. D. Tendler
The College of the City of New York
The differentiation drawn in neurology between organic and
functional disturbances lias created a need for psychological concepts that bear upon psychopathology and psychotherapy. Rival
schools have proposed such concepts and look to therapeutic success for proof of their doctrines. However, all that therapeutic
success can demonstrate is that functional conditions respond to
psychological treatment.
Choice of hypotheses as to these underlying psychological processes is to be understood as a matter of orientation. Dewey's
dictum, '1 In philosophy we do not solve any problems; we get over
them,'' has its application in the choice of psychological hypotheses.
The significant issue involved is whether we shall adopt psychological concepts that fit in with a mystic or naturalistic point of
view.
Modern psychotherapy, originating in the use of hypnotism for
the treatment of hysteria, received a naturalistic interpretation by
Janet1 when he restated both the phenomena of hysteria and hypnotism in terms of dissociation and proceeded to study the conditions under which dissociations took place. Unfortunately, and
now regretfully, he used the term subconscious. It was his intention that the term be understood in a purely descriptive sense.
Psychoanalysis dropped the hypnotic method, but took up the concept of subconsciousness as an explanatory principle, invested it
with animistic potency and elevated it to a God-head. What may
be termed a cultural reversal took place. Primitive, pagan, and
theological concepts 2 were used to give content to the subconscious
and Aesop's Fables became the textbook of psychology. This became the self-styled "New Psychology."
* Paper presented at the 1932 meeting of the Association of Consulting
Psychologists.
1 Pierre Janet, Major Symptoms of Hysteria, New York: Macmillan, 1907,
Chaps. XII, XIV, XV; Subconscious Phenomena, Boston: Badger, 1910, pp.
54-70.
2 Signiund Freud, The Problem of Lay-Analyses, New York: Brentano's,
1927, pp. 96-103.
253
254 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
The entrance of clinical psychology into the field of therapy
is a necessary consequence of its diagnostic functions. The process
of treatment, better termed as readjustment, must however be restated in terms of a naturalistic psychology. I propose that the
factors at work in psychotherapy or readjustment be sought in
the processes of emotional tension, intelligence, motivation, and
learning. Briefly stated, psychological treatment is to be understood as involving a process of reducing tension, of stimulating a
more adequate comprehension of disturbing factors, of establishing
adequate responses. Therapeutic success depends upon effective
progress in these directions regardless of what system the therapist
follows.
The concept of tension provocation and tension reduction is
basic. Tension may be defined as a psycho-biological interaction,
as a disturbed state of the organism involving visceral, glandular,
neural, motor, situational, and ideational factors. Tension, here,
is not used in Janet's sense of mental energy. The process of
tension provocation is built around situations, ideas, persons.
Situations evoking fear, anger, insecurity, uncertainties, rivalries,
jealousies, hatreds, self depreciations, are tension provoking. Situations calling forth feelings and ideas of well-being, of security,
of being liked, of personal recognition, achievement and worthwhileness, are tension reducing. Ideas and persons associated
with the one or the other sort of situation become stimuli for provoking or reducing tension. For convenience we may apply the
term tensors to tension provoking factors, detensors to those reducing tension. Broadly considered, a system of tensors and detensors are built up within the individual by the experiences life
offers. Maladjustment may be regarded as the preponderance of
tensors and inadequate detensors, the process of adjustment as an
increasing adequacy of detensors, a process of tension reduction.
It must be remembered that efforts at adjustment take place
normally within the individual. The average person does not resort
to psychiatric treatment when faced with difficulties. Current
expressions as "Enough of that," "I should worry," "getting wise
to ones self," "snap out of it," "cut out the sob stuff," give indication of the hitting upon of tension reducing ideas. Everyday
activity detensors may be illustrated by escapes from difficult situations as truancy from school, giving something up as a bad job,
learning not to argue with some people, or more positively, by the
deliberate use of distractions, turning to recreational outlets, taking
A REORIENTATION IN PSYCHOTHERAPY 255
a vacation, a trip to Europe, etc. The use of persons as detensors
is fairly common, as confiding in friends, seeking advice from associates, cultivating a new set of friends, perusing the columns of
advice to the lovelorn, etc. Instances of this sort provide the cue
for the psychologist to follow. The psychologist tries to do more
effectively what naturally goes on. He assists the process of adjustment by a more expert use of detensors?tension reducing
ideas, situations, and persons. His knowledge of mental processes,
unbiassed attitudes, and comprehension of life situations enable
him to use detensors more adequately.
Conferences with the psychologist are directed towards tensor
exploration diagnostically, and therapeutically towards a stimulation of insight and assistance in the establishment of the more adequate responses. Each of these phases deserve further analysis
and the focussing of attention upon salient features.
1. Tensor exploration: Here instead of the roundabout methods
of dream analysis, schemes for symptom interpretation, inferential free association techniques, or ink blot gazing, the modern substitute for crystal gazing, I use a more direct experiential approach. The Emotional Insight Test,3 reported on elsewhere,
gives an indication of emotional difficulties. The stimuli include
a major share of important emotional states: admiration, anger,
happiness, love, hate, self-abasement, worry, make believe, regret,
boastfulness, pride, grudge formation, negativism, pity, shame,
fear, interest, disgust, evasion, desire. Personality questionnaires,
the Psychoneurotic Inventory, conferences with parents and other
interested individuals, all yield material which is taken up with
the individual treated. Facts and attitudes are evoked, elaborated,
connected up with significant life experiences. Methods of tensor
exploration fall into three groups: field study?direct observation
of the individual in actual situations, clinical study?application
of tests and clinical devices, subjective report?statements made by
the individual himself.
In the study of tensors, a basic factor to be considered is the
inadequate ideation or comprehension of the individual. Individuals of dull and inferior intelligence are constitutionally prone to
misunderstand situations, the motives of the people involved, and
their own inadequate ways of dealing with difficulties as in the use
of emotional outbursts instead of analysis and planfulness.
s A. D. Tendler, Preliminary Report on a Test for Emotional Insight, J.
of Appl. Psychol., 1930, 14, 122-136.
256 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Complexity of situations is another barrier to effective management. Individuals of average and superior intelligence may
face problems that are involved and difficult to manage. Often an
analysis of their methods and ideas reveal responses of an inferior
sort with resulting tensions.
Lack of adequate concepts and the presence of erroneous concepts make for misunderstanding of situations and tension provocation as instanced by an adolescent girl who mistakes her rapid
heart beat in the presence of males as an indication of cardiac
pathology, or one who can only think of punishment as a way of
dealing with his misdeeds. In the neuroses a fundamental source
of tension is the failure to understand and appreciate emotional
upsets as functional disturbances. Other potent sources of inadequate thinking are the fixed mental sets that steer toward erroneous
interpretation such as concern over health, self depreciation, grudge
formation, ideas of persecution, self overvaluation.
This principle, inadequate ideation results in tension provocation, and conversely, adequate ideation reduces tension, is the basis
of the readjustment process, as I see it. Cumulative evidence appears to establish the principle. The military neurotic was shown
by Hollingworth4 to be typically of inferior intelligence. The
writer's study 5 of the civil neurotic showed a similar result. Continued testing of psychoneurotics verifies these results. Slawson's6 study of the Delinquent Boy found intellectual inferiority
and a greater degree of emotional instability in the delinquent
than in the normal. The writer's study 7 of maladjusted children
showed that those who responded to treatment were superior in
intelligence to those who did not. Evidence from neuropathology
is again in the direction of these findings?cortical control of lower
emotional centers. There appears to be enough ground for regarding the principle of stimulating adequate ideation as a basic factor
in psychotherapy or readjustment.
2. Special features in connection with the stimulation of insight are :
4 H. L. Hollingworth, The Psychology of Functioned Neuroses, New York:
Appleton, 1920, pp. 80-99.
s A. D. Tendler, The Mental Status of Psychoneurotics, Arch, of Psychol.,
1923, 60, pp. 23-29.
e J. Slawson, The Delinquent Boy, Boston: Badger, 1926, pp. 191, 268.
7 A. D. Tendler, The Role of Intelligence and Emotion in Maladjusted
Children, Proceedings and Papers, Ninth International Congress of Psychology, Princeton, N. J., Psychological Review Co., p. 425.
A REORIENTATION IN PSYCHOTHERAPY 257
(a) The reanalysis of the difficulties encountered, this time not in
the circular process that the subject has indulged in, but
with the therapist bent upon directing attention to factors
wrongly stressed or overlooked.
(b) The effort directed towards changing mental sets?for example, instead of blaming oneself to understanding the conditions under which responses were made, or changing a
sense of impossibility to one of possibility.
(c) By explanation and teaching, efforts are directed towards
building up an adequate set of concepts with which to comprehend the situation?such as the factor of habit, ideas as
a means of control, the uselessness of certain erroneous interpretations, the difference between an organic and functional condition, the true attitudes of others.
3. The stimulation of insight glides into the third phase?that
of assisting the establishment of more adequate responses. If the
preceding has been properly conducted, the analysis has served to
change the subject's mental set, has brought out new aspects of
the situation and has paved the way for finding a new solution to
the difficulties encountered. A process of reasoning has been substituted for impulsive action. The conferences have habituated
the subject to a thoughtful approach, and if skilfully conducted,
have made it a satisfying affair. The subject has already involved
himself in a controlling thought process and some plan of action
has been evolved, a plan in which the subject has cooperatively
shared.
The psychologist further seeks to induce a hopeful attitude and
enthusiastic efforts from the subject. In this connection chart
devices that can bring home to the subject an indication of the
degree of progress he is making are of decided value. One type of
chart I have used is the self estimate chart, aimed at stimulating
better insight. The subject rates himself on some socially desirable traits. He usually overestimates himself. This paves the way
for a consideration of the trait, its meaning and application in
everyday situations, the justness and adequacy of the rating the
subject has given himself. Another type of chart is aimed at establishing control. Thus, a child who has difficulty in controlling
anger, or fear, or temptation to steal is asked to keep a record of
such situations. He uses a stroke to indicate that he was about to
respond the wrong way and crosses it if he catches himself in time.
The device lends itself to the variety of problems one meets in maladjusted children.
258 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Full advantage of these techniques may be taken only when the
underlying psychological factors are appreciated. The chart technique is to be regarded as an attention-getting, associative, and
motivating device. It directs attention to specific features of a
situation, provides an opportunity of associating ideas of control
with specific performances, and motivates action by allowing for a
measurement of successful effort. Before undertaking its use the
subject must feel its significance and accept it wholeheartedly, the
psychologist using all his skill to present it in such terms.
The techniques and methods of dealing with children are fairly
evident from the preceding. An illustration of the method with
an adult case may be of value.
Patient, male, age 35, presents himself for treatment at a nerve
clinic. He complains of numbness of fingers, especially evident at
night and after tightly clasping fingers. Neurological examination
proves to be negative. Diagnosis: Anxiety neurosis.
Tension exploration yields the following data: Recently a friend
of the patient had suffered a paralytic stroke. Patient is in a state
of fear lest he suffer a similar fate. He has begun to observe himself and has noted the phenomenon of numbness. Patient is very
much disturbed over it and is unable to get his mind off the symptom. The detensor he had hit upon by himself was that if he takes
preventive measures, he may save himself.
Tension reduction: Psychologist explains to patient in terms
that he can understand the distinction between functional and organic disturbance, the neurologist's diagnosis of his case as a functional disturbance. The story of the onset is retold to him. The
error of thinking that because his friend became ill he would too,
is pointed out to him. He is told that a paralysis does not come
on without an adequate organic basis and that the neurologist had
found nothing warranting any such fear, that the phenomenon
of numbness is a normal physiological one, and that under the
circumstances he would be justified in practicing the art of dismissal of troublesome thoughts. Some illustrations of this art are
given and the mental gesture of dismissal evoked. Patient feels
assured and is relieved of distress.
The case, although a fairly simple one, illustrates the principle
of tension provocation, the inferior type of thinking involved, the
process of tension reduction as a building up of a more adequate
ideation process, and assistance in the formation of a technique
that may be applied should the tensor recur. In more complicated
cases the same factors are involved.
A REORIENTATION IN PSYCHOTHERAPY 259
Attention has been directed to an analysis of the dynamic factors in psychological treatment or readjustment, a process in which
the clinical psychologist must become adept. Failure to advance
in this direction relegates the psychological clinician to the role of a
laboratory assistant whose findings are significant to him alone, and
whose usefulness in human adjustments must remain a misunderstood and debatable matter. On the other hand, the development
of such skill must of necessity win recognition and increasing opportunities to be of service in an age in which appreciation of
psychological factors is becoming a predominant force.
