A Comparative Study of Three Vocational Interest Tests 1
===========================================================

By Dr. Koy N. Anderson
Associate in Guidance and Personnel, Teachers College, Columbia University
During the past few years several tests have been devised for
use in the measurement of vocational interests. These have been
put forth as tools which vocational and educational counselors
might use in objectifying their procedure. But the vocational
counselors are asking the question, which test shall I use? In an
attempt to obtain light on this question, a study was made in
which three interest tests were administered and comparisons were
made between the scores on the various tests.
Source of Data
The three interest tests used were Strong's, Brainard's, and
Hepner's. In addition to these, the results of a Psychological
Examination, and academic grades, were available.
The subjects used in the investigation were 35 men between the
ages of 17 and 40 2 enrolled in courses in accounting at New York
Institute of Accounting and Commerce in connection with the edu-
cational department of the Y. M. C. A. in New York City. During
the daytime these men were engaged in the following occupational
pursuits: clerk (general office, shipping, stenographer, and book-
keeper), 21; meat inspector, storekeeper, assistant manager, office
manager, adjustment manager, assistant to vice-president, teller, as-
sistant cashier, chauffeur?1 each; and 5 were unemployed.
From this group, then, we may assume that these men had a
definite interest in the field of accounting?first, because the ma-
jority are engaged in various phases of that type of work as their
i The writer is indebted to Mr. Chester Bussey, Registrar of the Educa-
tional Dept. of the 23d Street Branch of the Y. M. C. A. in New York City,
for his assistance and cooperation in this study and to Miss Lucille Wetzig
for assistance in tabulating the results.
2 Age distribution 18-22 yrs., 13 cases; 23-27 yrs., 14 cases; 28-32 yrs.
4 cases; 38 yrs., 1 case; 40 yrs., 1 case; not stated, 3 cases.
117
118 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
vocation; and secondly, because they had enrolled in evening ac-
counting classes for which they paid tuition.
The three interest tests were given twice?once in October, 1931,
at the beginning of the courses, and again in May, 1932, at the end
of the academic year. This was done to ascertain if there was any
decided shift of interest during the academic year and also to
provide a measure of the reliability of the tests used.
Owing to changes in the personnel of the classes it was impos-
sible to obtain complete data for all the subjects, because some
entered the class late, others dropped out during the first semester,
and still others did not enroll at all in the second semester.
Results were available for the following tests and number of
cases:
30 took the Strong test in October
17 took the Strong test in May
32 took the Brainard test in October
19 took the Brainard test in May
29 took the Hepner test in October
15 took the Hepner test in May
34 took the Psychological Examination.
In scoring the responses to the Strong Vocational Interest
blanks it was not feasible to score them for all of the 23 occupa-
tions for which norms have been provided; accordingly, the blanks
were scored with respect only to the following occupations: Ac-
countant (C.P.A.), Purchasing Agent, Office Clerk, Engineer,
Farmer, and Journalist. The first three occupations were con-
sidered to be related types of work in which these men might be
interested, and on which they might be expected to make high
scores as compared with the norms. The last three are so different
that interest would be lacking and we might expect that the men
would probably make low scores for these occupations. This in-
ference is based on the assumption that men engaged in taking
courses in accounting would have interest patterns similar to the
first three, but different from the last three. If so, the test should
make this discrimination.
Brainard's Interest Test can be scored in three different ways.
1. The interest areas or patterns may be observed when scores for
the 20 groups or sub-totals are arranged in rank order. For com-
parative purposes the highest three and the lowest three sub-totals
for each case were recorded. 2. Brainard provides a key which
COMPARATIVE STUDY OF THREE TESTS 119
can be used in scoring the blank for 18 occupations. From this
key the following five were selected to compare with the other in-
terest tests: Engineer (electrical, mechanical, civil, mining, chemi-
cal) ; Farmer (general and truck); Journalist; Banker (teller,
credit manager, cashier, broker, examiner) ; Secretary (typist,
stenographer, private secretary, social secretary, office manager).
3. The occupational patterns of the sub-totals are classified under
four general categories?namely, Artistic Type, Business or Com-
mercial Type, Intellectual or Professional Type, and Mechanical
and Manual Type. The cases were studied in the light of these
classifications with the assumption that most of them should score
high for the Business or Commercial Type.
The Hepner Vocational Interest Quotient (V.I.Q.) was the
third test used. The blank entitled "Business Occupations for
Men" was the one used in this study. Hepner provides norms for
66 occupations, but only furnishes spaces on the blanks for record-
ing the 24 occupations which ranked highest. In this study we
have tabulated the first three and the last three occupations of the
24 listed on the blank. These were considered as fields of the great-
est interest and the least interest, respectively.
Results
Strong Interest Test. There were 31 subjects who took the
Strong test which was given in the fall, but only 17 took the same
test in May, at the end of the academic year. The results for the
six occupations are presented in Table I. On examining this table,
it will be noted that when scored with respect to the occupation Of-
fice Clerk, 73 per cent of the men made a score of B or higher, the
first time the test was given, and that on the retest the number rose
to 94 per cent. This increase is probably accounted for by the
fact that the least interested men had dropped out of the course
during the second semester. Also the learning factor in connec-
tion with the courses may have had some effect.
"When the scores which this group made were compared with
the norms for accountants (C.P.A.'s), we found that less than half
made a score of B, while the rest scored only C. One would ex-
pect these men to make a better showing, but possibly the group
is not select enough to compare favorably with the highest type of
accountants (C.P.A.'s), for which Strong gives norms.
When their blanks were scored for Purchasing Agent, 70 per
120 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Table I
Results on Strong's Vocational Interest Blank
Accountant (C.P.A.)
Test Test
Oct- *? May
A
B+ 13 16
B 9 30 4 24
B- 3 9 16
C+
C 18 58 11 64
C
Total 31 100 17 100
Office Clerk
Test Test
Oct- S May
13 43 7 41
3 10 7 41
6 20 2 12
6 20 1 6
31 100 17 100
Purchasing Agent
Test Test
Oct. S May
3 10 2 12
3 10 1 6
16 50 7 41
4 14 4 24
16 3 17
31 100 17 100
Engineer
Test Test
Oct- S May **
2 6
3 9 3 17
1 3
24 79 14 83
1 3
31 100 17 100
Farmer Journalist
Test Test Test Test
Oct-S^^^Oct.^^^
2 7
1 3 3 17 4 10
10 33 5 30 4 14 3 17
5 14 1 6 7 23
15 50 8 47 14 46 14 83
31 100 17 100 31 100 17 100
COMPARATIVE STUDY OF THREE TESTS 121
cent made a score of B, or higher, on the first test, and 59 per cent
scored B, or higher, on the retest.
When we examine the scores with respect to the three occupa-
tions which might be expected to involve only slight similarity of
interest pattern, we find that our expectation is fulfilled in prac-
tically all of the three occupations, as 50 per cent or more of the
cases made a score of C. These men show a slight interest in Farm-
ing, and there is evidence of a decided change of interest on the
retest for Journalism as compared with the interests shown at the
first testing.
There were 15 individuals who were tested in both October and
May. They followed the same general trends indicated in Table I.
There was a slight shift towards higher scores on the retest in the
Office Clerk group, and a decided drop in the retest scores for
Journalism. For only two cases were the scores identical on the
two tests.
Therefore, the Strong test seems to give results which would
divide this group with respect to interests according to our as-
sumption made at the outset.
Brainard Specific Interest Test. Brainard emphasizes the gen-
eral interest pattern rather than the specific occupational pattern.
For example, instead of a score for accountants, the test is scored
for what he calls "modes of expression." One way of scoring the
test is to arrange the sub-totals of the 20 "modes of expression"
in rank order. Then select the highest six, which furnishes the
interest pattern of the individual. In this study we selected the
highest six and the lowest six "modes of expression" and arranged
them in a frequency distribution, which is shown in Table II. It
will be noted that "Esthetic," "Commercial," "Order," and
"Study" are the four modes that ranked highest and that show
the greatest difference between the highest and lowest groups. This
holds true for the retest in May, with the exception of '' Esthetic,''
which ranked much lower, and the difference was small. On the
other hand,'' Physical," " Drawing," " Fine Manual,'' and '' Skilled
Manual" are the four modes that had the greatest frequency among
the six lowest and also had the greatest difference between the low-
est and the highest. The same results were obtained on the retest
in May with the exception of "Fine Manual," the four "modes of
expression" which ranked lowest are the items in which one might
expect an accountant or clerk to have only a slight interest; but
then the question may be raised as to why "Mechanical" and
122 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
"Outdoor," "modes of expression" did not show greater di-
vergence between the highest and lowest.
Another scoring method suggested by Brainard is to compare
the scores on the blank with scores for 18 occupations on the "sug-
Table II
Results of Brainard's Specific Interest Test
Frequency of the Highest Six and Lowest Six Items Selected from Modes of Expression
Listed on Test Blank
Modes of Expression
October Test
Highest
Six
Lowest
Six
May Test
Highest
Six
Lowest
Six
1. Physical
2. Mechanical
3. Outdoor
4. Vocal expression
5. Drawing
6. Leadership
7. Social
8. Order
9. Literary
10. Mathematics
11. Esthetics
12. Scientific
13. Fine manual
14. Commercial
15. Skilled manual
16. Music
17. Study
18. Experimental
19. Observation
20. Creative imagination.
1
9
9
5
3
13
11
25
4
10
16
9
3
18
5
5
22
4
7
13
19
7
9
11
20
8
9
2
14
12
4
4
21
2
19
12
1
9
3
7
8
5
2
9
7
13
3
4
5
4
1
10
3
4
12
1
2
4
12
5
3
3
13
1
2
1
9
8
2
7
8
0
13
6
1
5
6
3
gestive occupational key." This was done for the following occu-
pations: Engineer, Farmer, Journalist, Banker, and Secretary.
Brainard states, "If approximately 80 per cent of the items agree
and the odd items are not opposed, the choice is satisfactory."
Therefore, we might make a dichotomous classification of "satisfac-
tory" or "unsatisfactory." In making such a classification it was
found that on the first test for Engineer two cases would be classi-
fied as satisfactory; Farmer, three cases; Journalist, two cases;
Banker, three cases; and Secretary, three cases. On the retest
only one case could be classified as satisfactory as an engineer, one
as a farmer, two as journalist, four as banker, and four as secre-
tary. All the other cases made scores that would be classified as
unsatisfactory for the five occupations. We might expect these
results for the first three, but we would expect to find a greater
COMPARATIVE STUDY OF THREE TESTS 123
number of these men having interests similar to the banker and
secretary, and the sub-titles listed under them. Therefore, it would
seem that this test did not discriminate closely enough among the
members of this group and also that the interest pattern was not
clear-cut between the non-clerical or non-accounting occupations
(Engineer, Farmer, Journalist) and the clerical and accounting
occupations.
Brainard's third scoring method has to do with large areas of
occupations. He states that the "Business or Commercial Type"
of persons should have high sub-totals in the following "modes
of expressions": "Vocal Expression" "Leadership," "Social,"
"Order" and "Commercial." In Table II it will be noted that
only three of these appear in the highest five frequencies. They
are, "Order," "Commercial" and "Leadership." But on com-
paring these with the other occupational areas, we find that "Lead-
ership" and "Order" rank high in the "Intellectual or Profes-
sional Type," and that "Order" should also rank high for the
"Mechanical and Manual Type." Therefore, the only significant
mode of interest remaining is the "Commercial," and this we
would expect. But we can not rely entirely on this one mode of ex-
pression. When we look at the wide distribution of "modes of ex-
pression" in Table II the question can very appropriately be
raised as to whether this gives an occupational pattern in harmony
with the "Artistic Type," "Business or Commercial Type," "In-
tellectual or Professional Type," or the "Mechanical and Manual
Type." If the results were running true to expectations the group
in this study certainly should be concentrated in the "Business
and Commercial Type" to a greater extent than this test indicates.
Hepner's Vocational Interest Quotient (V.I.Q.). Since it is
impossible to list all the 24 occupations recorded on each blank,
we selected the three occupations that ranked highest and the three
of the lowest rank. These have been arranged in a frequency dis-
tribution which is presented in Table III.
It will be observed from the table that "Accountant" (Public)
was mentioned most frequently among the highest three rankings,
but not mentioned among the lowest three rankings (22d, 23d and
24th rankings). It may have appeared in the 11th and 12th rank-
ings, but these were not tabulated. Even though "Accountant"
received four 1st rankings in the test given in October, "Fruit
Dealer" (Wholesale) also received four 1st rankings. Therefore
124 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Table III
Results of Hepner's Vocational Interest Quotient (V.I.Q.)
Highest Three and Lowest Three Occupational Rankings
1st
Ranking
Test
Oct.
May
2nd
Ranking
Test
Oct.
May
3rd
Ranking
Test
Oct.
May
22nd
Ranking
Test
Oct.
May
23rd
Ranking
Test
Oct.
May
24th
Ranking
Test
Oct.
May
Accountant, public,
Advertising
Broker, securities...
Business executive,
printing
Buyer, dept. store .
Coal dealer
Draftsman
Employment manager.
Florist
Foreman of labor gang
Fruit dealer, wholesale
Hotel executive
Importer
Jeweler
Mortician
Newspaper reporter...
Photo engraver
Politician
Proprietor, small town
business
Realtor
Salesman, insurance. .
Salesman, specialty...
Salesman, staples
the question is raised, what advice can the counselor give, and how
is the individual to interpret these results?
It will be noticed that4'Coal Dealer," "Florist," "Politician,"
and "Realtor" received three first rankings, while "Buyer" (De-
partment Store), "Draftsman" and "Jeweler" were not listed in
the highest three rankings. In surveying the table in general, we
find several occupations that are ranked among the highest three
and then, too, we find that the same occupation is listed in the low-
est three rankings, which indicates a dislike. In examining the
table as a whole one gets the impression that it is a good scatter dia-
gram. Some of the occupations listed seem far removed from those
relating to accounting or clerical work, in which we have assumed
that these men would have an occupational interest.
Psychological Test. In order to obtain a comprehensive picture
of the group, the American Council on Education, Psychological
COMPARATIVE STUDY OF THREE TESTS 125
Examination (1931 edition), was given in October. There are 34
cases for which scores are available. The gross scores ranged from
44 to 253; when compared with the norms given for College stu-
dents these scores fall into the decile distribution as shown in Table
IV. When plotted, the data give almost a straight line distribution
slightly skewed towards the lower end. This table shows that about
Table IV
Distribution According to Deciles on American Council on Education
Psychological Examination
Deciles Number Cases
0-9   5
10-19  6
20-29  4
30-39  2
40-49  4
50-59  2
60-69  2
70-79  3
80-89  3
90-99  3
34
60 per cent of the group fall below the 50 percentile mark. On the
whole the cases seem to be fairly well distributed as to mental
ability.
Academic Grades. The instructors' grades for the 6 semester
courses are presented in Table V. The grades follow the general
Table V
Grades in Accounting Courses
Acct.
No. 1,
Fall
Sem.
Acct.
Theory
No. 2,
Spring
Sem.
Acct.
Prob-
lems
No. 2,
Spring
Sem.
Busi-
ness
Eng-
lish,
Fall
Sem.
Busi-
ness
Study-
Prob-
lems,
Fall
Sem.
Business
Law
No. 1,
Spring
Sem.
Percentage
of
Attendance
Per cent
No.
A
B
C
D
E
F
4
10
11
3
2
100-95
94-90
89-85
84-80
79-75
74-70
64
23
No credit
Lack of attendance
Totals 30
69-65
64-50
and Under
18
17
24
22
10
2
59
121
126 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
distribution that one would expect when no standardized achieve-
ment tests are administered, and they indicate that these men
demonstrated their interest in accounting and clerical work by
making creditable grades in these standard accounting courses in a
school of accountancy, and commerce. Interest is also indicated
by the high percentage of attendance which these young men
maintained while taking these courses.
Conclusions
It would seem that these subjects constituted a group of young
men who had a real interest in accounting and clerical work be-
cause they were employed in that type of work, were willing to
pay tuition and attend class at night; they also represented a good
cross section of mental ability.
Therefore we might assume that if these interest tests measure
what they are purported to measure they should at least reveal
that these men have a strong interest in accounting and clerical
work, also possibly reveal that they had weak interests in other
occupational fields such as those selected?Engineering, Farming
and Journalism.
Of the three tests Strong's Interest blank fulfilled the require-
ments best, as the men made high scores when the blank was
scored for the clerical occupations, but not quite so high when
scored for accountants. Low scores were made, also, on the fol-
lowing occupational norms: Engineer, Farmer and Journalist. It
was also found that on the retest it gave evidence of measuring the
same thing consistently or as technically stated had fairly good
reliability because practically the same results were secured. The
only exception to this was when the blanks on the retest were
scored for the journalist.
Brainard's test seemed to be the next best as evidenced from the
scores which these men made on the test. But the results were not
as clear-cut as in the case of Strong's test. Yery few of the men
made scores which Brainard classified as "satisfactory." As for
the interpretation of the modes of expression, considerable leeway is
left to the test administrator and this will vary with individuals.
In general there seemed to be a fair degree of consistency between
the first test and the retest.
Hepner's test makes the poorest showing of the three tests.
While there was some evidence that the group made a good score
COMPARATIVE STUDY OF THREE TESTS 127
when compared with the norms for accountants, the difference
between this occupation and others was not clear cut. There was
practically no consistency between the scores made on the retest
when compared with the first test.
In comparing these three tests some difficulties were encountered
because of the make-up of the test blanks and it was hard to get
strictly comparable occupational groups. Then, too, the scoring
devices did not lend themselves to the same quantitative treatment,
but nevertheless each blank is purported to give a measure of occu-
pational interests regardless of scoring techniques, and this was
our primary interest.
Although the number of cases in this study are too few to give
us an adequate measure of the reliability of the three tests, we do
find that Strong's test gives the best indication of reliability,
Brainard's gives some evidence of reliability and Hepner's, very
little. Consequently it leads the writer to question whether or not
the last two tests measure interests consistently, but only further
research with a greater number of cases can give a definite answer
to this question. Strong publishes in his manual figures on the re-
liability of his test, but neither Brainard nor Hepner provides
us with this information in his manual.
Another weakness of the tests is the number of cases on which
the tests have been standardized. Strong shows that his blank has
been standardized on groups containing from 60 to 337 cases. Hep-
ner states that his results are based on 25 or more cases, but gives no
figures for the specific 66 occupations, and Brainard does not give
any figures in his manual as to the number of cases for his
occupational groups. To the writer it would seem that both the
Hepner and Brainard tests need to be standardized on more cases
before we can accept their results as approaching an adequate
sampling.
Therefore, in answer to the question asked by the vocational
counsellor, which test shall I use?, it would seem from the results
of this limited study, the tests would rank in the following order:
Strong, first?Brainard, second?and Hepner, third.
In conclusion it is recommended that this same technique be
carried out with other groups and with a larger number of cases
known to have a rather high degree of interest in certain occupa-
tions in order to check these interest tests to see if they are measur-
ing what they purport to measure.
