A Comparison of Orthogenic Backward Children and Regular Grade Children at the Six-Year Performance Level
==========================================================================================================

By Mabel R. F arson
Supervisor of Mental Examinations, Division of Special Education,
Philadelphia Public Schools
The Problem
A question which is frequently put to members of the Division of
Special Education of The Board of Public Education, School District of Philadelphia, by visiting psychologists and educators is an
inquiry as to how placement of children in Orthogenic Backward
Classes, i.e., classes for the education of children who can not function adequately in the regular classes, is determined. All too
frequently the question takes the form, "What is the range of Intelligence Quotient in your Orthogenic Backward Classes?" or
"With how low an Intelligence Quotient do you permit children
to enter the Orthogenic Backward Classes and what is the upper
limit ?''
It has never been the belief of this Division that placement of
children in these special classes, to which for convenience we shall
subsequently refer as 0. B. classes, should be made upon so arbitrary and so narrowly definitive a basis as some particular psychometric measure. The selection of children for special educational
treatment is made on the basis of a pre-analytic judgment on the
part of their teachers and the principal of the school which they
attend, plus an analytical diagnosis made by one of the examiners
of the staff of the psychological clinic of the Public School System.
Teachers, subject to the approval of their principals, select children
who in the competitive event which school presents, display their
relative inferiority by failure to gain adequate proficiency. The
children are then given psychological tests and their performances
are analyzed from both qualitative and quantitative points of view
to determine their abilities and their defects. The examiners critically interpret and evaluate the performances of the children and
make judgments as to whether or not their competency is so limited as to make special educational treatment advisable. Since it
149
10
150 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
has never been the policy of this Division to use "Intelligence
Quotients with a sooth-sayer's finality,"1 no definite Intelligence
Quotient limitations for children in 0. B. classes have ever been
set. Placement has always been made on the basis of the pedagogical needs of the individual child. A survey of all 0. B. classes in
the city would show the range of Intelligence Quotients to be
great, including some cases of relatively high Intelligence Quotients in which some specific mental defect or defects in personality, motivation or adjustment was responsible for failure to gain
adequate proficiency in school.
A desire to define in some way this group, which has been
judged as having inferior competency to the extent of rendering
its members incapable of profiting by the instruction offered in the
regular elementary school grades, led to the present investigation.
There were, according to the enrollment figures of January,
1931, in the Philadelphia Public Schools 8,068 children in 0. B.
classes, 169,222 children in the regular grades of the elementary
schools, and the total enrollment in the school system was
234,860. The children in the 0. B. classes then comprise 3.4
per cent of the total public school population and 4.2 per cent of
elementary school children. Witmer's method of estimating competency in terms of relative superiority or inferiority suggested the
plan of defining the 0. B. group which has been eliminated from
the regular grades by comparing it with the "normal" or regular
grade group. The only previous comparative study of children in
the regular grades and in the 0. B. classes of the Philadelphia
Schools was embodied in McCaulley's 2 study in which she compared the memory spans of regular grade children with those of
children in the 0. B. classes.
The standards of performance which were available for purposes of comparison had to be taken into consideration. The Witmer Diagnostic Standards, compiled as the result of investigations
of competency at different significant age levels, afforded the most
satisfactory means of comparison. It was necessary, however, to
limit this investigation to a comparison at one particular level,
deferring comparisons at other levels for some future date.
1 L. Witmer, Psychological diagnosis and the psychonomic orientation of
analytic diagnosis, Psychol. Clin., 1925, 16, 1-18.
2 S. McCaulley, A study of the relative values of the audito-vocal forward memory span and the reverse span as diagnostic tests, Psychol. Clin.,
1928, 16, 277-291.
A COMPARISON OF CHILDREN 151
The six year level of competency presented a logical choice as
a basis for the first comparison of the children comprising the 0. B.
group and the regular grade group of children. Witmer has
stressed the significance of this level which marks the child's entrance into a new social and intellectual sphere, that of formal
education, and has designated the six year level as "the competency level of literacy"3 and has claimed it is only when a child
has reached this level that he is "fully born," that "all the cards
are on the table," i.e., that his congenital competency has sufficiently developed to be displayed adequately.
There was available at this level for purposes of comparison the
results of Easby-Grave's4 investigation which constituted the six
year level of the Witmer Diagnostic Standards.
It was decided then to make this first attempt to define the
0. B. group by comparing with the six year Diagnostic Standards
the performances of a group of children in 0. B. classes, selected
on the same basis as that used by Easby-Grave in establishing the
Diagnostic Standard.
Method of Procedure
For this particular investigation, there were selected 500 children who were in the 1A and IB grades when they were referred
for psychological examinations, and who as the result of such
examinations were recommended for placement in 0. B. classes.
In choosing the children whose records were to be used for this
study, all cases were eliminated where a recommendation for placement in an 0. B. class with a view to restoration to grade was made
or where in the recommendation or case report, the psychologist
suggested the probability of eventual return to grade. Thus some
of the more superior children at this level who are actually found
in 0. B. classes were not included in this study, since there is the
possibility that they constitute restoration rather than 0. B. cases.
The restoration classes under the direction of the Division of
Special Education are few in number because it is difficult to find
in any locality enough children who need and can profit by this
type of training. As the name implies, a restoration class is a
class in which educationally retarded children are given specific
3 L. Witmer, The problem of educability, Psychol. Clin., 1919 12 174178.
4 c. Easby-Grave, Tests and norms at the six year old performance level
Psychol. Clin., 1924, 15, 261-300. '
152 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
teaching with the aim of speeding up their school accomplishments,
thus enabling them to return to the normal grade for their age.
Sometimes children who are real restoration cases are placed in
0. B. classes when no restoration class is available, are given particular attention and are returned to grade.
All the first grade children who were given a psychological
examination by the writer and recommended for placement in
0. B. classes during the school years 1928-1929, 1929-1930 and in
September and October, 1930, were selected for this investigation.
Additional cases to bring the number up to 500 were selected by
going through the files of the psychological records of the Division
of Special Education. One file was chosen from the first cabinet,
another from the second cabinet, etc., and in any particular file
every case which filled the requirements for this investigation and
which had been examined in the years from September, 1927 to
June, 1930 was used. A few earlier cases which had been examined by the writer and which were found in these files were also
included.
Because of the method of assembling cases, children were
culled from many different schools, and varied environmental conditions. When it was estimated that about 500 cases had been
chosen, a count showed that this indiscriminate choice had resulted
in a group composed of 229 IB children and 246 1A children.
Since there was so nearly equal a division of the two sections of
the first grade, the remaining number of cases were so selected as
to make a final group of 250 1A children and 250 IB children.
This group of 500 children included 339 boys and 161 girls.
The preponderance of boys in this representative group of
O. B. children is not surprising. The greater number of boys
recommended for placement in O. B. classes does not warrant the
assumption that boys are duller in school than girls. Boys as a
rule are more active and less conformed in school than girls and
consequently more frequently attract the attention of their teachers.
The dull, but cooperative and well conformed, child of pleasing
personality is not so likely to be referred for an examination with
a view to placement in an O. B. class as is the more obstreperous
child. Many teachers show a decided reluctance to recommend
for special educational treatment the dull but infantile and winning, or the shy, timid and rather attractive little girl because of
their belief that the O. B. classes of their particular community
are not socially desirable for such little girls. It is not unusual to
A COMPARISON OF CHILDREN 153
hear such remarks as, "She is too nice a child to be placed in an
0. B. class."
A classification of the group on a racial basis shows that 95, or
28 per cent, of the boys; and 53, or 32.9 per cent of the girls are
negroes. There is a somewhat larger percentage of negroes in the
0. B. classes than in the total school population since 20.5 per cent
of the total school population for Philadelphia are negro children.5
An inspection of the negro group shows that 23 of these children
are overage children who have come from the rural South where
they have had little or no school opportunities. Their chronological ages range from 7 years, 11 months to 13 years, 10 months.
Fourteen of these cases were ten or more years old when examined. Obviously these cases contribute to the greater chronological
age of the 0. B. group as compared with the regular grade group
of the Easby-Grave study.
An analysis according to the nationality of the parents shows
that 90 boys and 48 girls, a total of 138 children or 27.6 per cent of
the group, are of foreign parentage. Particular nationalities are
distributed as follows:
Italy  77
Russia (Jewish)  27
Poland  11
Lithuania & Latvia  7
Germany  7
Ireland  3
Greece  2
Armenia, Ukrania, Hungary, Austria  1 each
The percentage of children of foreign parentage is not so great
in the O. B. group as in the regular grade children whom EasbyGrave used for her study. She took children from five Philadelphia schools, two of which were located in a neighborhood where
the population is almost entirely Italian with the children being
the first generation born in America. The children of the present
investigation represent a random choice of city-wide distribution.
The occupations of the parents of the children of the group
studied for this investigation give some idea of their social status.
In only 244 cases was it possible to get from the child some idea
of the father's occupation. Perhaps in some cases the occupations
ranked a little high because there was no way of knowing, when a
child said his father was a carpenter or a plumber, for example
whether he was a skilled mechanic or merely a helper. The occus Figures of June, 1931.
154 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
pations of the parents were classified as well as could be done from
the descriptive terms used by the children according to Taussig's
5 point scale.
Percentage
Class I?Laborers, unskilled and untrained manual workers ... 83 34
Class II?Factory and mill workers doing the simpler operations and semi-skilled workers  94 38.5
Class III?Skilled workmen   55 22.5
Class IV?Clerks, salesmen, shopkeepers, etc  12 5
All twelve cases listed in Class IV were shopkeepers except one
man, the father of twin boys, both of whom were included in this
study, who was a druggist. While the source of these results is
subject to error, there seems to be a preponderance of children
whose parents are employed at unskilled and semi-skilled work.
A comparison of the occupations of the parents of the children
in the 0. B. group and in the regular grade group of Easby-Grave's
investigation indicates that the 0. B. group springs from a lower
economic and social order. It must be taken into consideration
that some of the backward children of professional people, the
higher grade shopkeepers, etc., are sent to private schools when they
encounter difficulty in keeping up to grade standards.
It is apparent that a large percentage of this typical group of
0. B. children suffer an environmental handicap. Not only do
their homes fail to provide cultural advantages but they also in
many cases do not furnish the opportunities for acquirement of
even the minimum intellectual development necessary to build an
adequate background for the introduction of school work nor for
the development of satisfactory motivation patterns.
In the matter of language development many of the children are
seriously handicapped. They enter school with greatly restricted
vocabularies and consequently poor comprehension of English.
Concepts of both concrete and abstract words which occur in school
readers must often be developed before any attempt is made to
teach the recognition of the printed word. The poor comprehension
of language also influences the Binet I.Q.
The psychological examinations, the records of which were used
for this study, were made with a view to determining the best educational treatment for the children involved. They represent the
general run of cases of the psychological clinic of the Division of
Special Education and when the examinations were made it was
not planned to treat the results statistically. Consequently this
study differs from the investigations made in establishing the age
A COMPARISON OF CHILDREN 155
level norms in that there was no previous definite selection of a
battery of tests to which every child was subjected. The children
were given those of the available tests which would enable the
examiner to make a judgment of their competency and permit
such an analysis of their performance as would lead to definite
recommendations for educational treatment.
The Division of Special Education maintains a central clinic
to which children may be brought for examination by parents,
teachers or interested parties; most of the cases, however, were
examined in their own schools. The Witmer Cylinder Test is not
included in the test material used in schools because of the difficulty of transporting it. The examining staff much prefer to use
the Cylinder Test for young children and do so whenever possible.
The method of procedure was the usual one employed by the
examining staff of this Division. Each child is examined individually in an especially assigned room. Data is recorded on Form
S 81?Individual Clinical Record?School District of Philadelphia,
the Abbreviated Filing Record Card for the Stanford Revision of
the Binet-Simon Test and Form S 80?Arithmetic Test, Lower
Grades?School District of Philadelphia. The child's school
registration card furnishes his date of birth, the country of his
birth, the birth place of his parents, the date on which he entered
school, a record of repetitions of grade if any and term ratings.
This information is transferred to the Individual Clinical Record
Sheet as is also the data obtained from the medical card. The
medical card shows the height, weight, the standard weight for the
child's height and age, and specific physical or sensory defects
which have been noted by the school physician. Since the children
coming to the central clinic do not bring their registration and
medical cards, such information as seems pertinent is obtained
from the person accompanying the child.
A brief social history is obtained from the child himself in the
schools or from the person accompanying him to the central clinic.
An effort is made to determine the members of the household, the
occupations of the parents, and whether or not any social agency
has contacts with the family.
The time which the child requires to do the performance tests
is recorded on this Individual Clinical Record Sheet. His mental
age, his I.Q., his memory spans, audito-vocal, visual and reverse
and his proficiency in the various school subjects are also noted on
this record. In addition this sheet contains a list of eighty-eight
156 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
personality qualities and the particular qualities checked in each
case give an indication of the child's personality, the maturity level
of his general orientation and his manner of response.
The "Psychological Analysis" printed on this form consists of
a list of twenty-nine capabilities covering with some further analysis the general categories of vitality, movement, attention and
imagination, so designed as to give with a five point scale rating, a
qualitative and quantitative analysis of the child's performance
although ratings are not always given for all the abilities listed.
It is the customary practice of examiners of the staff of this
clinic to give tests according to standard procedure, but it must
be borne in mind that the examinations, the records of which were
used for this investigation, were made not with the purpose of
establishing any standards of performance, but with the idea of
discovering the child's abilities and defects with a view of recommending the most advantageous educational procedure. There
were then in all probability some cases among the group where
some variations of standardized procedure and directions were
necessary in order to elicit the best and most significant performance from the child, variations necessitated by peculiarities in personality such as shyness and timidity, stubbornness, fear, etc., or
by a language handicap or marked mental deficiency accompanied
by limited comprehension, and so forth.
The usual procedure of the examiner is to begin the examination with the Witmer Form Board, because of the interest which
it arouses, because it is usually easy enough to be successfully accomplished, and has been found to be a good means of establishing
rapport with young children. Of the 500 children whose records
were used for this study, 498 had two trials on the Witmer Form
Board; two boys were not given this test for some reason which
the examiner failed to state on the record; and 490 children had
three trials on this test, as it is the customary procedure of this
Division to give three trials on all so-called performance tests.
The Form Board used differs from the usual Witmer Form
Board in that the tray has been dispensed with in order that the
test may be fitted into a brief case. It is customary to use the
standard procedure except that the blocks are placed on the table
where the tray would be in the regular formboard.
For the reasons previously stated, only a limited number of
children had the opportunity to do the Witmer Cylinder Test,
68 children, 38 boys and 30 girls, had one trial on this test, 67
A COMPARISON OF CHILDREN 157
children, 38 boys and 29 girls, had two trials and 61 children, 35
boys and 26 girls, performed the test three times. The test is
usually given to younger children with the directions used for the
Easby-Grave investigation, which differs from the standardized
directions in calling attention to the smoothness of the top when
the blocks are properly placed.
The Healy A test is presented in the following manner: the
blocks are removed without permitting the child to see the completed test and are arranged so that they are not seen in the correct relationship for placing. Then the child is told to ''put all the
blocks back so that they all fit in and there are no spaces left.'' A
time limit of three minutes is allowed. If he is successful he is
asked to put the blocks back in the same places again and if he
fails, he is taught how to do the test. Usually three trials are given
on this test. Of the 500 cases used for this investigation, 464 had
one trial on the Healy A, 460 had two trials and 450 three trials.
In this clinic memory span tests are given as a separate unit of
the battery of tests using the Humpstone series of digits to obtain
the audito-vocal memory span. The standard method of procedure
is used. The visual memory span or more properly the visualvocal-kinesthetic memory span is obtained whenever the children
are able to recognize digits well enough to take this test. For
the reverse memory span test, the digit series of the Binet Scale
are used and the procedure is that used by Easby-Grave. The digit
memory span tests, audito-vocal, visual-vocal and reverse, were
given to all the 500 children who constituted this sampling of O. B.
children.
Every child also was given the starred series of the Stanford
Revision of the Binet-Simon Tests. No substitutions of tests were
made as in the Easby-Grave study.
Measures of school proficiency were obtained by the use of
Form S 80?Arithmetic Test, Lower Grades, School District of
Philadelphia, Detroit Word Recognition Test for Primary Grades,
Gray Oral Reading Check Tests and a check on counting and recognition of phonic elements and their use.
Results
The results are shown in the Decile Tables following the discussion. To facilitate comparison with the results for the EasbyGrave regular grade group, these latter results are given in
parentheses.
158 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Chronological Age
The purpose of this investigation is to indicate what 0. B. children are like by comparing their performances with those of regular grade children at some particular functioning level. When
the functioning level is defined somewhat loosely as competency to
do school work, the O.B. group as the very term implies, will be
slower to develop this competency and consequently will reach
this level at a somewhat greater chronological age than the normal
child. The chronological ages of the 0. B. group, ranged from 5
years, 10 months to 14 years, 10 months with a median age of 7
years, 11 months.
A comparison of the tables of the Easby-Grave investigation
and the 0. B. group shows that the 0. B. group is older. The
differences in the ages of two groups at corresponding decile levels, varies from 6 months to 46 months and the average
difference in age for the decile levels is 17.5 months. The
median chronological age for the regular grade group is 6 years,
7 months. Only 10.2 per cent of the 0. B. group at this level are
as young as the median age for the regular grade group. In the
Easby-Grave investigation 58.0 per cent of the regular grade children have chronological ages between 6 and 7 years whereas only
20.4 per cent of the 0. B. group fall within this chronological
age limit. It is, however, significant of the advance in educational
practise that even so large a percentage of children are now recognized in the first year of their school life as needing special teaching methods.
The greater chronological age of the 0. B. group is attributable
to several factors. The group included 23 negro children from the
rural South who entered the first grade considerably over-age for
grade and who because of their inferior ability to do the work of
the grade, their size, or both, were referred for examinations as
candidates for 0. B. classes. There were several older children
who were transferred from parochial schools and who because of
their lack of school proficiency, were placed in a first grade where
it soon became evident that they needed special class treatment.
Then too, in some quarters there is a reluctance to recommend
children for special classes until they have been "tried out" in
the grades, with the result that children who are not capable of
profiting by regular grade instruction are permitted to waste several terms in the grade, forming bad habits of attention and work,
A COMPARISON OF CHILDREN 159
before they are referred for examination. There is however a
rapidly growing tendency on the part of first grade teachers to
refer for psychological examinations their problem children in the
first term of school, to determine whether they can be handled in
the grade or whether they need special educational treatment.
Early selection of those who need special pedagogical procedure is
an economical measure for both the child and the school system.
Witmer Form Board
The Witmer Formboard is a significant test for the younger
children in our group. It is of more importance from a diagnostic
point of view than is apparent from the quantitative comparison
of the 0. B. group and the regular grade group at the six year
level. The Witmer Formboard has been standardized at the four
year level, i.e., it is at this level that 50 per cent of children complete the test successfully in five minutes and 50 per cent fail. That
it is not a test of intelligence for the 0. B. child at the six year
level is demonstrated by the fact that only 3.6 per cent of this
group fail on the first trial of the test. Intelligence as defined by
Witmer is the ability of the individual to solve new problems and
the criterion for an intelligence test is that at the particular level
at which it is standardized "the number of individuals who succeed do not more than equal the number who fail." 6 It is obvious
that the Formboard test does not provide enough novel elements
nor make great enough demands on the originality of this group
to excite a display of intelligence.
A comparison of the results of the 0. B. group and the regular
grade group of the Easby-Grave investigation shows that there is
a more extensive distribution in time results for the 0. B. group,
that the 0. B. group is generally poorer than the regular grade
group, and has a greater percentage of failures. The differences
between the 0. B. and the regular grade group increase as the
lower deciles are reached; there is a consistent sex difference which
is greater for the 0. B. group than for the regular grade group,
and this difference also increases as the lower deciles are reached
As is to be expected, the inferior children show the greatest deviation from the established norms.
In the 0. B. group there are 3.6 per cent failures on the first
trial as contrasted to 2.6 per cent failures in the regular grade
e L. Witmer, Intelligence?a definition, Psychol. Clin., 1922, 14, 65-67
160 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
group. On the second trial, there is a one per cent failure in the
0. B. group and no failures in the regular grade group. On the
third trial there are 1.2 per cent failures in the 0. B. group. (The
regular grade children did not have a third trial.)
The following table shows the differences between the regular
grade and the 0. B. group at each decile level above the zero and
one per cent points, where failures are recorded for both groups.
Table 1
Witmer Form Board. First and Second Trials
First Trial Second Trial
100th percentile?Regular grade group? 3 sec. better? 2 sec. poorer
90th percentile?Regular grade group? 3 sec. better? 3 sec. better
80th percentile?Regular grade group? 5 sec. better? 5 sec. better
70th percentile?Regular grade group? 5 sec. better? 6 sec. better
60th percentile?Regular grade group? 4 sec. better? 8 sec. better
60th percentile?Regular grade group? 6 sec. better? 9 sec. better
40th percentile?Regular grade group? 6 sec. better?10 sec. better
30th percentile?Regular grade group?12 sec. better?12 sec. better
20th percentile?Regular grade group?16 sec. better?19 sec. better
10th percentile?Regular grade group?35 sec. better?32 sec. better
The difference does not seem to be significant except at the lower
decile levels. The first thought is that possibly the greater chronological age of the 0. B. group influences the time scores on the
Form Board test and an analysis of the results shows this to be
true. Young7 has said "there is an indirect ratio between age and
formboard ability at least to the age of maturity." Of our cases
110 complete the Form Board in 40 seconds or less. This group
represents approximately the superior 20 per cent. Of these only
20, or 18 per cent are below the median in chronological age and
90, or 82 per cent are above the median. There is thus shown a relation between age and formboard ability which not even "backwardness" or inability to progress adequately in school is great
enough to offset.
Many of these older children do the Witmer Formboard so
easily and quickly that their performances throw little or no light
on the cause of their difficulty in school. It can be noted for these
children that though their performances are efficient for the sixyear level, a comparison with the standard for the ten-year level
which strikes more nearly at their chronological age level, shows
that if their chronological ages are considered, they are relatively
inefficient. There are some younger children also whose perform7 H. H. Young, Physical and mental factors involved in the formboard
test, Psychol. Clin., 1916, 10, 149-167.
A COMPARISON OF CHILDREN 161
ances fall in the best 20 per cent group and for such children their
performances provide a display of abilities which can be utilized
in teaching them.
The children who encounter difficulties in solving the Formboard Test frequently reveal in their performances some of the
specific defects which handicap them in school. In such cases an
analysis of the performance is of value. For example, does he
attempt to place the blocks in incorrect recesses because of inferior
discriminability, limited distribution of attention or is he deficient
in both these abilities ? Frequently, incidental errors on the test
are obviously due to poor distribution of attention. A child attends to one small portion of the board at a time and tries to fit the
block which he has chanced to pick up into one or more of the recesses within his range of attention without looking further. Obviously such a specific defect is a marked handicap in school and
calls for definitely adapted pedagogical procedure. "With such
children instructional material must be presented in small units.
Sometimes errors in this test are due to inferior discriminability. Inferior analytic discriminability is one of the defects frequently cited in the reports of the psychological examinations of
this group. The errors which occur most often are the confusion
of the isosceles and equilateral triangles, the diamond and the
hexagon, and the cross and the star, whose similarity lies merely
in the fact that in both cases there are members which radiate
from a center. This lack of adequate discriminability is found to
be a marked handicap in school in learning to discriminate digits
and letters. In presenting new material to a child so handicapped,
definite characteristics and distinguishing differences in the material presented must be pointed out to him as he does not have
the ability to detect these for himself. When both inferior distribution of attention and inferior discriminability are present, as
is often the case, the problem obviously becomes one which can be
dealt with adequately only in a relatively small group where the
rate of progress can be adjusted to the capability of the child and
does not need to be dictated by the arbitrary demands of a course
of study.
Sometimes the child's errors lead one to suspect inferior visual
imagery, i.e., he does not hold the image of the block which he has
picked up, while he is looking for the correct recess. Some of the
children reveal poor muscular coordination in the difficulty they
encounter in placing the blocks in their appropriate recesses. In
162 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
such eases the necessity is indicated for blackboard work as the
earliest work in writing because the larger size of the writing makes
less demands on the coordination, and is an effective means of preparing the way for ultimately better writing on paper. Simple
construction work as part of the activity program also should be
given as an aid to the development of finer muscular coordination.
Inferior persistent concentration of attention is a defect which
also appears in a number of the reports of the psychological examinations for the group. This defect is sometimes shown in the
child's performance on the Witmer Form Board. The children
whose attention is easily distracted while they are doing this test,
those who stop to look about the room, to ask questions, to pick up
other material lying about, etc., show marked defects in concentration since this test is usually interesting enough to hold the attention of the child. A grave defect from the standpoint of school
instruction is thus shown and the need for specific efforts to build
up better habits of attention as the first step in the learning process
is pointed out.
Some knowledge as to the vitality, the degree of maturity and
the personality of the child is gained from an observance of his
performance on this test. Some of the 0. B. group show in their
performance inferior energy, relatively great fatigability and a
lack of initiative. Their very method of attacking the problem
often gives some indication as to these defects as does also their
lack of enthusiasm with however perfect willingness to do what is
asked of them, their slow rate of movement, and in some instances,
the increased time on the third trial.
A comparatively large proportion of the 0. B. group at this
level are infantile in their general reactions and sometimes this
trait is displayed in their manner of patting the blocks after they
have been placed in the recesses, in their playful manner of executing the test with no attempt at speed even after suggestion or
urging, or in their babyish dependence as they appeal to the examiner or the parent for help either by look or word. The shy and
timid child, the poised child and the hyper-excitable child likewise
reveal something of their personalities as they do this test.
Witmer Cylinder Test
The norms established for the Witmer Cylinder Test by Paschall
show that, as in the Formboard, there is a positive relation between
chronological age and time required to do the test. The number
A COMPARISON OF CHILDREN 163
of children in onr group who did this test is so small that the results are probably not very significant.
Easby-Grave's results show that 47.6 per cent of the regular
grade group fail on the first trial of the Witmer Cylinder Test
while 51.4 per cent of the 0. B. group of this investigation despite
their greater age, fail on the first trial. "With the regular grade
group 12 per cent fail to complete the test within the time limit
on the second trial and in the 0. B. group there are 10.4 per cent
failures on this trial. In the 0. B. group 11.4 per cent fail on the
third trial of the test. However, since only 14 per cent of our 0. B.
group took this test, these results probably mean very little. In
the 0. B. group as in all other groups taking this test, the performance of the boys is somewhat better than that of the girls.
The performance of children of the 0. B. group at this level on
the Witmer Cylinder Test often reveals mental defects or defects
of vitality or personality which are the fundamental causes of the
displayed incompetency in school. A brief description of some
of the typical performances of the 0. B. group on the Cylinder
Test gives some indication as to the manner in which specific defects are revealed. Some children fail to pass the test because of
their lack of comprehension of the problem. Early in their performance they place some of the small cylinders in the large recesses, perfectly satisfied as long as the cylinder will slip in and
then later they are nonplussed by the problem of what to do with
the large cylinders which remain. Others fail because they spend
much time in trying to fit blocks into the few recesses which fall
within their limited range of attention without even looking at
the remainder of the board. Many children display real analytic
discriminability when placing the larger cylinders but resort to
trial and error for the placement of the small cylinders.
The infantile children can usually not be hurried in their performance. Some of the children cease their efforts before the time
limit has expired, saying, "It's too hard" or "I can't do it," etc.
"With some, a mere suggestion that they continue is enough to cause
a resumption of effort whereas others must be urged to go on. It
is not at all unusual for children at this level to appeal to the examiner for help.
Healy Construction Test A
The Healy Construction Test A presents too difficult a problem
to be a test of intelligence for children of the six-year level. Terman in his Revision of Binet-Simon Tests places the Healy A at
164 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
the ten-year level (Alternative Test 3?to be solved three times in
five minutes). The Lowe, Shimberg, Wood Norms give median
and quartile rankings for each chronological age from 9 to 17 years
inclusive.
Of the 464 0. B. children at the six year level who took the
Healy A Test, 348 or 75 per cent of them failed on the first trial.
It is of some advantage, however, to observe a child's reactions
when he is working at a task which is obviously too difficult for
him. Some children make good persistent efforts at a solution.
Others at first try to solve the problem but when they continue to
encounter difficulty, merely go on in an aimless trial and error
fashion, making little real effort but continuing to do something
because they realize that some activity is expected of them. Still
other children soon accept and express their defeat and even when
urged to continue, ask to be permitted to stop several times before
the time limit has expired. Such performances contribute to an
adequate knowledge of the child which is vital from an educational
point of view.
The Healy A is particularly significant as a learning test for
children of this level. There are 29.1 per cent failures on the second trial as compared to 75 per cent failures on the first trial.
Only 10.4 per cent failed on the third trial. There were 24 cases
(17 boys and 7 girls) who failed on the second trial and not on the
first trial, and there were 2 cases who did the test successfully on
the first and second trial, but failed on the third trial. There is a
larger element of chance involved in the successful solution on the
first trial of this test than there is with either the Formboard or
the Cylinder Test. The cases of success on the first trial and failure on the second trial represent, generally, instances in which the
test is solved by luck on the first trial and in which the child does
not give enough attention to the completed test to gain a visual
image or where the visual imagery is so inferior that an adequate
visual image does not result from a visual percept. There are
among this group children who even with three or four repetitions
of instruction do not learn to do this test and such a performance
gives some indication of the teaching problem the child will present in school. The Healy Construction Test A also provides a
means of determining something of the child's visual imageability.
Since visual presentation is one of the most common mediums of
school instruction, some knowledge of the child's powers of visual
imagery is important because of the part this ability plays in learning to read.
A COMPARISON OF CHILDREN 165
Memory Span
The results of the memory span tests for this group show a
negligible sex difference which concurs with the findings of other
investigators. The performance of this representative group of
0. B. children at the six-year level with respect to the audito-vocal
digit memory span is inferior to that of the regular grade group
at this level. A comparison with the diagnostic tables established
for the six-year level by Easby-Grave shows that the regular grade
group has an auditory memory span one digit higher at each decile
level except the 20th and 30th percentiles where the span is the
same for both groups.
Another method of comparison, as shown in the following table,
perhaps makes the difference in the audito-vocal memory span more
apparent. The median and modal audito-vocal memory span for
the regular grade group is 5, and for the 0. B. group it is 4. Of
the regular grade group 33.2 per cent have an audito-vocal memory
span of less than 5, while in the 0. B. group 72.4 per cent have less
than 5. The range for the first grade children of the regular
grades is from 3 to 9 digits while for the 0. B. group the range is
from 2 to 7 digits.
Table 2
Percentage in Regular Grade and O. B. Group Obtaining a Given AuditoVocal-Digit Memory Span
Digits Reg. Grade O. B.
2  0 1.4
3  3.8 18.2
4  29.4 52.8
5  41.4 23.2
6  15.8 4.0
7   7.8 .4
8  1.6
9 2
The inferiority of the 0. B. group in auditory memory span is
even greater than is apparent from an inspection of the comparative tables. All investigations with this test have shown that there
is a direct relation between memory span and chronological age,
and since the 0. B. children are older, they should be expected to
do better.
This test measuring as it does the number of discrete elements
which an individual is able to grasp in any one act of attention
reveals one of the contributing factors to the demonstrated inability of the 0. B. group to make adequate progress in the regular
grades. The experience of members of the Division of Special
11
166 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Education has led to the belief that a memory span of 3 is not great
enough to enable a child to do the work of a first grade in a regular
first grade except in rare cases where some marked compensating
ability is present. Of the group used for this study 18.2 per cent
have an auditory memory span of 3 and 1.4 per cent have an auditory memory span of only 2. Considering the age and the repetitions of grade of many of the children, it seems probable that a
still larger number may have had auditory memory spans of only
3 when they first entered school.
The results which have been outlined indicate that the auditory
memory span test is highly significant from a diagnostic point of
view and that it is of value in indicating pedagogical procedure.
The child whose "ability to distribute his attention over a number of discrete perceptions" is limited, cannot compete with a
group who can in a single coherence grasp a greater number of
elements. When he enters first grade early in the term, too many
new elements are presented at any one time for him to be able to
grasp them. Soon he is unable to profit by the teaching offered
because he has not fully grasped the preceding work and consequently does not have an adequate background or preparation for
the new work. He becomes hopelessly lost and as he cannot comprehend the instruction, if he is an active, energetic child gets into
mischief or if he is a dull stolid child, just sits paying no heed to
the instructional efforts of the teacher and in either case develops
poor habits of attention and work.
If placed in an 0. B. class where his specific defect or defects
can be taken into account, the teaching can be adapted and a very
limited number of elements are presented at a time. Thus he can
progress, though to be sure, he will not progress at the regular
grade rate because of the small amount of work taken at any one
time. The limitation imposed by a poor memory span must constantly be borne in mind, in giving directions for work, and in
planning the teaching both as to amount to be covered and method
of instruction.
Attention has frequently been called to the fact that it is probable that no one has a true memory span of more than 5, considering the true memory span as the number of discrete elements which
an individual is able to grasp in a. single coherence. Some of the
children of the 0. B. group and more than half of the regular grade
group at the six year level repeated 5 digits or more. It is probable
that many of these children had a true memory span of 3 and that
A COMPARISON OF CHILDREN 167
none had a true memory span of more than 4. Their results on
the memory span test (unless echolalia) were achieved by grouping. In such cases, each group becomes a unit and the individual
constituents of the group lose their identity as discrete elements.
This integration of a number of separate elements into larger units
is indicative of a degree of intellectual complexity. That the 0. B.
group possess this ability to a less degree than the regular grade
group is one of the factors involved in their inferior ability to
acquire an education. Because each element remains a separate and
distinct unit to be grasped and because material is grasped in these
elemental units rather than in complex units, their rate of progress
is much slower. A teacher who is new to 0. B. work will frequently
find at first that she presents too many new elements in a lesson
to fall within the range of the limited memory spans of her class,
not because she has not definitely tried to limit the elements but
because what seems to her to be one step may in reality be two or
three for handicapped pupils. In planning lessons the teacher finds
it necessary to analyze the material into its most fundamental units,
to avoid this difficulty.
For the visual-vocal memory span, Easby-Grave found that the
median and the mode was 4 in the regular grade group, one less
than the median and mode for the audito-vocal span. With the
0. B. group the median and modal visual memory span is also 4
which is the same as the median and modal audito-vocal span for
this group. However, it must also be noted that an inability to
give a visual span occurs almost as frequently as the modal span
of 4.
Table 3
Percentage in Regular Grade and O. B. Group Obtaining a Given VisualVocal-Digit Memory Span
Digits Reg. Grade O. B.
F   17.0 25.8
2  2 2.0
3    6.2 14.2
4    31.2 29.2
5    30.4 21.2
G    11.0 6.8
7   2.8 .8
8. . . . . .    !-?
9 2
Though the median and the mode of the two groups are the
same, 42 per cent of the 0. B. group have visual memory spans
of less than 4, as contrasted with the 23.4 per cent who fall below
168 TEE PSYCEOLOGICAL CLINIC
this level in the regular grade group. The 0. B. group, however,
is slightly less inferior in the visual than in the auditory memory
span.
At the six year level the reverse memory span is not as significant a diagnostic test as it is at higher levels. A comparison of
the frequency distributions of the two groups shows less difference
in the scores for the reverse memory span than in the case of the
forward memory spans.
Table 4
Percentage in Regular Grade and O. B. Group Obtaining a Given Reverse
Audito-Vocal-Digit Memory Span
Digits Reg. Grade O. B.
F  42.4 55.4
2  18.8 27.8
3 31.0 14.2
4  7.2 1.6
5 6 0
It is significant that for approximately half of the children both
in the regular grade group and in the 0. B. group the reverse
memory span is too complex a problem. It may be assumed that
the degree of complexity which this test measures is greater than
that which is necessary for beginning school work. Though when
their age is taken into consideration the reverse memory spans of
the 0. B. groups are inferior to the age level norms established by
the Binet Scale, their inferiority in this respect cannot be held
accountable for their lack of school success at the six year level.
The Binet Scale
The Binet Scale is included in the battery of tests given to
children who are failing in school because it gives a quantitative
measure of the child's general proficiency level and if subjected to
qualitative analysis is of diagnostic value in indicating specific
abilities and attainments. An estimate of the child's ability to
comprehend and use language and of his ability to grasp situations
which other children of his age comprehend can be gained by the
use of this test. It also gives some indication of the child's ability to acquire information, and to deal with ideational material.
The quality of his response as well as its quantitative measure gives
some idea of the child's degree of intellectual complexity. From a
diagnostic point of view, the information gained from an analysis
of the child's performance is of more value than the mere Intelligence Quotient.
A COMPARISON OF CHILDREN 169
At the six year level the I.Q. is not in itself a reliable measure
of competency any more than is any other single test used in this
battery. In the discussion of the performance tests it was pointed
out that there were some children who gave performances equal
to or better than the average of the regular grade group, on these
tests, who, however, showed marked defects in memory span and
in intellectual ability which rendered them incapable of competing
in the regular grades.
The diagnostic significance of the I.Q. and other test results may
be illustrated by a few brief clinical studies of cases in our group.
Elizabeth was 6 years of age, and had been in school only one
month when she was referred for an examination. She achieved
an I.Q. of 104. On the Witmer Form Board she required 65 seconds for the first trial, which ranked her inferior to 60 per cent of
the 0. B. group and inferior to 70 per cent of the regular grade
group. She attempted to place in incorrect recesses the circle, the
hexagon and the cross. On her second trial of this test, she required 76 seconds and made errors with the star, the square, the
hexagon and the triangle. Her second trial from the standpoint of
time required placed her in a group of 10 per cent inferior to 80
per cent and superior to 10 per cent of the O. B. group and was
inferior to that of 90 per cent of the regular grade group. Her
third trial on this test required 72 seconds and she made errors
with the triangle, the diamond, the rectangle and the star. It
was significant that she attempted incorrect placements for forms
which are not frequently confused. On the Healy A, Elizabeth
failed on her first trial. She was taught how to do the test but
failed again on the second trial. The third trial required 24 seconds and was accomplished with one error. The fourth trial took
22 seconds.
The child had an auditory memory span of 4, which was satisfactory for her age. The reverse memory span was too complex
for her. On the Binet Scale she had a basal age of 6. At the 7
year level she passed the test requiring a description of pictures.
It was noted that her response was slow and that her expression
was dull. In the one month she had been in school, she had learned
to recognize 3 digits?1, 5 and 3?which was the extent of her
school accomplishment.
The significant items of Elizabeth's performance were her inferior visual discriminability, her poor learning ability (as shown
on performance tests and in the class-room) and her slowness of
170 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
response. On the psychological analysis chart she was rated on a
5 point scale as follows: ability to profit by experience 2, ability
to solve problems 2, discrimination 2, visual imagery 2, learning
ability 2, and muscular coordination 2. The recommendation was:
"Because of her slowness, her inferior discriminability, and her
inferior learning ability, Elizabeth will not be able to make normal
progress in a first grade. It is, therefore, advisable to place her
in an 0. B. Class."
Eleanor was 6 years 11 months of age and had an I.Q. of 98.
She was spending her third term in a 1A grade. Her school proficiency consisted of being able to count to 29 and to recognize a
few sight words. She knew no phonics, was of course unable to
read and had not learned any number combinations. She had an
auditory memory span of 3, a visual memory span of 3, and no
reverse span. (Elizabeth and Eleanor were both placed in an
isolated 0. B. class in which none of the children were doing work
above the first grade. The type of class available is of some influence in making recommendations.)
Recent experience has led the writer to beware of attaching too
much significance to the high I.Q.'s attained by a child at the six
year level. A survey was made of all the children in the 0. B.
classes during the autumn of 1931. After the survey was completed some observation or a re-examination was made of all children with I.Q.'s above 80 who had not been recently examined.
The writer made the check-up in two 0. B. Centers and found a
number of cases of children 12 to 14 years of age whose I.Q.'s
were listed as 100 or a high 90, who had been in 0. B. classes for
a number of years and who still had very little school proficiency.
Re-examinations showed that the I.Q.'s had dropped to the 60's
or low 70's. Such a decrease in I.Q. is frequently found among
our 0. B. children who have had re-examinations.
Walter was examined by the writer in 1927. He had spent one
term in a 1A grade, was completing his second term in a IB grade
and was not being recommended for promotion. He had no school
proficiency except being able to count to 49, and to count by 2's
to 12. He had not the slightest concept of number combinations,
recognized no sight words and knew no phonic elements.
At this examination "Walter achieved an I.Q. of 91. His memory spans were auditory 5, visual 4, reverse 2. His time on performance tests was as follows:
Witmer Form Board (1) 45 sec., (2) 40 sec., (3) 28 sec.
A COMPARISON OF CHILDREN 171
Ilealy A (1) Failure, (2) 18 sec., (3) 37 sec., (4) 27 sec.
On the Binet he had a basal age of 6 years.
At the seven year level he could tell how many fingers he had
and copy the diamond. At the eight year level he passed the comprehension test (2nd degree) and gave similarities. He gained
credit for defining 7 words.
Walter's performance on all tests at this time was within the
limits of the 60 per cent median-modal group of first grade children. An attempt to teach him was made. He had no number concept but it was possible to teach him number combinations by
developing them concretely. He also learned sight words with
drill.
As a result of this examination, Walter was placed in an 0. B.
class. An analysis of his performance, too lengthy to be reproduced
here, was sent to the school. It was stated in this report that the
boy was very slow to grasp any problem which was at all complex
and that he needed considerable drill in order to learn.
Five years later, Walter was re-examined by the writer. He
was now 12 years 8 months of age and was still in an 0. B. class.
He was clean, polite, cooperative and well conformed, and displayed good social qualities.
Walter had not done as well in school as one might have expected from his performance in his first examination. At the time
of his re-examination he did inferior 2A work in reading though
he made an obvious effort to do well. He comprehended what he
had read. His spelling was inferior 2A-2B work. In arithmetic
he did 4A addition, 3B subtraction, 3A multiplication and 2B
division.
His record for performance tests was:
Witmer Form Board (1) 23 sec., (2) 20 sec., (3) 17 sec.
Healy A (1) 42 sec., (2) 9 sec., (3) 6 sec.
Dearborn Form Board (1) 244 sec., (2) 97 sec., (3) 87 sec.
His memory spans were auditory 7, visual 7, reverse 4.
His I.Q. had decreased from 91 to 70. At seven years of age
he received credit for 7 words on the vocabulary test and at twelve
years of age he gave adequate responses for only 10 words. He had
a basal age of 8 years; at the 9 year level he gave the date and
sentences for three given words, and at the 10 year level named 28
words in one minute.
At Walter's first examination, his performance from a quantitative point of view placed him in the median-modal group of
172 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
first grade children. His subsequent school achievement, however,
corroborated the diagnosis made in his case. His poor school progress cannot be blamed on inefficient teaching since in the same 0. B.
class, there were other children whose original test performances
were not as good as Walter's, who made much greater progress in
school subjects.
As further examples, there were Raymond, whose I.Q. dropped
from 88 in 1925 to 73 in 1932, Freddie, whose I.Q. decreased from
90 in 1927 to 75 in 1932, and Bill, whose I.Q. was 87 in 1926 and
74 in 1931. Our experience leads us to believe that many of the
cases used for this investigation would show a similar drop in I.Q.
upon re-examination.
As Altmaier 8 pointed out, investigators have noted that the
I.Q. decreases as children reach the higher chronological age levels.
The consensus of opinion of those quoted by Altmaier was that the
tests at different chronological age levels were not of equal difficulty for the children of the respective age levels and that at the
five, six and seven year levels the age standards were too easy.
However, these investigators reported drops of no more than 11
points in the median I.Q. from years 10 to 14. With the 0. B. group
it is not uncommon to find a significantly greater decrease in I.Q.'s
from the 6 year level to the 12 year level or from the 7 or 8 year
level to the 14 year level. However, the significant factor is that
with many 0. B. children, the drop in I.Q. is not only absolute but
is also relative, i.e., children fall from a place near the median
level at the age of 6 or 7 years to the poorest 20 per cent group at
the age of 12 or 14 years.
A decrease in the I.Q. as a child gets older is in some measure
inherent in the structure of the Binet Scale. Cases such as those
cited, however, show a much greater decrease which obviously must
be accounted for in some other manner. Judging from experience
gained in the clinic of the Division of Special Education, the explanation seems to be that there are some children who display a
normal, though not good, ability to acquire information up to the
six year level, and that then they begin to slow up markedly in
their development with the result that their retardation increases
proportionately with their increase in age. It is possible that the
explanation may lie in the fact that many of these children show
normal or adequate ability to acquire social competency and that
s C. L. Altmaier, The performance level of children in the sixth grade in
two Philadelphia public schools, Psychol. Clin., 1931, 19, 233-257.
A COMPARISON OF CHILDREN 173
it is only after they have enrolled in school that the element of
intellect enters into the situation and that in the competition to
increase intellectual development, their inferior ability is first displayed. This premise, however, would imply that such a differentiation in abilities measured was intrinsic in the tests of the
Binet Scale. A marked slowing up of vocabulary development as
cited in one case, could however not be explained on this score.
In contrast to these cases, some of the children of foreign-born
parents who enter school with a marked language handicap show
an increase in I.Q. after some school training improves their language comprehension.
A comparison of the tables for the regular grade and 0. B.
groups shows that there is a greater difference in I.Q. in the two
groups than in the scores on performance tests. The differences in
I.Q. for corresponding decile levels range from 2 points at the zero
level to 56 points at the 100 per cent level with an average difference for the decile levels of 26.7. On performance tests the
greatest differences are at the lower decile levels, whereas with the
Binet Scale the greatest differences occur at the upper decile levels,
as the following table shows.
Table 5
Intelligence Quotient
100th percentile?Regular grade group?55.9 points better
90th percentile?Regular grade group)?30.9 points better
80th percentile?Regular grade group?28.3 points better
70th percentile?Regular grade group?27.9 points better
60th percentile?Regular grade group?27.0 points better
50th percentile?Regular grade group?26.2 points better
40th percentile?Regular grade group?25.1 points better
30th percentile?Regular grade group?24.4 points better
20th percentile?Regular grade group?23.1 points better
10th percentile?Regular grade group?21.1 points better
0 percentile?Regular grade group? 2.1 points better
One factor involved in the greater difference shown between the
two groups in I.Q. is that the I.Q. is a ratio between the child's
chronological age and his "mental age" with the result that in the
score represented by an I.Q., he is not at an advantage because
of his greater chronological age as is the case with the performance
tests.
Another element which is an influence in the greater difference
in I.Q. is that many of the children of the 0. B. group at the six
year level labor under a handicap in taking the test. With those
children whose comprehension of English is limited, the handicap
174 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
is obvious. It has been shown that the 0. B. group is drawn from
a social level in which the home training is negligible. In better
homes children are taught at an early age to tell how many fingers
they have, but a number of the children of this investigation have
never had that question put to them before they encountered it in
the Binet Test and they do not know unless they count, which makes
their response a failure. Fond parents usually take great pride
in teaching their children to count at an early age but in many
homes of a lower social level, a child never has this experience
until he goes to school.
Summary of Quantitative Results
Theoretically one might suppose that the quantitative results of
the 0. B. group would be comparable to those of the lowest 20 per
cent of the normal group with perhaps some exceptions.
A comparison of the tables shows that:
1. Chronological Age. Slightly more than 70 per cent of the 0. B.
group fall in the lowest 20 per cent of the regular grade
group, considering high chronological age to represent inferiority.
2. Mental Age. More than 50 per cent of the 0. B. group fall in
the lowest 20 per cent.
3. Intelligence Quotient. More than 80 per cent of the 0. B. group
fall in the lowest 20 per cent and all the I.Q.'s fall below
the median of the regular grade group.
4. Memory Span.
Auditory. 70 per cent of the 0. B. group are comparable to
the lowest 20 per cent.
Visual. 40 per cent of the 0. B. group are comparable to the
lowest 20 per cent.
Reverse. Two groups show almost the same results.
5. Witmer Form Board.
First Trial. Only slightly more than 20 per cent of the 0. B.
group fall in lowest 20 per cent of regular grade group.
Second Trial. 40 per cent of the 0. B. group fall in the lowest
20 per cent of the regular grade group.
Summary of Qualitative Observations
The qualitative analyses of the performances of the children
whose records were used for this investigation, show that deficiencies
A COMPARISON OF CHILDREN 175
of various types contribute to their inability to make adequate
progress in school. These may be classified under the general headings of Social Factors, Physical Factors, Personality Defects, General Retardation and Specific Mental Defects.
Social Factors. The classification of the occupations of the
parents of the children of this group show that they belong to a
relatively inferior social order which implies a degree of economic
stress. In very few of the homes are there any luxuries and in
many cases there are scarcely the bare necessities of life. Most of
the homes offer nothing in the way of cultural advantages. In a
great many cases, the children receive nothing by precept or training in the way of developing adequate motivation toward school
and learning though with another portion of the group great stress
is placed on academic education.
Some children in their comparatively brief school careers have
had many changes of address which bespeaks a certain instability
in the home life. In some cases it is noted on the record that the
child is neglected or even mal-treated in the home. All too often
the environment of the child is very poor from the standpoint of
play facilities and the contacts offered him in his attempts to
satisfy his gregarious tendencies.
Physical Factors. Immaturity is the most frequently occurring
defect noted under this heading. This term is used to denote children who are small, thin and retarded in their physical development. Deficient energy ranks second in the defects in the physical
category. Frequently this lack of energy is referable to a physical
condition.
Some specific physical defects occur in the group. There are
some orthopedic defects due to birth injuries and anterior poliomyelitis. One of these children has since been transferred to an
Orthopedic Class but in the other cases, the defects were not considered grave enough by the Division of School Medical Inspection
to warrant such placement. There are also among the group, some
visual and auditory defects which are not severe enough to make
placement in Sight-Saving or Deaf Classes necessary.
Speech defects may be included under this heading for want of
a better place to classify them. (In the schools this defect is recorded on the medical cards.) Most of the speech defects, of
which there are a substantial number, are of an infantile type
Defective phonation occurs most frequently. In conjunction with
this defect one frequently finds that the speech is infantile in man176 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
ner and content. The child makes, with mutilation, snch remarks
as, "Me like to play."
In this sampling of 0. B. children at the six year level there
occur two cases of hydrocephalus, two cases of microcephalus and
one case of epilepsy.
Personality Defects. Infantilism is the most frequently occurring of the handicapping characteristics listed in the category of
personality. An estimate that the child's general orientation and
emotional response is infantile is made in 20 per cent of the cases
of the group studied. Nervous and emotional instability is shown
in a small number of cases.
Other defects occurring in a small number of cases, listed in
the order of their frequency of occurrence are: lack of initiative,
shyness, dullness and lack of animation, restlessness, suggestibility,
hyper-excitability, apathy, timidity, stolidity, negativism, uncontrolled and undisciplined behavior, temper-tantrums, lack of selfconfidence.
General Retardation. The consistent inferiority of performance on all tests indicates the general retardation of the 0. B.
group.
Specific Mental Defects. One of the most outstanding of the
specific mental defects encountered in the 0. B. group is the limited memory span. As pointed out in the discussion, 72.4 per cent
of the 0. B. group have memory spans less than the median of the
regular grade group despite the greater age of the 0. B. group.
Specific mental defects which the examiners believe to be contributing causes to the children's inability to make adequate
progress in school are listed in the order of their frequency of occurrence : slow rate of discharge; inferior analytic discrimination;
inferior visual imagery; inferior distribution of attention; inferior
muscular coordination; inferior auditory imagery; inferior concentration of attention; inferior persistence; high fatigability.
These defects are variously distributed among the 0. B. group.
There are a number of children who display an adequate degree of
many of the abilities listed but who show limitations in one or another respect.
Many children of this group have great difficulty in learning to
read. Poor auditory imagery, which makes it very difficult for the
child to learn by a phonic method; poor visual imagery, which
causes the child to have difficulty in retaining a picture of the
phonic elements, and in learning sight words; poor distribution of
A COMPARISON OF CHILDREN 177
attention and inferior discriminability are specific defects which
contribute to this problem. Sometimes the situation is further
complicated by defects of attention. Training in good habits of
attention is one of the primary problems in 0. B. classes.
Conclusions
1. At the six year performance level, children selected for
placement in 0. B. classes are older than the regular grade children functioning at this level.
2. On tests, both those employing concrete and language and
ideational material, the performance of the 0. B. group is consistently poorer from both qualitative and quantitative points of
view.
3. There is a definite relationship between age and ability to
do performance tests and partly because of this fact, comparisons
of quantitative results for the 0. B. and regular grade groups at the
six year level, show a greater difference in I.Q. than in time results for performance tests.
4. In selecting children at the six year level, for placement in
0. B. classes, it is necessary to have a battery of tests varied enough
to explore competency in diverse fields because children at this
level fail to make adequate progress in school for different reasons.
No single type of test is adequate to call forth a display of this
diversity of abilities.
5. In order to determine whether children should be removed
from the regular grade and placed in 0. B. classes, why they fail,
and what are the best methods of teaching them, a qualitative
analysis of their performance on tests is more important than the
quantitative measures.
6. For purposes of analysis, the Witmer Form Board, Witmer
Cylinder, Healy A, Memory Spans and Binet Tests are significant
at the six year level.
7. It is possible to select upon their admission to school a certain number of children who can never function adequately in the
regular grades.
8. Factors contributing to school failure at the six year level
fall into the general categories of Social Factors, Physical Factors,
Defects of Personality, General Retardation and Specific Mental
Defects.
178 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Orthogenic Backward Group?Six Year Level
Total Cases
%
Chron.
Age
Mental
Age
I.Q.
Memory Span
Aud.
Vis.
Rev.
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
No. Cases
14-10 (10-3)
9-8 ( 8-0)
9-0 ( 7-4)
8-7 ( 7-0)
8-2 ( 6-10)
7-11 ( 6-7)
7-8 ( 6-5)
7-3 ( 6-4)
6-11 ( 6-1)
6-6 ( 6-0)
5-10 ( 4-8)
500 500
9-1 (10-0)
7-6 ( 8-0)
7-0 ( 7-9)
6-9 ( 7-6)
6-9 ( 7-3)
6-3 ( 7-0)
6-0 ( 6-9)
5-9 ( 6-9)
5-3 ( 6-6)
4-9 ( 6-0)
3-6 ( 3-6)
500 500
104.1 (160.0)
92.9 (123.8)
88.7 (117.0)
85.6 (113.5)
82.4 (109.4)
79.2 (105.4)
76.3 (101.4)
72.4 ( 96.8)
67.3 ( 90.4)
61.4 ( 82.5)
47.3 ( 49.4)
500 500
7 (9)
5 (6)
5 (6)
4 (5)
4 (5)
4 (5)
4 (5)
4 (4)
4 (4)
3 (4)
2 (3)
500 500
7 (9)
5 (6)
5 (5)
4 (5)
4 (5)
4 (4)
3 (4)
3 (4)
0 (3)
0 (0)
0 (0)
500 500
4 (5)
3 (3)
2 (3)
2 (3)
2 (2)
0 (2)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
500 500
%
Witmer Formboard
II
III
Witmer Cylinders
II
III
Healy A.
II III
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
No.
24 (21)
35 (32)
40 (35)
45 (40)
49 (45)
55 (49)
61 (55)
72 (60)
92 (76)
138 (103)
F (F)
498 500
13 (15)
28 (25)
32 (27)
36 (30)
40 (32)
44 (35)
49 (39)
55 (43)
68 (49)
91 (59)
F (259)
498 500
13
25
28
30
34
38
42
48
58
75
F
490
79 (21)
120 (112)
192 (146)
215 (184)
255 (225)
F (278)
F (F)
F (F)
F (F)
F (F)
F (F)
68 500
42 (25)
80 (71)
87 (90)
100 (102)
113 (118)
140 (135)
179 (158)
182 (192)
210 (255)
F (F)
F (F)
67 500
39
66
78
88
103
114
131
158
196
F
F
61
51
144
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
464
6
11
14
17
23
33
57
153
F
F
F
460
5
10
11
12
14
15
18
16
44
F
F
450
Note: In these tables the figures in parentheses indicate the results for
the regular grade group.
A COMPARISON OF CHILDREN 179
Orthogenic Backward Group?Six Year Level
Males
Chron.
Age
Mental
Age
I.Q.
Memory Span
Aud.
Vis.
Rev.
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
No. Cases
14-10 (10-3)
9-7 ( 8-0)
9-0 ( 7-7)
8-7 ( 7-2)
8-3 ( 6-10)
7-11 ( 6-8)
7-9 ( 6-5)
7-4 ( 6-3)
7-0 ( 6-1)
6-6 ( 5-11)
5-11 ( 4-8)
339 256
9-1 (9-4)
7-6 (8-3)
7-3 (7-9)
7-0 (7-6)
6-9 (7-6)
6-6 (7-3)
6-3 (7-0)
5-9 (6-9)
5-6 (6-6)
4-9 (6-0)
3-6 (3-6)
339 256
103.0 (147.7)
93.2 (123.7)
88.9 (117.5)
85.7 (113.5)
82.7 (109.7)
80.2 (105.6)
77.1 (102.2)
73.4 ( 97.9)
67.9 ( 90.4)
60.9 ( 82.8)
47.3 ( 49.4)
339 256
7 (8)
5 (6)
5 (6)
4 (6)
4 (5)
4 (5)
4 (5)
4 (4)
4 (4)
3 (4)
2 (3)
339 256
7 (9)
5 (6)
5 (5)
5 (5)
4 (5)
4 (4)
3 (4)
3 (4)
0 (3)
0 (0)
0 (0)
339 256
4 (5)
3 (3)
2 (3)
2 (3)
2 (2)
0 (2)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
339 256
Witmer Formboard
III
Witmer Cylinders
II
III
Healy A.
II III
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
No.
24 (21)
35 (31)
39 (35)
43 (40)
46 (43)
52 (48)
58 (53)
66 (60)
84 (75)
128 (95)
F (F)
337 256
13 (15)
28 (24)
31 (26)
35 (30)
38 (32)
42 (35)
47 (38)
53 (41)
65 (47)
86 (60)
F (232)
337 256
13
24
27
30
32
37
40
45
55
67
F
330
74 (43)
118 (105)
175 (131)
194 (163)
237 (200)
300 (245)
F (F)
F (F)
F (F)
F (F)
F (F)
38 256
70 (25)
82 (70)
93 (89)
97 (98)
108 (113)
145 (132)
163 (160)
174 (190)
210 (260)
F (F)
F (F)
38 256
61
68
83
95
113
116
150
174
196
F
F
35
10
50
155
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
318
7 5
11 10
14 11
17 12
21 14
30 15
54 17
125 24
F 44
F F
F F
316 311
180 TEE PSYCEOLOG1CAL CLINIC
Orthogenic Backward Group?Six Year Level
Females
%
Chron.
Age
Mental
Age
I.Q.
Memory Span
Aud.
Vis.
Rev.
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
No. Cases
13-10 (10-0)
9-9 ( 7-9)
8-11 ( 7-3)
8-6 ( 6-11)
8-1 ( 6-9)
7-11 ( 6-7)
7-6 ( 6-5)
7-2 ( 6-4)
6-10 ( 6-2)
6-4 ( 6-0)
5-10 ( 5-3)
161 244
8-3 (10-0)
7-3 ( 8-0)
7-0 ( 7-9)
6-9 ( 7-6)
6-6 ( 7-3)
6-3 ( 7-0)
6-0 ( 6-9)
5-9 ( 6-6)
5-3 ( 6-6)
4-6 ( 6-0)
3-10 ( 4-0)
161 244
104.1 (160.0)
92.3 (124.3)
87.4 (117.7)
85.3 (113.9)
80.5 (110.3)
77.5 (105.4)
74.6 (101.2)
72.8 ( 95.7)
66.7 ( 90.3)
62.2 ( 81.8)
50.4 ( 54.5)
161 244
6 (9)
5 (7)
5 (6)
4 (5)
4 (5)
4 (5)
4 (5)
4 (4)
3 (4)
3 (4)
2 (3)
161 244
7 (8)
5 (6)
5 (5)
4 (5)
4 (5)
4 (4)
3 (4)
0 (4)
0 (3)
0 (0)
0 (0)
161 244
4 (5)
3 (3)
2 (3)
2 (3)
2 (3)
0 (2)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
161 244
%
Witmer Formboard
II
III
Witmer Cylinders
II
III
Healy A.
II III
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
No.
25 (27)
36 (33)
45 (37)
50 (41)
53 (46)
60 (50)
73 (55)
90 (62)
115 (80)
180 (110)
F F
161 244
23 (16)
29 (25)
35 (27)
39 (30)
42 (33)
46 (37)
52 (40)
60 (45)
78 (50)
105 (60)
F (259)
161 244
19
25
28
33
36
40
47
57
65
110
F
160
97 (21)
122 (105)
215 (128)
296 (165)
F (208)
F (255)
F F
F F
F F
F F
F F
30 244
42 (36)
71 (72)
99 (90)
108 (107)
132 (120)
140 (137)
179 (160)
187 (200)
219 (255)
F F
F F
29 244
39
63
75
85
90
108
116
142
214
F
F
26
64
125
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
146
6 7
11 10
15 12
19 13
25 14
39 15
67 20
F 25
F 45
F 177
T? T?
144 139
