Correction of Defective Speech
===============================

REVIEWS

A complete manual of psychophysiological technique for the treatment and correction of the
defects of speech. By Edwin B. Twitmyer, Ph.D., and Yale S.

Nathanson, Ph.D. Philadelphia, Pa.: Blakiston's Son and Company, Inc., 1932. Pp. xviii and 413. $3.50.
In recent years there have been quite a few publications dealing with defective speech. In the main, they are concerned with exceedingly dubious
hypotheses of etiology and are of but slight practical value. It is with considerable hesitancy and skepticism, therefore, that one familiar with modern
"stammering" literature approaches a book with such a title as that of the
present. A glance at the table of contents, however, suffices to assure one
that this is an unusual book. For after but about 30 pages of theoretical
approach to the problem, there follow more than 300 pages of practical
technique. Ten pages of practical material for each page of theory!?unheard of in the field of "Correction of Defective Speech."
Dipping into the contents proper, one finds that even Part 1, pages 1 to
28, "The Psycho-Physiological Approach," is not all theory. The authors
point out that many of the "existing methods of attacking the problem of
speech correction are inadequate and unscientific" and that "unscientific and
fantastic etiologies" have been emphasized. They recognize the fact that
the approach to the problem must be biochemical, physiological, psychological
and pedagogical and that "removal of immediate cause of speech defects
does not (necessarily) mean restoration of normal speech." They present,
as the basic postulates of the normal processes of speech, " (a) correct breathing and proper utilization of breath; (6) correct kinaesthetic imagery
(Oratans); (c) combination of (a) and (6) in speech output." To continue in their own words: "To meet this approach appropriate material was
needed. A two-fold classification of Continuants and Stops, with the latter
divided into eight (8) groups, was made independent of, yet in agreement
with, traditional and philological classification and with anatomical correlation on the basis of the 'Curve of Articulation.' Combinations of sounds
were made, and from various sources 5,102 frequency words were selected.
The general trend of frequency sounds was consistent with the 'Curve of
Articulation,' with the exception of the L-R group, accounted for pedagogically. The use of frequency words is valid pedagogically and further
indicated since between six (6) words representing 20 per cent of spoken
English and 1027 words representing 78.6 per cent, the frequency list utilized
insures practiced articulation of more than 85 per cent of the modal vocabulary. The completed scientific investigations of the problem, which were
based on the 1 Curve of Articulation,' indicated the need for a progressive
allocation of sounds and words."

In Part 2, Corrective Material and Technique, a practical system of
exercises is presented, which, the authors state, is "applicable to all types of
speech defect in which a prognosis could be favorable," and they also present it as "a method in teaching children to read and in the improvement of
articulation when no specific abnormalities exist.''

The system embraces five series of exercises. The first is a set of calisthenics to improve general bodily tone and coordination, including movements
of the head, arms, legs, trunk and feet. Then follow exercises in breathing,
in vocalization and for the peripheral organs of speech. The fifth series is
of ''Articulatory exercises and integrated speech." This includes 100 sections, covering 300 pages, and embraces hundreds of practice sentences from
which the teacher may select such as are specifically indicated as necessary for
each particular case. It is this feature of the book which should make it
especially helpful to teachers of speech.

Part III of the book presents methods of keeping case records and
progress charts. In an interesting addenda?"A Conceptual Basis of Habit
Modification"?Nathanson points out that in the work of Lashley and Herrick
there is to be found "anatomical and physiological explanation of what was,
on the part of Twitmyer, a strictly 'conceptual' scientific approach" to the
problem.

To all those who employ articulatory exercises whether for correcting
specific speech defects or for improving relatively normal speech, the book
should be of great practical value.
Henry E. Starr,
Rutgers University
