A Psychonomic Contribution to Analytical Technique 1
====================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1933, by Lightner Witmer, Editor
Vol. XXII, No. 1 March-May, 1933
PROMETHEAN CONSTELLATIONS
PART I

By Henry E. Starr, Ph.D.
Read of the Department of Psychology and Director of the Psychological and
Mental Hygiene Clinic of Eutgers University
Consulting psychologists are increasingly being called upon to
advise in the complex and delusive field of personality. Constantly
augmented numbers of individuals with incipient mental disorders
are applying to them for first aid. Many quite severe cases are
being referred to them for study and treatment by honest and
capable physicians who have first assured themselves by thorough
examination that there is no detectable organic basis for the dis-
order.
The responsibility thus entailed is great. "We need especially
to be on our guard against permitting ourselves to slip into the
morass of a lop-sided cult.2 As psychologists, presumably ac-
quainted with the basic principles of psychology, familiar with the
behavior of normal individuals and recognizing the importance of
individual differences, our approach to the problems must be along
broad psychonomic lines.3 As Witmer has pointed out, it is impos-
i Read at the annual meeting of the Association of Consulting Psycholo-
gists, at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, May 6, 1933.
2 A not unlikely danger. Cf. Starr, H. E. Certain Phases in the Psy-
chology of Psychologists, Psychol. Clin., 1932, 21, 69-76.
3 The term '' psychonomic'' is employed in the Witmerian sense as de-
noting "what is in conformity to a fundamental or universal law of thought.
The orientation of the c].'nical psychologist is, or at least ought to be, psy-
1 1
2 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
sible to make adequate interpretations of human behavior "with-
out having had instruction in the psychological diagnosis of normal
mentality, personality and will."4 In that sentence, perhaps, is
the key to the inadequacy of much of modern psychopathically
founded psycho-analysis. Be that as it may, careful psycho-analysis
of even the pathological, itself finds more in the unconscious than
the limited number of complexes which are the stock in trade of
the average analyst. This is, I think, clearly indicated by certain
findings of the Psychological and Mental Hygiene Clinic of Rutgers
University. They are clinical and empirical findings based upon
the scientific study of both normal and abnormal individuals and
they point definitely to certain conclusions important to the ade-
quate understanding and treatment not alone of such as may
seriously require orthogenic aid but of human beings in general.
During the past four years, approximately 1,000 individuals
have been examined at the Rutgers Clinic. In most cases some at-
tempt has been made to study the personality from the six points
of view required by the psychonomic orientation. In many in-
stances, prolonged analyses have been conducted, involving dream
analysis, hypnotic and hypnagogic vision, controlled and free as-
sociation, etc. In every analysis we have endeavored rigorously
to exclude, or at least to minimize, the influence of suggestion in
the initial study. For example, even though the examiner might,
because of obvious symptomatology in a particular case, expect to
find an (Edipus complex, he sedulously avoided steering in that or
any other direction. Nor was an analysis necessarily terminated
when an expected complex appeared. That is, of course, an
?
chonomic. . . . Psychonomics is the body of fundamental laws or axiomatic
truths involved in the psycho-analytic interpretation of human behavior. The
term is more inclusive than the word 'psycho-analysis' which in its Freudian
orientation is a particular form of inquiry too much concerned with sex and
the pathology of sex. Psycho-analysis of more general orientation has been
for many centuries an organized procedure in introspective psychology,
aesthetic criticism, medical therapeutics, the Roman Catholic confessional and
the criminal courts?wherever, in fact, inquiry is made to ascertain the mo-
tivation controlling the behavior of persons, whether as individuals or in
groups. The psychonomic analysis of human behavior is concerned with what
is considered normal and orthogenic, and only by way of exception with what
is considered non-normal and pathogenic." "Witmer, Lightner. Psychological
Diagnosis and the Psychonomic Orientation of Analytic Science. Psychol.
Clin., 1925, 16, 1-18. Reprinted in Clinical Psychology, edited by R. A.
Brotemarkle, University of Pennsylvania Press and Oxford University Press,
Philadelphia and London, 1931.
4 Quoted from article cited in preceding foot-note.
PROMETHEAN CONSTELLATIONS 3
egregious error of technique to which we all are liable unless defi-
nitely on our guard against it. When, in the course of analytic
exploration, the particular kind of complex anticipated does ap-
pear, it is all too easy to stop the analysis. Obviously, the patient
should be encouraged to continue his associations beyond the point
of the initial appearance of any particular complex or constella-
tion. One can always return to it if desired. And often the trail
leads definitely through it and beyond to some quite different and
more deeply seated and disturbing element. Let me illustrate
with a case from the clinic files.5
L. was a junior in college when his family physician sent him
to us because of a marked anxiety neurosis, complicated by specific
phobias. "Without any suggested lead from the examiner, the trail
of association led rather circuitously but unmistakably to a highly
emotionally-toned homo-sexual complex. When, however, no par-
ticular attention was paid to this, and he was non-committally urged
to continue, L. passed through this level of associations and re-
vealed rather suddenly, an ardent drive in the direction of what,
for lack of a better term, may be called the "unio mystica." There
was neither excessive parental fixation nor abnormal "Wille zur
Macht." The homo-sexual complex was relatively superficial. The
root cause of his disorder was the repression of a strongly motivated
constellation urging in the direction of that which the famous
"Brother Lawrence" spoke of as "the habitual sense of God's
presence.''6
As a child, L. had been quite sympathetic toward all animate
things and empathetic toward the inanimate. "An universal liv-
ingness in nature," " a feeling with and into things," "an ever
present spiritual being"?emotionalized ideas such as these, early
fused into a potent constellation which was, however, repressed
under increasing pressure by his family and his social group.
Unlike Shaw's Black Girl, he was sent rather than went "in search
of God.'' He was sent to Sunday school. He was sent to catecheti-
5 Because of what appears to be the popularity of that complex among
certain psycho-analysts by whom, I understand, it is not unusual for a patient
to be given an encouraging booklet on the subject even before exploratory
analysis, I have selected a case who displayed a homo-sexual symptomatology?
as the result of reading such a tract.
6 ffloge, on Abrege de la Vie du Frere Laurent de la Resurrection. In
Recueil de Divers Traites de Theologie Mystique qui entrent dans la Celebre
Dispute du Quietisme qui s'agite presentement en France. Cologne, 1699.
There are several translations into English under the title of "The Practice
of the Presence of God," by Brother Lawrence (Nicholas Herman).
4 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
cal classes. He was sent to church. He was sent "to seek God"
in conformity with the standards of his group. An intensely
anthropomorphic concept was forced upon him. His earlier feel-
ings, ideas, satisfactions and ideals were tabooed. "God couldn't
be found out of doors in the sunshine or when one was by one's self.
On the contrary, God was locked up in a building and the clergy
were his keepers." Such, he reported, were his impressions at this
period of powerful anthropomorphistic pressure. Superficially
this pressure was successful. Beneath these impressions, con-
sciously accepted, his earlier drives were rigorously repressed into
the unconscious, despite intermittent revulsions of feeling. Upon
arriving at college he soon became associated with a rather atheistic
group who tabooed with equal rigor the concepts of deity of both
previous periods of his life. The anthropomorphic god went into
the discard?not very vigorously repressed, perhaps, but enough to
force under yet more deeply his childhood images and feelings and
the motivation toward the unio mystica. A period of vague unrest,
accompanied by an exaggerated consciousness of freedom, cul-
minated in the neurosis. Casting about to arrive at some measure
of self-understanding in a modern manner, he came upon a propa-
gandizing tract of a certain psycho-analyst who appears to be a
bisexual enthusiast. When, subsequently, his family physician
sent him to the clinic for psychological study, the contents of this
tract came up in consciousness, or at least directed his chain of
association, and he proceeded to unfold a homo-sexual complex with
symbolic trimmings. Yet the real unconscious source of his un-
rest, disease or neurosis, was not that complex, nor was it one of
inferiority or akin to CEdipus or Narcissus. If one must go to
mythology to find a generic term for a titanic drive of this sort,
it might best be referred to as a Promethean constellation. It was
a drive in the direction of a higher and fuller life than that per-
mitted by the taboos of his social environment.
The case I have cited is illustrative of many others. Time after
time, in case after case at the Rutgers Clinic the trail of association
has led to powerful and painfully repressed constellations of emo-
tionally charged ideas representing ideals above the level of the
conscious everyday life of the individual and above the level of his
social group, whether that be family, church or college, and which
are consequently repressed by social taboo. These ideals are not
always, or even most frequently, specifically religious, in the usual
sense of the word, or involving reference to the same name by which
PROMETHEAN CONSTELLATIONS 5
the Supreme or the Supernal may be called. Many times it is not
"God," but "Truth," "Social Justice," "Integrity," "Mercy,"
around which clusters the Promethean constellation. But always
it is, in psychonomic terminology, a repressed altruizing drive in
the direction of a " preferred perfection.''7 For example, a com-
pulsion neurosis may develop as the result of the inadequate ex-
pression of a Promethean constellation urging toward the free pur-
suit of truth. I have seen such a case cured by what might be
termed the "rechannelling of the libido" attending the relatively
simple expedient of the patient taking a course in analytical chem-
istry, wherein he had his first experience with the accurate and
impartial methods of a scientific laboratory.
It is true that many of our cases revealed a disordered repres-
sion of some phase of sexuality or of an overweening "will to
power." Probably many of the corresponding complexes are
present to some degree in each of us. I would not gloss over that
fact. But we need to recognize that they do not constitute the
entire content of the unconscious. We all may, and no doubt do,
carry about within ourselves certain dark and nameless powers of
the pit, but there is also deep within the unconscious a luminous
Titan, who now may slumber and again may rage, like Prometheus
chained to the rock. The analyst seeking to loose the repressive
knots of the '' censor'' must take heed lest he but free the 11 ape and
tiger," or loose yet another vulture upon the outstretched god.
As consulting psychologists, however, we are not exclusively
concerned with the abnormal, nor yet with the normal as normal.
We are interested also in the normal as the foundation of the su-
perior. It is peculiarly the work of the clinical psychologist to
continue, as heretofore, to blaze the trail for orthogenics 8?or as
certain phases of that discipline have more recently, if less aptly,
been termed, "mental hygiene." Orthogenics aims at the normal
development of every child, adolescent and adult. We must seek
to apply the psychonomic principles revealed by analytical methods
to assist the individual to attain his ontic norm and so to be his
Higher Self. We can the better do this if we realize, in each indi-
vidual case, that the ontic norm is itself largely determined by
7 For Witmer's introduction of the phrase '' preferred perfection,'' see
his article cited above.
8 '' Orthogenics in the field of human psychology is defined by whatever is
considered normal in the development of human personality and character.
The orthogenic treatment includes any agency known to science likely to de-
velop, preserve or restore personal competency."?Witmer, previous citation.
6 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Promethean constellations and that these constellations, at least
in many instances, are so extensive and organized that their integra-
tion constitutes a Higher Self.
The conclusions presented in this paper should not seem too
strange, even in modern psychology. It would appear rather ob-
vious that if a psycho-analysis is to be at all adequate, it must be
continued beyond the level of the first few complexes or constella-
tions encountered; that the trail of association may lead upward
as well as down; and that a competent psychonomic analyst must be
able to recognize and reckon with Promethean constellations and
their systems. It is true, these facts are consistently overlooked by
those to whom psycho-analysis is itself "an obsessional neurosis."
But they are implicit in the psychonomic orientation of Witmer.
The "instinct-emotion" systematizing of McDougall is quite sug-
gestive. The "anagogic" concepts of Silberer are illuminating.
And a similar trend of thought is increasingly manifest in the later
writing of Jung, much of which is distinctly psychonomic.
But, why multiply references to the moderns ? The conclusions
are a restatement in new terms of a very old truth. The novelty
consists but in the fact that they represent the scientific post-
analytic confirmation of a pre-analytic generalization?an olden
truth that may be found even in the ancient Egyptian Book of the
Dead. Frequently forgotten, ignored or contradicted, but capable
of post-analytic confirmation and, in our researches, post-analyti-
cally confirmed, the truth is that man is not "totally depraved"
and that not only from without is he urged in the direction of the
Platonic Trinity of the Good, the True and the Beautiful. That,
in fact, in addition to certain crawling creatures of the abyss, man
also bears within the vault of the unconscious a potential god?
hidden deep, perhaps, within what the poet Waite has called "the
secret, sacred, inmost shrine." As the same poet also sings, "At
the term of all, it is man who attains himself." May we, as con-
sulting psychologists, at least not hinder that attainment!
