The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1934, by Lightner Witmer, Editor
Vol. XXII, No. 4 December, 1933-February, 1934
THE INFLUENCE OF DISTRACTION UPON MENTAL
TEST PERFORMANCE 1
By Andrew W. Brown, Verne W. Lyon, and Seymour Stein
Institute for Juvenile Besearcli, Chicago
The experiment to be reported here was carried out in connec-
tion with the examinations given in the process of selecting men
for guides and policemen at the Century of Progress Exposition.
While a number of tests were given and a great deal of data col-
lected, this investigation is concerned only with the two tests of
general intelligence which were used.
It was assumed that many of the men selected as guides would,
at times, be required to carry on their duties under distracting
circumstances. It was further assumed that the men who would
be least distracted from their tasks by disturbing influences would,
other things being equal, make the better guides. We were there-
fore asked by those in charge of selecting the men to examine them
for any differences which might be revealed in working under dis-
tracting or annoying conditions. Of course it was impossible to
duplicate in the examining room either the actual work the guides
would be required to do or the type of distracting circumstances
under which they would be expected to work. It was taken for
granted, however, that a measure of the influence of distractions
on a pencil and paper test would yield a fair indication of the
influence of distracting conditions upon their ability to perform
their actual tasks. This may be an unwarranted assumption.
The pencil and paper tests selected for this purpose were the
Otis Self-Administering Tests of Mental Ability. As there are
four alternative forms of these tests, they served the purpose well.
i The writers are grateful to Dr. Chester W. Darrow for his suggestions
in this study, and also to Miss Eleanor Garm for her assistance in the sta-
tistical calculations.
213
214 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Two types of distractions were used: first, what we have called
"sensory," consisting mostly of noises of various kinds, and sec-
ond, what we have called " ideational," i.e., meaningful material.
These will be discussed in order and will be followed by two or
three related problems.
The Influence of Noise or Sensory Distraction on Efficiency
in Mental Test Performance
The sensory distractions consisted of the noise produced by
pounding a suspended Ford break-drum with a small sledge ham-
mer; by playing two different jazz phonograph records with a hole
punched off center; by blowing a siren, a horn, and a whistle.
These were presented in various combinations and sometimes all
together. The object was to create as much din as possible while
the men were taking the second intelligence test.
The distractions were presented over a microphone through an
amplifier. The amplifier used was capable of reproducing either
music or voice or both together. Either could be amplified or re-
duced in volume with control.
While no measure of the intensity of the distractions was se-
cured, they were purposely made extremely severe. Certainly the
noise was much more intense and piercing than that which a
worker would encounter in most factories. In this part of the
study 63 men were used as subjects. The Otis Self-Administering
Test, Form A (30 minute time limit), was given to this group in
the usual manner at the beginning of the testing period. Then,
after the men had taken the other tests, i.e., after about one hour
of work, they were given the Otis Self-Administering Test, Form
B (30 minute time limit) with the distractions. All the tests were
given between 8 and 10 o'clock in the evening.
The mean raw score on test A which was given without dis-
traction was 44.8 ? .97 and the mean for the test with the dis-
tractions was 48.0 ? 1.06. The correlation between the two tests
was .84 ? .02. Otis reports a practice effect of 4 points from one
test to another, but he also reports that Form B which was given
second is 4 points more difficult on the average than Form A. In
so far as A was given first and B second, the difference in diffi-
culty should, therefore, cancel the practice effect. There is, then,
an increase in score of 3.2 in raw score under distraction. This
difference divided by P. E. diff. is 2.7. We can at least be fairly
sure that the distraction did not decrease the mental performance.
INFLUENCE OF DISTRACTION UPON PERFORMANCE 215
Kornhauser,2 who studied the effect of noise on the production
of four typists in a large Chicago office, found that 3.2 per cent
more lines were written under quiet conditions, but that there was
23 per cent more wasted lineage in the form of discarded letters
in the quiet than in the noisy room so that the net figures for total
completed letters favored the work under the noisy conditions 1.5
per cent.
Morgan 3 who made one of the earliest studies of the influence
of distractions upon performance also found that noise in the form
of a variety of buzzers, electric bells, and phonograph records not
only fails to slow up work but seems to spur the subjects to in-
creased activity.
Several studies 4 have been made in England on the influence
of noise upon performance. The results are in general agreement
with our own. Vernon and Warner 5 who studied the influence of
noise on arithmetical computation found that the ticks of a metro-
nome accelerated performance 1.3 per cent while an intermittent
electric bell accelerated it 2.6 per cent. Loud mixed noises had no
effect on test time. The investigations of Lorrain-Smith, Pollock,
and others0 produced practically the same results, namely, that in
, a simple repetitive task a continuous noisy background appears to
have a stimulating effect. Subjective reports of the subjects, how-
ever, seem to agree that both noise and vibration are "disagree-
able" or "uncomfortable" accompaniments of work.
The Influence of Ideational or Meaningful Distraction on
Efficiency in Mental Performance
"When it was discovered that mere noise or sensory distractions
seemed to increase rather than decrease efficiency, it was decided
to investigate the influence of ideational or meaningful distractions
on performance.
The distracting material used for this part of the experiment
consisted of short stories and abbreviated articles on a variety of
subjects presented over a microphone with the same amplification
2 A. W. Kornhauser, The Effect of Noise oil Office Output, Indus. Psychol.,
1927, 2, 621-622.
3 J. J. B. Morgan, The Overcoming of Distractions and Other Resistances
Arch. Psychol., 1916, 5, No. 35. Pp. 84.
* Eleventh Annual Report, Industrial Health Board, London, 1931, pp.
62-65.
5 Iiid.
c Ibid.
216 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
unit as previously described. An endeavor was made to select
topics of popular interest, interspersed with various bits of humor.
The type of distraction was changed about every three minutes
and presented by different individuals so that there was little oppor-
tunity for adaptation to any one distraction or voice.
For this part of the study 488 men were used as subjects.
Otis Self-Administering Test, Form A (20 minute time limit), was
given under the distractions mentioned above. All of the tests
were given at one sitting and with this group the test under the
distractions was given last so that there was chance for the addi-
tional element of fatigue to reduce the score.
The mean raw score on test A (without distractions) was
45.4 ? .30, while the mean raw score on test B (with distractions)
was 47.8 ? 36. The correlation between A and B was .82 ? .01.
Here again, allowing that the difference in difficulty would cancel
the practice effect, the men improved with the ideational distrac-
tions. There is an average gain of 2.4 points in raw score. This
difference divided by P. E. diff. is 11.4. We can therefore be fairly
certain that this increase in score under ideational distractions is a
reliable one.
To make certain that the increase in performance under dis-
traction was not a function of the difference in difficulty of the
test, we reversed the order of the tests, giving Forms B and D first
without distraction and Forms A and C second, with distractions.
For Forms A and C the additional distraction of "set" was added,
but the average increase under the distraction with "set" was 6
points for 460 men.
In each of the above experiments the distractions were given
during the second test. When, however, the distractions were re-
versed, i.e., given during the first test, and when the difference in
difficulty and the influence of practice, as stated by Otis, were taken
into account, there was less than one point difference between the
result of the two tests for 195 men.
The Influence of an Increase in the Duration of the Dis-
traction on the Performance
The increase in the performance under the ideational distrac-
tions just noted was on the basis of a 20-minute time limit. Several
of the groups were given the tests under exactly the same condi-
tions as above except that a 30-minute time limit was used. We
INFLUENCE OF DISTRACTION UPON PERFORMANCE 217
were thus able to get some estimate of the effect of increasing the
duration of the distraction.
On the basis of a 30-minute time limit the mean raw score for
171 men on Form A, without distractions, was 52.9 ? .64 while
the mean on Form B with distractions was 54.2 ? .63, an increase
under distraction for the 30-minute time limit of 1.3. This dif-
ference divided by the P. E. diff. is 3.8, which substantiates the
conclusion reached in the previous section. The increase under
distraction for the 20-minute time limit, as stated in the previous
section, was 2.4. There is, then, a tendency for the amount of im-
provement under distraction to decrease with the increase in dura-
tion of the distraction.7 It is possible that if we were able to com-
pare the amount of work done with and without distraction over a
longer period of time we might find that the distraction would de-
crease, rather than increase the performance.
Comparison of Errors Made with, and without Distraction
Although there is an improvement in performance with both
sensory and ideational distraction, nevertheless, it was possible
that there might be, at the same time, an increase in the number
of errors.
To test this hypothesis the average of the percentage of errors
in relation to the number of items attempted (not including the
omissions) was computed for 220 cases on Form A which was
given without distractions. This was found to be 14 per cent.
The same group on Form B, given with distractions, made 23 per
cent errors. The distractions, therefore, increased the number of
errors with this group of 220 by 9 per cent. This increase in errors
was checked by the same calculation on another group of 197 men
with the order of the tests reversed, i.e., when Form B was given
first without distraction and Form A given second with distrac-
tion. The increase in errors in this case was 6.3 per cent.
It seems, therefore, that for this type of work under these con-
ditions, the distractions seem to spur the subjects to increased ac-
tivity, but at the same time makes them more liable to make errors.
' The diff. of 1.1 between the 20- and the 30-minute test divided by P. E.
diff. is 2.7. The P. E. of a diff. between differences ? P. E. diff. (A ? B) 2
? P. E. diff. (A ? B)o2. This formula was provided for the writers by Dr.
Luton Ackerson.
218 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Influence of ''Set" or Attitude toward Distractions on
Mental Test Performance
Another aspect of the study was an attempt to determine the
amount of the ideational distractions which could be recalled. The
problem was this: To what extent is it possible to carry on two
mental operations at the same time, namely, that of concentrating
on a mental test performance and attending to extraneous material ?
To study this problem a set of 46 true-false questions on the
ideational distractions was prepared. Some of the groups were
told that they would be expected to answer those questions and
were given additional motivation by emphasizing that those who
could recall most would make the highest score. Other groups were
given the true-false questions without previous warning.
For a group of 220 who were given the true-false tests without
any previous warning there was not only an average gain on the
Otis, which was given under distractions, of 2.1, but the men were
able to recall a considerable amount of the material given as dis-
tractions. The range of the amount recalled was 3.66 (the ques-
tions were scored right minus wrong).
The results of the effect of the distractions on the group to
whom it was explained that they would be expected to recall are
quite different. There is a consistent loss under the distractions
when given with "set." The group of 460 men on a 30-minute
time limit showed an average loss of 2.07. Another group of 197
men on a 20-minute time limit showed an average loss of 6.85.
This consistent tendency to lose is probably due to the introduc-
tion of the third element of "set," and the difference in the loss
in performance (i.e., the difference between 2.07 and 6.85) of the
two groups could probably be accounted for by the difference in
the degree of attention given to the distractions.
In the process of the experiment two other relationships were
studied which may be of some general interest:
1. There is only a slight relationship (r =-f-18 ? .04,
N = 203) between general intelligence as determined by the aver-
age score on the two tests and ability to recall the material pre-
sented as distractions.
2. There is also only a slight relationship (r = .19?.03,
N = 368) between general ability as determined by the two tests
and the amount of gain or loss under the distractions. The corre-
lation is about 6 times the P. E. and perhaps indicates a slight
INFLUENCE OF DISTRACTION UPON PERFORMANCE 219
tendency for the dull ones to be more disturbed than the bright
ones.
Summary
1. Mental efficiency as measured by mental test performance
does not seem to be greatly impaired, at least for a short period of
time, either by severe sensory or ideational distractions. There
seems to be fairly strong evidence that the so-called distractions
act as an incentive to greater mental activity.
2. The amount of improvement under the distractions seems to
decrease with the increase in the duration of the distractions.
3. While the distractions seem to produce greater effort and
consequently to increase the actual amount of work done, they also
tend to increase the number of errors.
