The New Field of Psychology
============================

By Madison Bentley. New York:
D. Appleton-Century Company, xvi -f- 439 pp.
Professor Bentley writes in the Preface to this work that a radical change
has taken place in his general envisagement of the subject from the position
expounded in his earlier Fields of Psychology. The publishers address the
present volume not only to the new student in first year psychology courses
but also to the general reader. The work invites comment therefore on the
grounds of its utility for these purposes as well as on the grounds of its syste-
matic consistency and value.
Of the former aim it may be said that it has been approached by a studious
aversion to experimental detail and a reliance upon homely illustration in the
text of the book. In this respect it may be said to differ from many contem-
porary text-books. In order to add some documentary evidence to the ex-
pository material, however, and to deal further with moot points raised in the
several chapters, a supplement has been incorporated into the book, which
contains additional reference and expository material for each chapter. The
text may be said to resemble other contemporary texts in that it is in the
tradition of giving somewhat less attention to the historic problems of sensa-
tion and perception. The book offers no material on abnormal, social or com-
parative psychology.
The understanding of the systematic position which Professor Bentley
defines begins with the abandonment of such notions as mind, mental processes,
states and forces. "We shall find it wholly unnecessary to assume that there
is also involved another kind of agent, which men have called a mind or con-
sciousness" (page 14). This does not, however, prevent the author from a
consideration of such problems as sensation, perception, memory, imagination
and thinking. These topics are discussed under the following chapter head-
ings: The Apprehending Functions, The Patterns of Apprehension, Learning,
Inspecting and Comprehending, and Elaborative Thinking.
The place of Apprehension and its associated concepts in the discussion
depends upon their recognition by means of a method of defining which begins
with the notion of function. By function Bentley means for the most part
a "mode of operation." It does not appear illegitimate to relate this kind
of definition to the general class of objective definitions of psychological
concepts, composed of definitions proposed by writers like Watson, Tolman,
Singer, etc., who have in common the fact that their concepts are free from
the taint of private experience. "When we say that the organism is appre-
REVIEWS 283
bending ^ve mean nothing more than that it is active in a manner that . . .
lays hold of objects, events, scenes and occurrences. . . . The apprehending
itself is a characteristic activity of the organism" (page 32). The author
however does not believe himself to be a behaviorist in his new position and
neither does he identify himself with the purposive behaviorists. In the place
of strivings, drives, purposes, etc., he establishes the concept of go\ernment.
This concept is not explicitly defined; its meaning is communicated by
example and analogy. Under its heading are enumerated three varieties of
governors, the extra-organic, the organic and the historical governors. The
function of all three classes of governors is the guidance, control and regula-
tion of the psychological functions. Perhaps it is not amiss at this point to
remark that it is just such a need which has occasioned the idea of mind in
many historical instances. However, the inclusion of the organic governors
among the matters discussed under government distinguishes it from concepts
such as mind. The organic governors are of great present significance and
of undoubted future significance; the implication lies in the whole book that
in neurology and physiology lie the answers to the psychological questions.
It is apparent that the intention is to present a strictly naturalistic system
of psychology without going over to the materialists on the important issue of
the suitability of what have been the historic problems in psychology to scien-
tific work. The success of any attempt of this kind rests with the success
with which the fundamental concepts are defined, unless it is proposed to gloss
over contradictions with a plea for eclecticism in systematic psychology. The
relation of Bentley's point of view to the classic systems is not completely
eclectic. Structuralism and Functionalism in so far as they involve mental-
isms are completely abandoned. On the other hand the data upon which the
Chapters on Apprehension are written is largely the data of Titchenerian
Psychology. The Gestalt point of view is denied because its cause is satisfied
the development of the laws of government, particularly the extra-organic
and historical governors. Behaviorism is rejected in its denial of the ap-
propriateness of the apprehending functions to scientific method. On the
other hand the whole system is beliavioristic by the definition which S. nger
gave to the subject matter of psychology.
The book is distinguished by an interesting chapter on Elaborative Think-
lng and by a particularly lucid discussion, on an elementary plane, of the
statistical methods used in psychophysics and mental testing. An index of
names and a subject index are furnished at the end of the book.
M. G. Preston
"University of Pennsylvania
