Some Behavior Changes in A Juvenile Paretic
===========================================

:Author:  Mary V. Louden
University of Pittsburgh
Patty was a colored girl of eleven years when she was first referred to the psychological clinic from the out-patient department
of a local hospital.1 The hospital reported the following clinical
findings: Spinal Fluid "Wassermann, four plus; Blood "Wassermann,
anti complimentary; Kahn, negative; Colloidal Gold, 5555552200-0
and 5555554210-0.

Her abnormality was first noted in school. She had seemed to
make average school progress until she reached 2-A, which grade
she repeated. She also repeated the third grade where she became
slow and seemed sleepy. Her writing became unintelligible; her
speech, incoherent ; and her behavior, unpredictable. She lost her
way when sent to school, lost her sense of propriety in school and
cried to be taken home, and did not seem to be able to adjust well
with the group.

It was at about that stage that Patty was first seen by a psychologist. There were then noted in her test performance great
irregularities, the nature of which seemed to indicate that she once
had been able to master material which was now beyond her ability
and only part of which she now retained. The case has now been
studied twenty-six months, during which time five examinations
have been made. Despite some irregularities in the successes and
failures from time to time on the Stanford Revision of the Binet,
there has been a fairly constant downward trend in I.Q. with a total
loss of twenty points. Her successive ratings have been 58, 47, 47,
50, 38. It is also to be noted that on the first examination Patty
passed all test items at the four-year level; on each of the next three
examinations she failed one item, and on the last retest, two items
in the four-year battery. Thus far she has never failed any test in
the three-year battery and never did she score any success beyond
the eight-year level.

i The author is indebted to the Pediatric Clinic of the Allegheny General
Hospital and to Dr Theodore Elterich in particular for cooperation, for certain information included here, and for permission to publish this report.
Some test items?comparison of weights (V-l), right and left
hand (YI-1), morning or afternoon (VI-alt.), and differences
(VII-5)?show an irregular alternation of success and failure from
time to time. These fluctuations seem to be due largely to chance,
perhaps depending upon whether the particular test was presented
on the upward or the downward swing of her rapidly fluctuating
attention. These variations actually did cancel each other so far
as score was concerned.

The tests below eight years which were failed most consistently,
indeed almost invariably, are repeating 12-13 syllables (IV-alt.),
patience (V-5), three commissions (V-6), counting thirteen pennies
(VI-3), repeating 16-18 syllables (YI-6), description of pictures
(VII-1), repeating five digits (VII-2), diamond (VII-6), and reversing three digits (VII-alt.). The nature of these failures suggests that Patty's characteristic fluctuating attention is too fleeting
to permit the carrying out of instructions or perhaps even to allow
their comprehension. A complete summary of successes and failures is appended.
Her poor penmanship, as well as her failure on the diamond, is
predominantly a matter of eye-hand coordination. That performance has become progressively poorer. In the diamonds reproduced
below, note the fringes which Mateer found characteristic in the
performance of luetics.

The Porteus mazes also reflected tremors; however, failure on
them was due to something more than faulty coordination. Although Patty never scored a success on the five-year maze, her performance became decidedly poorer from test to test, being marked
March 15, 1932
March 15, 1932
November 24, 1933
?
November 24, 1933
by more fringes and irregularities. Her last performance was a
succession of random stabs at the paper. Earlier failures had
seemed to be due to incoordinated efforts to trace between the lines
of the maze, but this random marking anywhere on the sheet
seemed to indicate complete failure to grasp the problem.
Not in test performance alone has this progressive loss of motor
coordination been evident. On her last visit to the psychologist,
Patty's gait was exceedingly faulty. She felt her way down steps
as would a child just learning that feat. She was unable to adjust
her clothing or tend to her physical needs. Her speech had become
more and more indistinct until it was impossible to understand
much that she said.

A tendency toward constant and incoordinated motion, hypersensitivity to stimuli and rapid fluctuation of attention have increased over this period until it is now almost impossible to administer any test. The tendency toward irrelevant conversation,
present throughout the period of this study, has become extreme.
At the last interview, Patty was in constant activity. No less constant was the flood of speech which was disconnected, irrelevant,
and garbled. Perseveration of a few ideas seemed to have reached
the point of obsession.

Memory, too, has shown a change. Whereas Patty once remembered the examiner's name from one interview to another, on
the last occasion she asked the name every time she wished to address any remarks to that same person.
No picture of Patty's behavior during this period of deterioration would be adequate without the mention of at least two other
tendencies. On each visit to the clinic Patty was in a state of
great euphoria. Any performance was interrupted repeatedly to
shake hands with the examiner and to tell her again and again that
it was good to see her. An equal manifestation of joy was brought
forth by the presence of a nurse, a doctor, or anyone whom she
recognized even in the most general way. Another striking characteristic of her performance has been the pronounced deficiency of
auto-criticism which now seems to amount to total absence of that
trait. Every request, if executed at all, is followed by '4 Is that all
right? Is that all right? . . . etc." This interrogation seems to
be a request for praise, rather than the expression of any doubt as
to the satisfactory nature of her performance. It is asked with the
same eagerness and in the same tone of voice whether the task has
been perfectly executed or most obviously and absurdly failed.
It is unfortunate that we have no objective record of Patty's
behavior prior to the havoc of disease. We have only the mother's
word that she seemed to be "normal" and the teachers' report that
she made average progress in school for a time. But despite the
fact that we do not know from what level she has fallen, we do
know that instead of the increase of twenty-six months in mental
age which should have been expected in the duration of this study,
Patty has actually lost eighteen months as reflected in test scores.
"We also have evidence that this loss may be greater than test scores
indicate, for despite the fact that she now scores a Binet mental
age of five years, she does not perform as an average child of five.
There are present here certain physical and personality traits
which detract from the significance of the test score and which must
Binet Results from Five Successive Examinations
Date of Examination

Oct.
23,
1931
Mar.
15,
1932
July
2,
1932
Dec.
24,
1932
Nov.
24,
1933
Year III 1. Parts of body
2. Names familiar objects.
3. Pictures, enumeration. .
4. Gives sex
5. Gives last name
6. Repeats 6-7 syllables...
Alt. Repeats 3 digits
Year IV 1. Compares lines
2. Discrimination of forms
3. Counts 4 pennies
4. Copies square
5. Comprehension, 1st degree...
6. Repeats 4 digits
Alt. Repeats 12-13 syllables...
Year V 1. Comparison of weights
2. Colors
3. Aesthetic comparison
4. Definitions, use or better
5. Patience, divided rectangle...
6. Three commissions
Alt. Gives age
Year VI 1. Right and left
2. Mutilated pictures
3. Counts 13 pennies
4. Comprehension, 2nd degree..
5. Coins
6. Repeats 16-18 syllables
Alt. Morning or afternoon
Binet Results from Five Successive Examinations?Continued
Year VII 1. Fingers
2. Pictures, description
3. Repeats 5 digits
4. Ties bow-knot
5. Gives differences
6. Copies diamond
Alt. I Names days of week. ..
Alt. II Repeats 3 digits reversed
Year VIII 1. Ball and field
2. Counts 20-0
3. Comprehension, 3rd degree..
4. Similarities, two things
5. Definitions, superior to use..
6. Vocabulary, 20 words
Alt. I Six coins
Year IX 1. Date
2. Weights (3, 6, 9, 12, 15).
3. Makes change
4. Repeats 4 digits reversed.
5. Three words
6. Rhymes
Date of Examination
Oct.
23,
1931
+
+
+
+
+
Mar.
15,
1932
+
+
+
+ *
+
0
July
2,
1932
+
+
+
0
+
Dec.
24,
1932
+
+
+
+
+
+
0
Nov.
24,
1933
+
+
* Success, doubtful.
t Year X given, no tests passed.
Key:
+, test was passed.
?, test was failed.

0, test omitted because all test items on previous level were failed or for
some other reason provided for by Terman.

be considered in all plans for her care. Here we have a thirteenyear-old girl who can scarcely climb stairs alone, who falls frequently, who cannot be intrusted with the simplest errand, who no
longer can dress herself nor tend to her simplest physical needs, and
on whom the most patient and persistent instruction is wasted, for
her attention is ever diverted by a multitude of stimuli. All this
makes her a physical burden in need of constant care, yet we have
not mentioned the most serious problem of such a child in the home
or in the neighborhood. The real gravity of the situation lies in
the fact that Patty cannot be relied upon to sense cause and effect
relationships, nor to use proportion in her behavior, nor to comprehend the gravity of her acts. We are told that the window and the
baby and all other objects have" equal chances of being the recipient
of blows with a knife or hammer or any object she may have in her
hand. So it has come about that the younger children in the family
are never safe in her presence. The mother has been anxious for
the child's recovery from the first. She has been cooperative with
the hospital and diligent in her care of this unfortunate girl, yet
even she has become convinced that it would be better if Patty could
be adequately cared for outside the home. Immediate institutionalization seems to be imperative.
