Textbook of Abnormal Psychology
===============================

REVIEWS
:Author:  Roy M. Dorcus and G.
Wilson Shaffer. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins Co., 1934.
xiii 4- 389 pp.

The present volume stands in marked contrast to the general run of
writings in the abnormal field with their pet biases, their distortion of facts
to fit theories, their failure to take cognizance of recent findings, or their
elementary treatment. The present authors have produced a work which for
its understanding demands at least an elementary knowledge of both general
and abnormal psychology, a book which represents for the mature student an
integration of the more recent advances, and one which definitely will not find
its way to the general public.

The text falls naturally into six general subdivisions. There is first given
a definition of the field, including a general orientation. A discussion of sensory and motor disturbances is followed by a presentation of theories of association mechanisms, including dissociation, redintegration, conditioned reflex,
etc. The problem of brain localization is here briefly treated. Following
this is a consideration of the affective aspects of behavior and then a discussion of sleep, dreams and hypnosis. The text then turns to the mental disorders, taking up the organic conditions, the functional disorders and finally
the psychoneuroses. A chapter on mental deficiency follows and the text concludes with a presentation of the methods of psychotherapy.
The orientation of the authors is well balanced, definitely psychological,
and with a lack of bias unusual in so controversial a field. A significant departure is seen in the stress placed upon the previous psychological makeup
as determinant of the particular symptoms and manifestations of even those
disorders classified as organic.

Despite the general superiority of the book, certain changes are to be
desired. The approach of the early part of the text logically demands that
the disorders be treated in the order: psychoneuroses, functional and finally
organic conditions. The reversal of this order has grossly disrupted the continuity of the development. Again, certain disorders have been too briefly
treated while others of importance in clinical practice have been ignored. Of
the latter, the post encephalitic conditions stand as a glaring omission.
Stricter attention should also be given to the organization of particular topics
since the constantly occurring "asides" disturb the progress of the presentation. Again, many will feel that too great emphasis has been placed upon the
intelligence quotient as the determiner of amentia.

The character of the treatment, is, however, excellent, particularly because
there has been no attempt to produce a work attractive to the tyro or the
Psychological dilettante. Of fine quality are the discussions of sensory and
motor disturbances, including a comprehensive presentation of speech disorders. Hypnosis, too, is treated in the light of recent developments with
none of the quasi-mystery inherited from the early workers. Outstanding as
an addition to psychological texts is the chapter on psychotherapy not as a
comprehensive discussion of each method, which it does not pretend to give?
but in that it presents an organization of the major methods available for
psychological treatment, as contrasted with the customary vague references
to equally vague procedures.

The text clearly shows its genesis in the clinical experience of the authors
rather than in class room discussions and will appeal to those who themselves
have the necessary technical background to supply for students much which is
presumed on the part of the writers. It represents an important contribution
to the slowly growing literature being created by psychologists relative to the
abnormal field.
Thomas J. Snee
