The Effect of Verbal Suggestion on Output and Variability of Muscular Work
============================================================================

By Charles W. Manzer
New YorTc University
Statement of the Problem
This study investigates the effect on the output and variability
of muscular work of telling the subject that his task is "easy,"
"medium" or "hard," when actually the task is of uniform objective difficulty.
Subjects and Apparatus
The subjects were fifty men and fifty women students between
the ages of eighteen and twenty-five years. The subjects of each
sex were divided at random into a control and an experimental
group with twenty-five subjects in each of these groups. The muscular work studied consisted of maximal contractions on the Smedley hand dynamometer. Among the subjects of each sex both
groups, control and experimental, had practically the same mean
initial strength of grip. Table 1 contains the means and the probTable 1
Means and Probable Error of Means of Initial Contractions by Both
Control and Experimental Groups (Kilograms)
Men Subjects
Control
Group
Experimental
Group
Women Subjects
Control
Group
Experimental
Group
Number of cases.........
Mean of first contractions.
Probable Error of Mean..
25
36.84
0.621
25
36.62
0.677
25
25.32
0.517
25
25.04
0.525
Difference between means of control
and of exper. groups
Probable Error of Difference
Difference/P.E.diff.
0.22
0.291
0.76
0.28
0.233
1.20
able errors of the means of the first contractions. Among the men
subjects, the difference between the means of the control and of the
experimental group is 0.76 times its probable error; the correspond248
EFFECT OF VERBAL SUGGESTION 249
ing difference among the women subjects is 1.20 times its probable
error. Since both differences are insignificant statistically, the
control and experimental groups may be considered as samples
from the same population.
Experimental Conditions and Procedure
The work was done by each subject individually in a small
room, free from noise or other distraction. While doing the work
the subject was seated at a table. The dynamometer on the table
was clamped vertically to an iron stand which was free to move
over the surface of the table at the convenience of the subject.
Both the apparatus and the record were completely hidden from
the subject throughout the experiment. The experiment was described to each subject as a study of work and rest and so far as is
known no subject suspected its real nature. The following instructions were read to each subject at the beginning of the experimental period:
This experiment is concerned with work and rest. The work consists
of squeezing a handle which compresses a spring. There are three different
loads: easy, medium, and hard. There is also a standard load. We are interested in comparing the easy, medium and hard loads with the standard load.
Do your best each time you squeeze the handle. In order that you may do
your best, you will be told what load you are using. The work is done in
pairs: standard, easy; standard, medium; standard, hard; standard, standard.
Do your best each time.
After each contraction, the reading on the dial of the dynamometer
was recorded by the experimenter and the pointer set back to zero.
Each subject was given a practice period long enough to familiarize him with the apparatus and procedure but not so long as to
produce fatigue.
In a series of preliminary trials it was found that, irrespective
of the load reported to the subjects, there was a tendency to do
more work in the second member of a pair of contractions than
was done in the first contraction. In order to control this tendency
to accentuate the second contraction of a pair, the suggestions used
were given half the time just before the first contraction and half
the time just before the second contraction. That is to say, half
the time the loads were reported to the subjects as standard, easy ?
standard, medium; standard, hard; while for the other half of the
time, they were given as easy, standard; medium, standard; hard
standard.
250 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
The work which was done in each contraction following the
experimental suggestions, easy, medium, and hard, was expressed
as a per cent of the work done in each contraction following the
control suggestion, standard. For example, in the pair, standard,
easy, the work done in the first contraction was used as the base
in finding the percentage, while in the pair, easy, standard, the
work done in the second contraction was used as the base. That
this procedure did in fact correct for the tendency to accent the
second contraction of a pair is shown by the percentages of work
done in the control series (Tables 2 and 3). As would be expected
theoretically, the percentages of work done in these control series,
in which standard, standard were the suggestions used throughout,
are all very near one hundred.
Each subject was given two tests; each test consisted of twenty
pairs of contractions. In the experimental series, the verbal suggestions were given in the following order: standard, standard;
standard, easy; standard, medium; standard, hard; standard,
standard; standard, standard; standard, hard; standard, medium;
standard, easy; standard, standard. When the test was repeated,
the order of giving the suggestions was reversed: hard, standard;
medium, standard; easy, standard, and so on. There was a onesecond interval between the members of a pair of contractions and
a fifteen-second interval between successive pairs. The rest between tests was ten minutes. This interspersing of rest throughout
the experiment was designed to keep fatigue at a minimum. Following each verbal suggestion, spoken by the experimenter, the
subject made a maximal contraction on the hand dynamometer.
The task, as has been said, was of uniform objective difficulty
throughout the experiment.
Results
The results of this study will be presented under two heads:
Work and Variability. The data of the men and of the women
subjects will be treated separately.
Work. Tables 2 and 3 show the mean work done, the probable
error and the probable error of the mean of the work series following each of the verbal suggestions of both control and experimental groups. The percentages for the control groups in Tables
2 and 3 are based upon the control contractions which correspond
in location in the total work series to the contractions in the experimental series where the experimental suggestions, easy, medium,
EFFECT OF VERBAL SUGGESTION 251
Table 2
Work Done by Control and by Experimental Groups
Men Subjects
Control Group
Suggestion
Used
Standard. .
Standard. .
Standard. .
Mean
(per
cent)
100.76
100.68
100.21
Probable
Error
P.E.,
5.06
4.92
5.49
0.72
0.70
0.78
Experimental Group
Suggestion
Used
Easy
Medium.
Hard...
Mean
(per
cent)
93.52
95.86
104.87
Probable
Error
11.94
8.90
5.29
P.E.-?
1.69
1.26
0.75
Table 3
Work Done by Control and by Experimental Groups
Women Subjects
Control Group
Suggestion
Used
Standard.
Standard.
Standard.
Mean
(per
cent)
100.66
100.92
100.46
Probable
Error
P.E.
5.90
5.81
6.42
Mean
0.83
0.82
0.91
Experimental Group
Suggestion
Used
Easy....
Medium.
Hard....
Mean
(per
cent)
99.42
99.65
107.49
Probable
Error
8.67
8.64
9.08
P.E.,
1.23
1.22
1.28
and hard, were used. It should be emphasized that the only verbal
suggestion used throughout the entire control series was the word
"standard." In view of the fact that the mean per cent of the
control groups is 100 (or very near 100), it appears that the control suggestion, standard, produced a uniform base or level of work
from which to measure the effect of the experimental suggestions.
In the light of this uniformity of work following the suggestion,
standard, we shall conclude that any significant difference between
the work following the control suggestion and that following the
experimental suggestions is indicative of the effect of these suggestions on work.
That output of muscular work is actually affected by verbal
suggestion can be seen upon examining the means, the probable
errors and the probable errors of the means in the experimental
groups (Tables 2 and 3). In the work of these experimental
groups, there is no such uniformity as that which appeared in the
work of the control groups. The means of the experimental group
of men subjects (Table 2) vary from 93.52 per cent to 104.87 per
252 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
cent; the probable errors range from 5.29 per cent to 11.94 per
cent. Among the women subjects, the means of the experimental
group (Table 3) vary from 99.42 per cent to 107.49 per cent; the
probable errors range from 8.64 per cent to 9.08 per cent.
The Men Subjects. The means in Table 2 indicate that the suggestion, easy, resulted in a reduction of output of approximately
seven per cent; medium led to a reduction of about five per cent,
while hard was followed by an increase of five per cent. The
statistical significance of these differences is shown in Table 4.
Table 4
Comparison of the Effects on Work of the Verbal Suggestions, Standard,
Easy, Medium and Hard: Reliability of the Differences
Men Subjects
Standard and
EasyStandard and
Medium
Standard and
Hard
Easy
and
Medium
Medium
and
Hard
Easy
and
Hard
Difference between means
(per cent)
P.E. of Diff
Diff./P.E.diff
-7.24
1.84
3.93
-4.82
1.44
3.35
+4.66
1.08
4.31
+2.34
2.11
1.11
+9.01
1.47
6.13
+ 11.35
1.85
6.14
Women Subjects
Standard and
Easy
Standard and
Medium
Standard and
Hard
Easy
and
Medium
Medium
and
Hard
Easy
and
Hard
Difference between means
(per cent)
P.E. of Diff
Diff./P.E.diff.
-1.24
1.48
0.84
-1.27
1.46
0.87
+7.03
1.57
4.48
+0.23
1.73
0.13
+7.84
1.77
4.43
+8.07
1.77
4.56
This table contains the differences between the control suggestion
and each of the experimental suggestions and also the differences
between each pair of experimental suggestions, the probable errors
of these differences and the critical ratios. Among the men subjects, the differences between standard and easy and between standard and medium are 3.93 and 3.35 times their probable errors, respectively. The difference between standard and hard is 4.31 times
its probable error. Accepting the convention which regards a
difference that is four or more times its probable error as significant, the statement is justified that the suggestions, easy and
medium, almost certainly lead to a reduction in output among the
men subjects (99.6 chances in 100 and 98.7 chances in 100, reEFFECT OF VERBAL SUGGESTION 253
spectively), while the suggestion, hard, is followed by an increase
in output that is fully significant, since this difference is 4.31 times
its probable error.
When the experimental suggestions are compared one with another, it is found that the suggestions, easy and medium, have essentially the same effect on the output of the men subjects?both these
suggestions cause a reduction in work. Easy causes a somewhat
greater reduction than does medium but the difference between the
effects of these two suggestions is not significant since it is only
1.11 times its probable error (77 chances in 100). The suggestion,
hard, causes an increase of nine per cent above the work done following medium. Each of these differences is more than six times
its probable error.
The Women Subjects. Among the women subjects (Table 3),
the control suggestion, standard, produces a highly uniform output. Unlike the men subjects, however, the women do as much
work following the suggestions, easy and medium, as they do after
the control suggestion, standard. Such slight reductions in output
as these suggestions cause (about one per cent) are only 0.84 and
0.87 times their respective probable errors. The suggestion, hard,
on the other hand, causes an increase in the output of the women
subjects of seven per cent; this difference is 4.48 times its probable error (Table 4) and is therefore statistically significant. Comparisons among the experimental suggestions show no difference
between the effect of easy and that of medium. Hard causes almost eight per cent more work than does either medium or easy;
the differences between hard and easy and between hard and
medium are more than four times their respective probable errors.
The difference between the effects of verbal suggestion upon the
work of the men and that of the women found in the present study
is similar to the difference found by Hurlock1 between the effects
of praise and reproof upon boys and girls. Hurlock found the boys
the more responsive and because of the fact that the girls were
more conscientious and interested from the start, the girls could
not raise their rate of achievement as much as the boys when incentives were used. The "conscientiousness" of the women subjects in the present study may have prevented their output from
falling below "standard," but they did respond to the suggestion,
hard, with an increase in work.
i E. B. Hurlock, An evaluation of certain incentives used in school work.
J. Educ. Psychol., 1925, 16, 145-159.
254 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
In this connection it should be noted that difference in sex,
which is generally regarded as important in the effectiveness of
suggestions and incentives, has not been controlled in this study.
Any generalization regarding the effects of these verbal suggestions
on muscular work would have to await the findings of a study similar to the present one carried out by a woman experimenter.
Variability. The effect of the verbal suggestions upon variability can be found by comparing the work done in the control member
of the pairs of contractions with that done in the experimental
member; that is to say, by finding the correlation between the work
done in the pairs of contractions. Theoretically, it should be expected that the correlation between pairs of contractions made
under the same objective experimental conditions, separated by
only a one-second interval and given as a response to the same
verbal suggestion (standard, standard), would be very near unity.
Such coefficients would provide a base with which to compare the
effect of the experimental verbal suggestions, easy, medium, and
hard, upon variability of output. In other words, if the experimental verbal suggestions, given just before one of the members
of the experimental pairs of contractions, should cause an increase
in variability of output, such increased variability would be shown
in a reduction of the correlation between the work done in these
paired contractions. It will be recalled that one member of the
paired contractions was preceded by the control suggestion, the
other member was preceded by one of the experimental suggestions.
Table 5 contains the coefficients of correlation found between
pairs of contractions in both the control and the experimental
series of the men and of the women subjects. The correlations in
the control groups show that the data approach very closely to the
theoretical expectations stated above. Among the men subjects
the correlations in the control group range from r = .9434 to
r = .9439. These coefficients show that the verbal suggestion, standard, given throughout the control series, leads to output of great
uniformity. A similar effect appears in the control group of the
women subjects; the coefficients are of the order of r = .9400.
In the experimental series (Table 5) it will be observed that the
suggestion, easy, reduced the correlation to r = .6930 among the
men and to r = .7652 among the women. The suggestion, hard,
lowers the correlation among the men to r = .8906 and among the
women to r=.8850. In the case of the suggestion, medium, the
EFFECT OF VERBAL SUGGESTION 255
Table 5
Variability op Work Done by Control and by Experimental Groups:
Correlations Between Pairs op Contractions
Men Subjects
Control Group
Suggestion Used
Standard.
Standard.
Standard.
.9405
.9248
.9334
P.E.r
.0110
.0157
.0122
Experimental Group
Suggestion Used
Easy
Medium.
Hard
.6930
.8210
.8906
P.E.r
.0496
.0311
.0197
Women Subjects
Control Group
Suggestion Used
Standard.
Standard.
Standard.
.9435
.9439
.9434
P.E.r
.0105
.0104
.0105
Experimental Group
Suggestion Used
Easy....
Medium.
Hard....
.7652
.7867
.8850
P.E.r
.0395
.0364
.0207
coefficients are intermediate between that for easy and that for
hard in both groups of subjects. The conclusion seems justified
that all the experimental verbal suggestions increase the variability of output, though they differ regarding the extent of increase
in variability produced. Output is most uniform when subjects
are working under "standard" conditions.
This study justifies drawing the conclusion that even when the
task is of constant objective difficulty the description of the task to
the worker as easy or hard affects the amount and the variability
of the work. When he is making muscular contractions, the subject is reacting not merely to the load but rather to a total situation. Changes in such an apparently minor element in the total
situation as the subject's attitude toward the difficulty of his task
result in significant changes in output and in variability.
Summary and Conclusions
The problem studied was the effect on the output and variability of muscular work of telling the subject that his task was "easy,"
"medium" or "hard," when actually the task was of uniform objective difficulty.
The work consisted of pairs of maximal contractions on the
Smedley hand dynamometer.
256 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
The subjects were fifty men and fifty women college students.
Subjects of eacli sex were divided into two equal groups, control
and experimental. Among the subjects of each sex, the control
and experimental groups had the same initial mean strength of
grip.
The word standard was the control suggestion. The words
easy, medium and hard were the experimental suggestions.
The following conclusions are drawn:
1. Among the men subjects, the suggestions, easy and medium,
cause a reduction in output of 7.24 per cent and 4.82 per cent,
respectively, below the work done following the control suggestion,
standard. The suggestion, hard, causes an increase in work of
4.66 per cent above that done following the control suggestion.
The critical ratios of these differences are 3.93, 3.35 and 4.31,
respectively. The work done following the suggestion, hard, is
11.35 per cent greater than that done following the suggestion,
easy; the critical ratio is 6.14.
2. Among the women subjects, the suggestions, easy and
medium, cause no reduction in output that is statistically significant. Hard causes an increase above the work done following the
control suggestion of 7 per cent; this difference is 4.43 times its
probable error. The work done following the suggestion, hard,
is 8 per cent greater than that following the suggestion, easy; the
critical ratio is 4.56.
3. Among both men and women subjects, variability of output
is increased by all three experimental verbal suggestions. The
suggestion, easy, increases variability most, while hard causes the
smallest increase in variability.
