Trachoma a Menace to America
=============================

NEWS AND COMMENT.
The National Committee for the Prevention of Blindness has published a
forty-page pamphlet on trachoma, by Gordon B. Berry, which should be given
wide circulation among school teachers and the general public. "It comes as
a shock," observes Mr. Berry, "to learn that in the state of Kentucky it is esti-
mated after a careful survey by the U. S. Health Service, that there are 33,000
cases of trachoma, and again, that of the 323,000 Indians in our country fully
20 per cent, or nearly 65,000 are infected. In the state of Ohio only two years
ago, among the employees of one of the largest industrial concerns, we read of
an outbreak which became so serious that it was necessary to call in the aid
of the government before the spread of the infection could be checked and the
disease eradicated among those already attacked."
Trachoma is defined by Surgeon John McMullen of the U. S. Public Health
Service as "an inflammation of the conjunctiva, which originates in infection
from a trachomatous to a non-trachomatous eye." The germ organism respon-
sible for trachoma has not yet been found, and the diagnosis must be based upon
the clinical picture.
There are figures to show that impaired vision results from trachoma in
50 per cent of the cases treated in hospitals, and blindness in 5 per cent. Of the
cases which do not receive hospital treatment, blindness or greatly impaired
vision is the almost inevitable result. "It is to be considered as one of the
diseases most disastrous in its economic effect upon a people, decreasing not
only the material efficiency of those whom it attacks, but also that of the race
or people among whom it is prevalent. In addition to the well-nigh constant
bodily discomfort of the individual sufferer, the resulting visual impairment
cannot fail to reduce greatly his value to society."
The Public Health Service has in the past few years opened three hospitals
in Kentucky, one in Virginia, and one in West Virginia. "A great many of the
public schools in Kentucky have been examined for knowledge as to the prev-
alence of trachoma among the children. In nearly every community where
these examinations have been held the trachomatous children have been with-
drawn from the schools by order of the Board of Health, and must remain out
until treatment has been afforded, and a certificate granted by the attending
physician permitting their return."
By statute or regulation trachoma is a reportable disease in fifteen states.
It "provides one of the strongest reasons for the periodic examination of the
eyes of all school children. Laws providing for medical inspection annually
have already been passed in seventeen states. ... It is highly important that
communities where the disease has not as yet obtained a foothold, where to
exist it must be imported, should protect themselves from its ravages by proper
legislation and medical inspection."
(248)
