The Use of Money
=================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM

By E. A. Kirkpatrick. (Childhood and Youth Series.
Indianapolis: The Bobbs-Merrill Co., 1915. Pp. x+226.
Professor Kirkpatrick's book, he tells us, "is the outcome of experience,
observation, and investigation as a parent, citizen, and an educator. . . . Part
1 being intended especially for parents and Part II for teachers."
Part I, Home Training, includes chapters on (I) Importance of financial
training, (II) Development of ideas of money, (III) The usual financial training
of children, (IV) Financial joys and sorrows, (V) Spending money, (VI) Getting
money by irregular gifts, (VII) Regular allowances, (VIII) Earning money,
(IX) Business dealings of children, (X) Saving money, (XI) Financial responsi-
bilities of children, (XII) Buying clothes, (XIII) Keeping accounts, (XIV)
Financial communism in the home. Part II, Training outside the Home, includes
(XV) Institutions for children's savings, (XVI) School arithmetic and financial
training, (XVII) Arithmetic with a motive, (XVIII) Incidental and intentional
financial training in school affairs, (XIX) Home and community life in financial
training, and lastly (XX) How Uncle Sam is giving his boys and girls financial
training.
There is a brief bibliography, and an appendix which calls for particular
mention. It is a chapter from that most delightful of books, "My Little Boy,"
by Carl Ewald, translated from the Danish by A. T. de Mattos. Surely no one
else has ever had so keen and humorous an insight into the perceptions and
imagination of a child, or so gentle a skill in turning them to account for the
child's development.
As Professor Kirkpatrick observes, "The need for financial training is
increasing. Money has a steadily growing importance in life as civilization
progresses. Money may quickly procure the necessities?food, fuel, and cloth-
ing. It may give us any kind of scenery or climate we prefer. It can surround
us with works of art and literature and give us leisure to enjoy them. It can
procure for us any sort of amusement we may desire, and, above all, it can to a
considerable extent determine our companions." But does he mean to imply
that the determination of one's companions by money is an unmixed blessing?
To all teachers and parents who would gladly train their children in the dis-
creet use of money, but who do not possess the rare sympathy and ingenuity of
Carl Ewald, Professor Kirkpatrick's admirable book can be recommended as
lucid and suggestive.
A. T.
