An Organized Mental Survey in Philadelphia Special Classes
==========================================================

/
By Norbert J. Melville, M.A.,
Psychological Laboratory, Philadelphia School of Pedagogy.
Early in 1915 the Philadelphia School of Pedagogy in co-opera-
tion with the Division of Medical Inspection and the Department
of Instruction of the Public Schools organized a system of psycho-
logical testing of the pupils in the special classes. Although the
public schools have had the advantage of the active co-operation of
the Psychological Clinic of the University of Pennsylvania, it has
been found impossible heretofore to arrange for a detailed clinical
examination except for a comparatively small number of the 2700
pupils enrolled in the special classes, to say nothing of the 9000
pupils enrolled in the regular grades who are from three to six
years over age for grade.
Consequently it seemed desirable that some system should be
organized by which a certain number of standardized mental tests
should be applied individually to as many of the pupils as could be
reached during the year. In this way it would be possible within
two or three years to have on record a tentative mental index of all
the pupils in the special classes as well as of such backward and
disciplinary pupils in the regular grades as could be reached.
It was thought that such a tentative mental index, provided
it was the result of standardized procedure, would serve as a
first aid in psychological diagnosis, and would bring to light
those cases that are most in need of thorough clinical examina-
tion. Moreover it was believed that these results, when carefully
analyzed and interpreted, would be helpful along with the school
and home records in determining provisional pedagogical treatment
until a complete medical and psychological examination of the case
could be made.
At the time some forty men were just completing a labora-
tory course in mental testing with special reference to the use of
standardized series of tests. No student had been admitted to this
course who had not completed in a satisfactory manner the funda-
mental courses in general and experimental psychology. Parallel
with the course in mental testing, a course in child study was re-
quired. Each man was provided with the materials necessary
for giving the Binet tests, some of the Knox tests, and certain tests
(258)
AN ORGANIZED MENTAL SURVEY 259
of ability in reading and arithmetic. All such material was care-
fully inspected from time to time.
A circular letter was sent out by Dr. Oliver P. Cornman, Asso-
ciate Superintendent having charge of the special classes, to all
principals having such classes in their schools. The letter stated
the purpose of the testing and requested those principals who wished
to co-operate, to indicate whether or not rooms would be avail-
able for the work. With the exception of two or three schools where
the conditions were not favorable, the principals expressed a willing-
ness to have such tests conducted in their schools and gave assur-
ance that accommodations would be provided so that the testing
could go on without interruption. With the cooperation of Dr.
Francis B. Brandt, Head of the School of Pedagogy, laboratory
extension work was organized as part of the advanced work in educa-
tional psychology.1 A roster was arranged by which the students
could be present one afternoon a week in the schools to which they
had been assigned for the testing.
In order to insure the greatest possible standardization of pro-
cedure the following measures were adopted. The recommenda-
tions of the informal conference on mental testing at Buffalo were
carefully studied and interpreted. Regarding the many questions
of Binet procedure not covered by these recommendations, an effort
was made by the writer to discover in what details his own methods
agreed or disagreed with those of other clinical examiners. These
efforts resulted in a tentative standardization of the details of Binet
procedure, which has been tried out during the past year in over
one thousand cases. Pinter's standardization was followed in
giving the Knox cube tests. To secure uniformity in the general
procedure of mental testing, emphasis was laid on such matters
as (1) setting the pupil at ease, (2) constant encouragement to
effort, (3) application of definite rules in the matter of second chances,
(4) completeness and carefulness in recording all responses for the
purpose of later verification and study, (5) the reporting of any
factors which might affect the results, (6) attention to the mechanics
of testing, (7) consideration of such questions of school hygiene
and administration as are related to the work of visiting examiners.
In order to perfect the mechanics of testing and recording, special
record blanks known as forms 43 and 44 of the Philadelphia Public
Schools were prepared. These forms will be described in a later
article on our proposed standardization.
Arrangements are being made to translate our proposed uniform
method into several foreign languages so that foreign born pupils
can be tested in their native tongue.
i See Am. Psych. Assoc., Report on Academic Status of Psychology, Dec., 1915.
260 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
During the first part of the extension work the students retested
such pupils in the School of Practice as had already been carefully
examined. The practice-testing was done in the presence of the
writer so that he could assist and render such immediate and later
criticism as was necessary in training these student assistants.
This practice work was supplemented by a series of carefully planned
written examinations on questions of standard procedure. The
student-examiners were then given a series of lectures on their relation
to the administration of the schools to which they would be assigned.
Such questions as their obligations to the supervising principal,
their duties in times of fire drill, the detention of pupils after school
in order to complete examinations, the desirability of minimizing
the interruptions of school routine, and other similar topics were
considered. The student-assistants were instructed never to at-
tempt an evaluation of results except in laboratory conferences
under the direction of the writer, who made the final interpretation
of results.
The student-assistants reported to the principals who assigned
them rooms where the individual examinations could be made under
satisfactory conditions. The examiner was held responsible for the
pupil from the time of leaving to time of returning to the class; and
following the regulation of the Division of Medical Inspection, it
was provided that the testing of a girl pupil should always be done
in the presence of a witness.
The results of all tests were brought to the psychological lab-
oratory and there carefully evaluated during the term. At the
end of the term reports were sent to each school, to the Division of
Medical Inspection, and the Department of Instruction. During
the spring term of 1915 three hundred and forty-two pupils were
examined in this way; during the fall term of 1915 five hundred
and twenty more, making a total of eight hundred and sixty-two
tested during the year. In addition to these eight hundred and sixty-
two examinations over one hundred and fifty re-examinations were
given. The following table and chart1 show the results of the Binet
tests for the first eight hundred and fifty pupils examined. The
results obtained with the Knox tests will be reported in another
article on the development of a supplementary scale of performance
tests.
In order that the total Binet age might not obscure certain
important facts concerning the pupils tested, they have been classi-
fied in growth periods2 according to their ability to pass four out of
1 This chart was prepared for the Special Class section of the exhibit of the Committee on
Feebleminded of the Public Charities Assn. of Pa.
2 cf. Ellis, F. W.p Report of Mental Examinations at Neurological Inst., N. Y.: 5th and
6th Ann. Rept. of N. Y. Probation and Protective Assn., 1913, 1914.
AN ORGANIZED MENTAL SURVEY 261
850 SPECIAL CLASS PUPILS CLASSIFIED BY MENTAL LEVELS AND AGE
DIFFERENCES ACCORDING TO THE BINET SCALE (FINAL REVISION).
Summary According to Mental Levels
Total
Summary According to Age
Differences
Group A
-4 or more
Group B
-1 to -3.9
Group C
less than
+1
Group D
+1 or more
Level of Early Infancy  20
Level of Later Infancy  112
Level of Early Childhood  563
Level of Later Childhood  139
Level of Adolescence or higher. 16
Total Examined 1 850
18
51
160
35
1
265
2
59
337
82
10
490
2
63
20
5
90
five of the tests for III, VI, IX, or XII years, as shown in the chart.
The pupil who fails to pass the III year tests is classified at the level
of early infancy in his intellectual development through not neces-
sarily in his emotional or volitional development. A pupil who
passes III but fails on the VI year tests is classified at the level of later
infancy, etc. This method of classification (1) reveals the fact that,
certain highly diagnostic tests, e. g. the definition tests, have not
been passed and (2) suggests one form of school grading.
As shown in the table, twenty, or 2 per cent of the pupils ap-
peared to be at the level of early infancy i.e. they failed to show
the intelligence of normal three-year-old children. All of the twenty
should be given a thorough clinical examination with a view to the
proper disposal of these cases for whom it would seem impossible
to make adequate provision in the public schools.
One hundred and twelve pupils, or 13 per cent appeared to be
at the level of later infancy i.e. they failed to show the intelligence
of a six-year-old child. Further examinations will probably show
that comparatively few of these pupils can be adequately provided
for in the public schools.
Five hundred and sixty-three, or 63 per cent of the pupils tested
at the level of early childhood i.e. they showed the intelligence of
six-year-old children but not of nine-year-old children. One hun-
dred and sixty of these, four or more years below age, call for special
detailed examination particularly if developing signs of lawlessness.
The remaining four hundred and three pupils, approximately fifty
per cent of the total number examined, together with the one hun-
dred and nineteen pupils of higher levels who are at age or less than
four years retarded, represent the type of pupil for whom the state
cannot at the present time hope to make institutional provision.
Of the one hundred and thirty-nine pupils tested at the level
563 PUPILS TESTED
(7to 18 Years Old}
20 PUPILS TESTED
ROMAN NUMERALS INDICATE YEAR5 OF MENTAL GROWTH
ACCORDING TO THE BINET ? SIMON SCALE
850 Special Class Pupils classified by mental levels and age differences according to the Binet Scale (Final Revision).
264 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
of later childhood, thirty-five tested four or more years below age.
According to some investigators this group would probably contain
the cases most likely to become defective-delinquents. Such would
be the pupils having a physical development corresponding to ado-
lescense but a mental development corresponding only to the level
of later childhood i. e. pre-adolescence.
The sixteen pupils who tested at the level of adolescence like
the five pupils to be mentioned later in group D were usually of the
disciplinary or ill balanced type. Together with disciplinary cases
belonging in groups B and C many of these would be best provided
for in probationary classes or in a parental school.
As already mentioned the pupils are grouped within each level
according to the difference between their Binet age and their chrono-
logical age. Four groups are made on this basis, namely, Group A?
pupils four or more years below normal according to the Binet scale,
Group B?pupils from one to three years below normal, Group C?
pupils having an age difference of less than plus or minus one, Group
D?pupils one or more years above normal according to the Binet
scale.
Although Binet and other psychologists suggest that a mental
retardation of three years is indicative of serious mental deficiency,
the writer has considered it best to include in Group A i. e. those
most likely to prove feebleminded upon further examination, only
such pupils as test four or more years below age?a mental retarda-
tion corresponding to more than one growth period. As shown in
the table two hundred and sixty-five pupils or 31 per cent are in-
cluded in Group A, fifty-five of the pupils in this group tested from
seven to twelve years below age. Such cases call for further examina-
tion with a view to institutional care and treatment.
Group B contains all the pupils having age differences ranging
from minus one to minus three and nine-tenths inclusive. The
majority of these four hundred and ninety pupils or 57 per
cent are found to bs at the early childhood level and seem to
constitute the main problem of special classes in our public schools.
Groups C and D,1 containing ninety-five, or twelve per cent of
the pupils, represent the most promising cases for possible restora-
tion to regular grades when given thorough clinical examination
and adequate treatment.
All the cases of re-examination thus far studied merely confirm
the previous testing with the exception of two cases. One of these
pupils is troubled with a serious speech defect and has shown a gain
'These "approximately normal" pupils are the younger children at each level who have thus
far failed in the regular grades.
AN ORGANIZED MENTAL SURVEY 265
of 1.6 years within six months. The other pupil passed the tests
of memory span and association in the higher years when first tested
but failed to do so when retested six months later, thus lowering
his Binet age by two years. This second record was accompanied
by a note stating that the pupil was in poor health. An immediate
effort will be made to have both these pupils given detailed psycho-
logical and medical examination. An analysis of these changes in
Binet age upon retesting revealed the fact, however, that in neither
case were the changes of such a nature as to alter the classification
of these pupils. The retesting confirmed their original classification
in mental levels and their grouping by age-difference. A further
study of retesting is in progress.
Upon request from a school, the writer has analyzed the results
of a given examination in conference with the examiner and has
submitted a report based on the detailed analysis. Later conferences
with the school authorities have confirmed the value of such reports.
In certain instances another series of tests has been applied in our
supplementary studies. In our practice school, each of the special
class pupils was tested one hour per week for five successive weeks.
This testing included experiments in learning the regular school
subjects.
It is important to emphasize here that the results of this survey
are based upon the Binet-Simon scale as revised by its authors in 1911.
Unlike the earlier revisions still generally used in this country,
Binet's final revision corrects for the most part the errors in mental
ages X to XII inclusive, pointed out by Brigham1 and by Thorndike.2
Their criticisms, though published in 1914, do not refer to Binet's
final revision of 1911, recommended by the Buffalo conference, but to
an earlier form of the scale.
Conclusions.
The Binet-Simon and other scales administered under careful
supervision provide a standard method of:
1. Selecting cases for detailed clinical examination.
2. Detecting eligibility of pupils for special classes or for institu-
tional care.
3. Grouping pupils within the special class.
4. Investigating the causes of delinquency.
5. Registering data concerning the feebleminded.
1 J. of Ed. Psychol., Vol. V, pp. 439-448.
2The Psychological Clinic, 1914, Vol. VIII, pp. 185-189.
