A Formboard Demonstration.1
============================

V By Lightner Witmer, Ph.D.,
University of Pennsylvania.
Lynne was a chubby little boy of seven and a half years, who
had been diagnosed as an epileptic at the University Hospital. A
Wassermann test made a little later gave a negative result. The
question which his mother wished to have decided at the Psycho-
logical Clinic was, whether or not he was educable, and to what
school he should be sent. Several examinations were made. On
one of these occasions Dr. Witmer took him before the class in Mental
Analysis, and tested him with the Witmer formboard.2 When Lynne
arrived at the Clinic this afternoon, the table full of picture puzzles
fascinated him. The social worker induced him to go upstairs to the
demonstration room by taking a box with a puzzle in it and sug-
gesting that they "go upstairs where there was a nice little table to
fit him, in a big sunny room." Then he went willingly enough.
During his entire stay of nearly an hour his mind seemed fixed on
the puzzle, and he made attempts from time to time to get back to it.
"He is just at the stage," said Dr. Witmer, "when memory is
an important item. Come over here, Lynne." He came to the
smaller table where the formboard was lying, but almost immediately
went back to the larger table and his picture puzzle. Dr. Witmer
moved the formboard to the larger table, while an assistant gathered
the pieces of the puzzle into the box and handed it to the social
worker for safe keeping. "I want you to see how fast you can put
these blocks away," Dr. Witmer said, adding for the benefit of the
class, "See the distractable attention." Lynne broke out in a half-
whine, half-growl, "I wanna go to Mamma." He was chewing on
something, probably gum, which impeded his articulation. When
Dr. Witmer said, "No, you go on with this," Lynne grasped a block
in each hand, and gazed around the room. Dr. Witmer continued,?
" There is nothing here that can be called ' looking.' That means
there is no true observation. He is able to see things. He is even
able to see the proper place for the blocks to go. He has two blocks
now in the proper places, but he never looks around the board.
That is faulty observation, a nearly complete lack of analytic atten-
tion. Now and then, almost by chance as he moves a block over the
board, he seems to see the right space. We can tell that he actually
> Reported by A. Travis, Recorder of the Psychological Clinic.
5 See Young, H. H. The Witmer Formboard. The Pstchol. Clinic, Vol. X, No. 4.
(199)
200 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
does see the right space. The block doesn't slip in by pure accident,
but there is a great deal of chance in his getting it in the right place.
"He has a certain amount of understanding, a low grade of
understanding of what this test is. This child does not fail com-
pletely to understand the test. Good! Now you have got four put
away. Again he is trying a block in the right place. Good! You see,
after doing all that, after showing a recognition of the block and
the space where it should go, he tries to put the star in a triangle,
and when it won't go in he keeps wriggling it around and trying to
force it in. That shows faulty understanding. He doesn't compre-
hend that each one of these blocks has its appropriate space, and the
block cannot possibly be forced into the wrong place. Are those
right? (Lynne nodded assent.) No, they're not. You fix them up
and get them all in the right place.
"His performance with this formboard we would rate a failure,
that is he cannot put all the blocks away without being continually
stimulated to go on. He would be satisfied to leave these blocks
resting over the wrong spaces. In other words, this performance
is a failure unless we instruct him; and these words of incitement
with which we encourage him to go on, are words of instruction.
Without instruction he cannot perform this test. It is above his
developmental level at the moment. Measuring his performance
in terms of normal children, we can say that he is certainly below the
four-year level, possibly below the three-year level.
"Now we will make the instruction more specific. Take these
out, they are not in the right places. Find the right place for that
one. That's not the right place. No, find the right place for that
one before you give it up. (Lynne went on trying to squeeze the
isosceles triangle into the equilateral space.) You see, he under-
stands language. Try another place. Look all around and put it
in the right place. That's right. Now put that one in the right
place. (Lynne was trying to force the ellipse into the diamond.) Try
that place (pointing to the elliptical space). Now put another one
away."
Lynne placed correctly three blocks in succession. As soon as
he had finished he went to the social worker, took from her the
picture puzzle box, and brought it back to the table, where Dr. Wit-
mer took it away from him, saying,?
"Try this again; try these all by yourself. There is no use
keeping a record of the time there. Good! That's a difficult one
to put away, that isosceles triangle, and that shows a certain amount
of memory. He has retained the position of that block. This one
he hasn't got so well. Now he has got it. Good! (Lynne tried
A FORM BOARD DEMONSTRATION. 201
the circle in the rectangle, than placed the rectangle in its own space
and went back to put the circle in the circular space.) It seems like
an almost impossible situation for a child, to do so well at one moment,
and blunder so at the next. It looks as though his attention were dis-
sipated. He has got them all put away except the two most difficult
blocks."
Lynne looked up and remarked, " 'At's all right."
"No, they are not all right. Fix them right. Here again is a
measure of intelligence and understanding. He had got everything
done down to the last two blocks, which are somewhat similar. He
can't get them in, but instead of solving this particular problem, he
keeps on in a very stupid way, trying to force the blocks into the
wrong places. It doesn't seem to have occurred to him to change
them. Perhaps almost by accident he will move over and try the
block in the right place. Now he has got the block over the right
place, but in an imperfect position. He has got his mind wholly on
that one position. First he tried one block in it, then the other
block, but he hasn't yet solved it. Those two aren't right (pointing
to the two triangles).
"This boy's mother says he is very anxious to learn. He has
learned something here. I have here a record of his first examina-
tion. At the first trial with this formboard he was able to place the
circle. The record reads,?'After innumerable trials he put the
circle in the right place, and apparently it was done with compre-
hension, but none of the other blocks were put in the right place. He
had to be urged to keep at the test. Dr. Witmer selected the
circle, the cross, and the semi-circle, and attempted to teach him to
place these three blocks.' No further tests were given at that time,
the reason being that I did not want to spoil him for the tests today.
He did very much better today.
"That's good. Now you can do it all by yourself. I have a
clock here (showing him the stop-watch) and I am going to see how
fast you can do it. You see him in the process of learning,?either
that or his attention is too fluctuating to hold him to the task. But
this particular block, the square, which is one of the easiest next to
the circle, he is not placing correctly, probably because he doesn't
keep his attention concentrated on the work in hand. That is a
lack of persistent as well as of analytic attention. You see how he
takes a block and tries to force it into the wrong position, keeping on
stupidly trying to do it. We may call that a lack of analytic atten-
tion,?his failure to see that the block cannot possibly be forced into
that space. He takes out one which is in the right place, in order to
try the wrong block in that place. Now he has found the right
202 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
place for the star. Good! You see he is learning how to do this,
but he hasn't yet learned it. He is just in the process of learning.
Fine! Go ahead! Time: 2 minutes 30 seconds.
"We want to try it once more." Lynne's face fell, and a mur-
mur of sympathy came from the class. "This is not a bitter dis-
appointment, remember. Go ahead, quick! See how fast you can
do it this time. He makes straight for the right place. Now he
tries the square in the wrong place, in the circle, taking out the circle.
Those of you who are near enough can observe a slight tremor of the
hands as he tries to put these blocks away, like the hands of an old
man. That would indicate some nervous disease, and caused us
to send him over to the Medical Clinic last week. I regard him as
primarily a medical case. Time: 1 minute, 30 seconds."
Dr. Witmer placed before Lynne the tray with two kinds of pegs,
plain and colored. Told to pick out a red one, he gave yellow. Q.
Is that right? A. Yeh. Q. Pick out a blue one, give me a blue one.
Again Lynne gave yellow. Q. Give me another blue one like this.
Lynne gave yellow for the third time. Dr. Witmer remarked: "He
doesn't even know how to match colors, for when I said another, he
gave me a different color from the one in my hand. Pick out one
just like that" (red). Lynne picked up two yellow pegs and one
blue, and handed them to Dr. Witmer.
The pegs were taken away, and the Witmer cylinders put before
him. Dr. Witmer ran his fingers around the top of the cylinders as
they stood in position, saying,?"See now they all fit? I am going to
take these out and put them in there. Now you put them all back.
From his performance with the formboard you can probably make
some kind of estimate as to how long it would take him to do this
test. The child who hasn't got enough analytic attention to learn the
formboard at seven years more quickly than he learned it, isn't going
to be able to learn his letters. To learn letters requires an acute
detailed analytic attention to form as well as an understanding."
Lynne put the cylinders in at random, but showed better per-
sistence than with the formboard, and his face wore a pleased expres-
sion. He put two short cylinders in the same deep socket, put very
small cylinders into the largest holes, and tried to squeeze large
cylinders into holes too small for them. One he got right by accident.
Four were still unplaced, when he turned away and reached for the
picture puzzle. Dr. Witmer commented,?
"You see, the cylinder test is a failure, and there is no question
of measuring his intelligence by that test. It is far above not only
his level of development, but his level of intelligence. Good-bye
Lynne, you may go down to your mother now, and come back to see
us another day."
