Retarded Children, not Defectives
===================================

By Anna Johnson,
Teacher in Elmwood School, Denver, Colorado.
Since the searchlight of investigation has turned its ray on
childhood, we find children classified in the following terms: normal,
abnormal, subnormal, supernormal, and retarded. Those who know,
or think they know, tell us that normal children are children that
conform to the average human type representing the present stage
of civilization. Abnormal, subnormal, and supernormal children are
those who deviate from the average human type, and retarded chil-
dren are those who have failed to make the usual progress in school
work, as prescribed by school authorities and courses of study.
This article is to deal exclusively with retarded children. For
the past five years, I have had the privilege of observing the intel-
lectual and spiritual unfolding of about one hundred and fifty
retarded children who were classified in the fifth, sixth, seventh,
and eighth grades. Out of this by-product of the school system, I
can safely say that not one could be grouped as a mental defective.
This naturally provokes the questioni "Why were these children
retarded?" On investigation, the most prevalent causes were
found to be economic, temperamental, disciplinary, slow mental
growth, physical defects, and general illness. Those tabulated
under general illness were only about one per cent. Frequently
these children are very bright, but their continual absence from
school duties prevents them from making that seventy per cent
which stares them in the face in every subject. Hence on account
of the disorganized knowledge these children have, they become
retarded, but they are not defective.
If children were passed on their ability to make a conscious
connection between the work of their present grade and the work
of the grade to which they should be advanced, it would decrease
retardation, and be a fairer passing test than the seventy per cent.
The physically defective children found in the Retarded School,
are those with poor eyesight, defective hearing, adenoids, bad tonsils,
and the hundred and one ills attributed to childhood. But when
these physical defects are corrected so that the mind can function
without any outcry from the physical body, these children recuperate
mentally and often make greater progress than the so-called normal
children in the regular grades.
(45)
46 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Another type is the child of slow mental growth who fails year
after year in his studies, and we think surely this is a mental defec-
tive of some sort. But we are wrong again. We found any number
of such children, after one or two years of adolescence, blossom out
all at once. Such children live in that quiet, subconscious state
where the real mind does its work in secret. When they find them-
selves, and their conscious mind is awakened to the realities of the
external world, they take hold of the problems confronting them
in the most effective manner. And then it is a case of the stones
which the builders rejected becoming the corner stones of the temple.
Frequently in after-life these young people make great success of
the very subjects in which they appeared to be slow.
A heavy percentage of retarded children are so through economic
conditions. Last year 30 per cent of the children in my room came
from homes where the mother either had'to help support the family
or was the sole support of the family. When the father can't get
work or when he considers the burden of life too great, he often walks
away from home and forgets to come back. The mother becomes
the burden bearer, the meager supporter of the family. She usually
sews, cooks, waits on table, or works in a department store. She is
gone all day and the children are left to shift for themselves. They
are hungry, poorly clad, and unclean. They come to school all out
of sorts, they fail to get their lessons, they show no consideration for
the rules of the school, and why should they??life has extended no
courtesies to them. We cannot hope that children who come from
such dwarfed and twisted homes should be obedient and good, and
step right into the many activities which are worked out of a course
of study. So these victims of broken homes and the economic condi-
tions of our splendid civilization become retarded. They do not
pass and the teacher with forty or fifty children on her hands has
no time to look into'their home conditions, to say nothing of study-
ing their mental and moral natures. Possibly then some wise head
comes along and pronounces them defective, mainly morally. But
they are like those children we call the normal type. When set
right with the world they show keen appreciation for what is done
for them and become anxious and willing to do right. The con-
science of a child is not hard to reach, and what higher result in
education can we aim for than to bring a human being face to face
with his own conscience? Every child is a new world and we must
help make that world beautiful both internally and externally.
Speaking of temperamental causes of retardation I have refer-
ence to superior or talented children. These children are the most
misunderstood and abused children in the whole school system and
RETARDED CHILDREN NOT DEFECTIVES. 47
invariably become targets for that word "defective". They are
the children of genius and treat no subject with respect except that
one toward which they feel their divine impulse. They have strong
outbrusts of temper and passion, in other words they are moody and
emotional. Instead of such antics being evil, they are marks of a
noble and original temperament. In it lies dormant the creative
genius that characterizes the poet, the artist, the inventor, the
reformer. Children with such natures should be carefully dis-
ciplined. Their emotions must not be rooted out but controlled with
a discipline that is just yet firm as steel. In this surging sea of
feeling rocks the future of the child, as well as that of the race. It
is the soil from which will sprout the seed that will afterward deter-
mine the saint or the sinner. Through the study of biography both
past and present, we learn that genius can never be molded along
the lines prescribed by the ordinary school system. The most
specific type I ever saw of the temperamental child was a boy I had
in school for three consecutive years, and who is now a cartoonist
011 one of the foremost daily papers in the country. He was not
discovered in the most gentle way, but he was discovered. For two
of the most precious morning hours I tried to get something out of
him through various lessons, but of no avail. He showed little
active resentment until technical grammar was thrust upon him,
then life became unbearable. He picked up the book and hurled it
at me. Going back to his desk I found him engaged on a cartoon.
The spirit of genius was crowding him and he had no time for my
petty subjects. At times, we didn't speak for days, but at the end
of the period a cartoon was sold, and perhaps it was found on the
front page of the paper. Then we were all happy.
In addition to his ability as a cartoonist, this boy has marked
talent along literary lines. He has written several short stories of
merit as well as two or three poems that have been published.
He never took the Binet-Simon tests, but he was considered
somewhat defective, chiefly from a moral view point. I made a
record of all his moral moods where real conscience was involved,
and found he had the keenest sense of justice, as well as cleaner
morals than most boys of his age. It is decidedly worth while to
give special attention to children of this type. They are the ones
that adorn our civilization; they produce food for our emotional
nature, and spin the threads that bind together the finer fibers of life.
The children who are in the Retarded School for discipline are
those who have no liking for a classical education, or rather for
school books. They come to school year after year resenting most
of the subjects in the school curriculum. They are nagged at and
48 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
punished at school by the teacher and the principal, and sometimes
by the truant officer, until in self-defense these children become
almost fiendish in trying to preserve their natural impulses. As a
last resort they are dumped on the Retarded School. Usually they
have worked fairly well until they have reached the fifth or sixth
grades, then they begin to resent everything in the school system.
Right here some sort of industrial education should be presented
to them because they are eager for the industrial side of life. Most
of the boys are truants but they are bright. They can give a teacher
more practical information than she can give out to them. They
like lots of arithmetic and sloyd. They prefer to read about current
events, mechanics, and all sorts of industrial matters rather than
in the school reader. They want to be in partnership with the
teacher instead of being subordinate. These boys are optimistic
and versatile. They work in gangs and are usually loyal and honest.
If we could look beyond the pale of the school system we would see
in these young people the captains of industry, the leaders and
managers of great commercial enterprises.
Girls of this type like sewing and cooking; they like to make
beautiful, things for the home and are invariably fond of little chil-
dren. They are very neat and spend much time on their personal
appearance. After finishing the eighth grade they usually marry in
a year or so, and our observation has been that they make good
wives.
There is something to be said in favor of these children who
vibrate along the industrial wire. All we need is to take an outlook
on life and we shall find that at least 85 per cent of the human race
are engaged in productive labor. Is it not right then that many of
our children should be eager for the industrial side of life? Instead
of attaching to them that word "defective," which has been so
freely misused for the past few years, let us set our children to the
tasks which are to their liking, and so turn their activities into
creative channels, instead of allowing them to be wasted in concen-
trated crime.
Progress can do nothing better than make the most out of all
of us as we are, therefore our aim should be to prepare the children
for whatever work life brings them, and for whatever they are
capable of doing. We must never forget that future history plays
at our feet, and if we hope to perpetuate any lofty ideals in the
race, we must do it through the children, by educating them as
ndividuals along their God-given impulses.
