The Practical in Educational Research
======================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1916, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. X, No. 3
May 15, 1916

By David Spence Hill, Ph.D.,
Director Division of Educational Research, Public Schools,
New Orleans.
What is Practical?
From the beginning, demands for the practical have harassed
the researchers in chemistry, physics, astronomy, or biology.
Abundantly practical have been the ultimate results of a score of
pioneer studies which were of only academic interest to our learned
ancestors, and unheard of by the contemporaneous multitudes.
What seems purely academic, theoretical, or even visionary to one
generation or individual may be of demonstrated utility to another.
To prove this, one needs only to trace the manufacture and present
economic significance of drugs, pure food stuffs, anesthetics, dyes,
metals; or of dynamos, motors, telephones and wireless?all electrical
devices,? the steam engine, specialized factory machines, and the
aeroplane; or of modern navigation; or of medicine, surgery, as
well as of scientific agriculture. Philosophers easily show the impos-
sibility of limiting rigidly the concept, practical. The practical in
education is as difficult to define as it is in chemistry or geology. We
mean by it generally something that is of immediate use in our mutual
betterment. The idea of the practical can easily be degraded to
that of expediency, or to subserviency to stronger power for selfish
ends. Facts about certain school problems can be of great practical
use to boards, superintendents, and the people.
Men of Affairs Employ Research.
In the presence of proof that a method of efficiency is helpful
to all concerned, practical men of affairs are prone to adopt the
efficiency method. Initiative in educational research cannot be
credited as a rule to those who bother chiefly about units of college
? A paper prepared for the Round Table of Directoia of Educational Researeh, Department
of Superintendence, National Education Association, Detroit, Michigan, February 24, 1916.
(65)
66 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
entrance requirements, or about protecting the B.A. degree from the
contamination of "practical" studies. It is pleasing to contemplate
the recent unconditioned employment of good researchers by cities
and boards?and by some with a reputation hitherto for political
evils in education. The movement betokens disgust with old
methods and a hopeful turning toward the light. The researcher in
the schools is burdened with a heavy responsibility, that he may
not dispel confidence in his method by inaccuracy or bias, that
he may be helpful and constructive, rather than a wrecker without
plans of rebuilding.
Typical Difficulties of Practical Research.
Formal attempts to apply systematically the methods of
research to problems of public education are recent, and many
difficulties, as of old, arise. The university man or woman with a
wealth of information and with mental training and a heart to serve
through research the children in our public schools, who plunges
into such public service, may encounter discouragements such as
these: Incredulity about practical values, questions to be solved
too quickly, competitive exploitation of mediocrity, academic scorn
from a few pedants and conservers of the narrower collegiate con-
ventions, hostility or jealousies from those who pose as ultra-con-
servative, and sometimes there appears trickery, or persecution from
the political type of pedagogue whether in public or private educa-
tion, as soon as a measure of personal or professional success is
achieved by the worker. It is perhaps only average human nature
for some employes of schools to be proud of educational research
when any published results of a study reflect upon them credit
or prestige?and for them to swell with indignation, caution against
"radicalism" and to show pernicious activity, when the truth may
reflect disadvantageous^ upon them. Such trivial difficulties, how-
ever, may culminate in financial stress?felt when publications
should be made, supplies or instruments purchased, assistants
engaged, or when the salary budget is made up. Fortunately, the
writer knows of no city or state school system where all of these
school evils operate simultaneously. The increasing demand now
being answered, to remove the schools from partisan politics,
brightens the prospect before the competent worker in educational
research.
It would not be difficult to recite incidents to show that these
gloomy difficulties are punctuated with humor in the experience of
some researchers. Attractive aspects of the work also appear to the
researcher who enjoys, for its own sake, the endeavor to discover the
THE PRACTICAL IN EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH. 67
truth, and there is always as an allurement, the vision of multitudes
of children who may be helped by the application of facts from a
dry monograph.
Four Activities Needed in Public Schools.
Educational research is done by universities, or by cooperation
of universities and public schools, or by independent foundations,
or by public school systems. In small towns and cities it is desirable
that the superintendent should be able to conduct routine researches.
In the large cities the exacting demands of an executive nature upon
the superintendent, and the complexity of the researches demanded,
make it necessary for him and the board to relegate the work of
research to a special department or bureau. This present paper
refers especially to this type of organization.
We believe that if educational research is to be made quickly
practical there must be more than the mere getting of facts. There
are at least four classes of related activities, or steps, needful to
make educational research practical. They are:
(1) The accurate getting of the desired facts by researchers.
(2) The careful consideration of the facts by boards and by
superintendents.
(3) The prompt publication of the facts upon mutual agreement
of researcher, boards, and superintendents for the benefit of the
people.
(4) Appropriate action where consideration of facts reveals the
necessity for remedial action.
The factors in each of these related steps in turn suggest at
once why some educational researches have not been productive
or practical.
(1) Chiefly facts, not mere opinions, or amateurish attempts,
are desired. Standards of scholarship, training, compensation, and
contract are essential if men and women of calibre, capable of research,
are to do the work of obtaining facts. High grade clerks, book-
keepers, librarians, Binet-testers?none of these people are com-
petent to determine the essential facts to be sought in a complex
school system, or to get the facts by approved methods, or to present
them with force. The director of research should be one of the
best trained men in a school system. We may look with suspicion
and condemnation upon a school department of research which is
at bottom a clerkship.
(2) Superintendents and boards have not time to read all the
numerous reports placed upon their desks. Educational research
fails where facts, however painstakingly ga+hered, are not weighed
68 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
and considered. Brevity and clearness of presentation, and speed
in completing a study are necessary, lest it lose all interest save that
of local history. If the researcher be competent and the study
needful, scarcely anything is of greater importance to superintendents
than the research report. Research work is not an administrative
or executive function; therefore the best efforts will become imprac-
tical if the report lies idle for weeks, and if the busy members of the
board and the people do not realize its content and importance
because the report has not been brought properly to their attention.
(3) Mutual agreement between researcher and superior officer
is a working basis for legitimate publicity. The spirit of cooperation,
simple fairness, and courage to show the truth where good can be
accomplished, are sufficient guides in this difficult question. As a
rule the people of the United States are entitled to learn in a wise
manner all of the facts about the public schools. General knowledge,
rather than partisanship, or prejudice, or misinformation, is a power-
ful lever to effect practical results, after educational researches have
been made.
(4) Cautious application or action in our schools upon the basis
of research is peculiarly difficult to secure. Most of the work of
research is barely begun; hosts of teachers in America are trained to
observe a favorite method and rule from which it is difficult to depart.
Tenure of office of persons who should, but will not, energize a school
system, is often prolonged; financial deficits in city or state make
impossible the needed action?or else supply an excuse for inaction,
indifference, or political machination to hold fast to the present
status.
Educational research will not meet the demand in the public
mind for the practical unless all the above four steps of study and
action are completed. If educational research should become a
farce, or be manned by unequipped persons, either fledglings or
veterans, who may or may not be self deceived; or if it is regarded
as an advertising or publicity bureau to boost the school officials and
divert attention from live issues; or if accuracy of fact-getting and
fact-presentation is impossible?then the farce should end, for the
same reason that graft should be extirpated wherever it shows itself
in the public service. Where educational research is well done, but
where the three steps to follow are not completed by the cooperation
of researcher, superintendent, and board, and the public is not
reached by reports and the press?in this case there is a situation
needlessly impractical and itself deserving study. It would be
interesting to diagnose the conditions regarding research in all of
our cities, in order to ascertain which of the four steps or activities
are weakest, and the causes involved.
THE PRACTICAL IN EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH. 69
Problems in Research Vary.
The specific problems for educational research are manifold in
degree of difficulty and of significance. Here is a brief list of kinds
of problems which are of perennial interest, and research into which
will be of practical value in typical American cities, if the four
essential steps enumerated above are followed:
(A) Periodical accounting of the placement, or movements of
classes and groups, of children according to the prevailing plan of
organization and promotions. The accounting should reach the
smallest divisions of every school in a system.
(B) Studies of all cases of elimination from the schools, through
personal investigation.
(C) Studies of all cases of repeating the work of a grade.
(D) Intensive study of exceptional children by cooperating
psychologist, physician, teacher, and social investigator.
(E) Measuring the results of courses of study and programs
and methods by means of special tests in arithmetic, spelling, reading,
drawing, writing, physical education, etc. Here, with moderation,
can be utilized the resources of experimental pedagogy.
(F) Study of local industries and vocations with reference to
education in the public schools, and with particular reference to
trade and commercial courses, continuation and night schools.
(G) Special experimental studies of groups of delinquent
children with reference to the best ameliorative and educational
treatment.
(H) Administrative problems regarding the hygenic construc-
tion of school houses, the grading of teachers, the examination of
text books, and the questions of organization and finance,?these
offer possible fields of helpful study to departments of research
properly equipped.
Reasonable Autonomy Necessary.
A degree of reasonable autonomy in iniative and in the employ-
ment of assistants?an independence resting upon confidence in a
researcher's ability and motive, rather than upon rigid rule, is basal
for effective research work in a school system. Autonomy of this
kind, exercising skill and a constructive spirit, can be of practical
benefit to educational research. Educational research of the right
kind should protect the child and serve ultimately nearly every depart-
ment of the community. The researcher, or his department, should
be able to attack various types of problems for the school system,
such practical issues, for example, as are indicated above in the eight
groups of problems. Of course, the purpose may vary from time to
70 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
time. The researcher may endeavor (1) to secure new facts, make
new discoveries, or (2) to verify former researches, or (3) to find
errors in existing doctrines or practices, or (4) merely to stimulate,
by repeating well-known tests and measurements of materials and
methods. He needs a rare combination of scientific training,
patience, courage, capacity for drudgery, tact, and inherent interest
in the children.
Logical Outcome of Research.
The practical outcome of educational research under fair condi-
tions, whether the outcome be measured in terms of dollars, or in the
economy of time and the increased welfare of pupils, will outweigh
the cost of its maintenance. To preserve at once its scientific
integrity and also to secure utilization of its potential value for the
efficient administration of our increasingly complex school systems,
while it survives the financial hardship of pioneer work, are three
problems of educational research, from the director's point of view.
When researchers under stress are able to maintain without blemish
the scientific integrity of their work, while faithfully helping our
teachers, superintendents, and boards to solve the baffling problems
that multiply in modern school systems?then their positions should
be accorded adequate recompense. Public approval will be theirs,
and researchers of highest training and experience will not have to
rock along on inadequate salaries. Then also will a high type of
public school and university trained graduates be attracted to the
work in increasing numbers. The present disposition of school
boards, progressive superintendents, and of the public, to favor
educational research upon a broad, adquate basis, in behalf of our
thronging millions of children, is an encouraging sign in these troubled
years of the world.
