Physical and Mental Factors Involved in the Formboard Test
===========================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1916, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. X, No. 6
November 15, 1916

By Herman H. Young, Ph.D.,
Psychologist, Psychopathic Laboratory, Juvenile Court,
Cincinnati, Ohio.
1/
The purpose of this discussion is to present a tentative analysis
of the various physical and mental factors involved in the per-
formance of the formboard test. The existence of these factors
places the formboard at the head of the list of clinical tests. That
it really holds this exalted position is supported by statements
coming from various clinical laboratories. Thus Goddard says,
"We have in our laboratory no other test that shows us so much
about a child's condition in so short a time as this formboard."
(1) Witmer considers the formboard to be first among clinical
tests. He may be quoted as follows, "It is one of the best tests for
distinguishing the feebleminded from the child of normal intelligence.
It very quickly gives the experimenter a general idea of the child's
powers of recognition, discrimination, memory, and coordination.
Repetition of the experiment often leads to a conclusion as to his
ability to learn." (6) Wallin employs the formboard test in
determining intellectual status, to throw light upon the patient's
ability visually to identify forms, upon his constructive capacity
and his power of muscular coordination. (5) Norsworthy con-
siders the formboard a test of form perception and rate of movement.
She also sought to learn something of the individual's learning
capacity and his ability to meet a new situation. (2) Sylvester, in
the introduction to his standardization of the formboard, values
the test as follows, "It appeals to the child's interest, affording him
a short and fascinating task which calls for his best efforts, and it
helps to free him from the fear and self-consciousness which often
interfere seriously in a mental examination. At the same time the
test gives the examiner a good general view of the child's mentality
(149)
150 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
and it usually indicates more or less clearly the nature of his
defects." (4).
The above citations serve two purposes. In the first place
they show the general agreement among clinicians as to the value of
the formboard as a general diagnostic test. In the second place
they name the various functions or capacities which are sought to
be explored and tested by different examiners. Perhaps no one
quoted above intended to name all the qualities or capacities revealed
by the test, but they no doubt did mean to name those which they
considered to be most significantly revealed in the performance of
the test. The fact that they did not attempt to catalog it as a test
of this or that particular mental function or capacity is of more
than ordinary importance. It is an indication of the growing
tendency to recognize the complexity and interdependence of the
mental functions involved in the performance of apparently very
simple tests. In addition, it indicates the great need of carefully
studying and analyzing the elementary mental qualities involved
in the performance of each test as a basis for correctly evaluating
the behavior of an individual.
Perhaps the chief obstacle to a more rapid analytic develop-
ment of tests has been the desire to express results in quantitative
terms in order to establish norms for comparative purposes. To
accomplish this aim, since only measurements of objects or qualities
belonging to the same general class or order can be compared, inves-
tigators have been forced to posit and assume that the particular
test which they were standardizing tested only one quality, as
memory, imagination, form perception, or rate of movement. If,
however, the investigator was aware that other factors were involved
and not infrequently exerted a powerful, and only somewhat less
frequently a dominating influence on the quantitative expression of
an individual's record, he failed to give them the prominence and
emphasis necessary to prevent others from falling into the error
of being content to assume that only one quality is being tested and
that its value is adequately expressed in quantitative terms and may
be directly compared, in those terms alone, with the results of others.
Group comparisons may be justifiable, but even then we are not
safe in concluding that this summation which obscures individual-
ities insures the measurement of the same quality in different
groups. When applied to an individual, a comparison with this
narrow outlook is sure to be unjust and misleading.
No attempt is made to minimize the value of quantitative
measurements and the establishment of norms. That has great
value and is an important part of the further development of tests.
FACTORS INVOLVED IN FORMBOARD TEST. 151
The emphasis here is on the careful establishment, proper use, and
interpretation of norms. Objection is raised against the habit of
assuming that figures tell the whole story. They have value only
when supplemented by qualifying terms determined by the require-
ments of the particular case under consideration.
The value of any test is great or small in direct proportion to
the examiner's ability carefully to observe, recognize, and analyze
the various mental functions, capacities, or limitations revealed by
the subject during his performance of the test. To facilitate rating
the performance of an individual on the formboard an attempt is
here made to include in one chart many of the more elementaly men-
tal and physical factors involved. This is not proposed as an
exhaustive list. If revision is needed it will be by addition rather
than subtraction. Various other peculiarities of habit and mental
traits are often revealed, but it has not seemed advisable to carry
the list beyond those factors likely to be revealed in the testing of
every individual. This list is intended to be suggestive of possi-
bilities and aims, to stimulate further and more careful observation,
and to induce the examiner to cultivate the habit of analyzing
behavior. It is in no way intended to pieclude further and addi-
tional observations.
To evaluate correctly the performance of a given individual a
certain amount of information is necessary. There is (1) a slight
but constant sex difference in formboard ability running throughout
life, men and boys tending on the whole to do the test quicker than
women and girls; and (2) an indirect ratio between age and form-
board ability up at least to the age of maturity. Consequently sex
is chosen as the primary and age as the secondary basis of classifica-
tion. It is possible that there is a closer correlation between physio-
logical age and formboard ability than between chronological age
and formboard ability, but such classification is impossible at present,
because there is no ready means of adequately determining physio-
logical development. Although not a part of the established system
of classification, it has been found advisable to record the subject's
educational or professional standing.
After the sex, age, and educational standing of the subject
have been obtained, his performance may be compared with the
performances of normal subjects of the same sex, age, and educational
standing, or if his performance is so exceptional in any respect that
it falls outside the group in which it properly belongs, an attempt
should then be made to find in what group a performance such as
his naturally falls. A boy six years and two months old must be
rated in terms of what boys of this same age do under similar cir-
152 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC. .
cumstances. He cannot be expected to give more attention, show
more intelligence, planfulness, or powers of observation than boys of
his age, but he should be on a par with them. In some respects he
may rate near the median, in others he may reach the maximum,
and in still others he may fall to the minimum for his age, yet his
performance as a whole may be considered medium for his age,
because his assets and defects counterbalance one another. It is
exceptional to find a normal child consistently above or below par
in every respect. His degree of success is determined by the inter-
play of all the factors involved and by the number, nature, and
degree of their variations from the median.
If a subject does so poorly that he falls outside his age group,
he may be found to do as poorly as a two or three year old in some
respects, while in others he may show normal powers. On the
other hand, a subject may be precocious in one or more respects and
make a fine record. Whatever the nature of a performance, it
should be rated as accurately as possible on every factor involved, by
using the median of the subject's age group as the standard. Such
ratings give valuable diagnostic material, by showing where
the individual excels, where he is defective, in what he may be
expected to succeed, and in what to fail. It gives evidence as to
why he is thought dull, normal, or precocious by his teachers or
parents.
Early in this investigation attempts at the qualitative analysis
of the formboaid test revealed that faulty evaluation and interpre-
tation of performances are responsible for more mistakes than
inherent defects of the tests themselves. It is generally assumed,
and perhaps rightly so in many cases, that in a test we are securing
the best possible results from the subject, that he is in the best of
trim, and is revealing his innate powers. Unless care is taken, the
subject is considered unable to do better on other occasions and on
other tests. On the other hand, just as serious a mistake may be
made by assuming that he will always do as well as he did on this
particular occasion. The test may present itself as unusually diffi-
cult and thus show the subject at his worst, or familiarity with the
test or allied tasks may give a decided advantage. Such differences
tend to make results incomparable. If a reliable study and diagnosis
is to be made, the individual must be subjected to a large series of
tests and given an opportunity to display his powers. But later,
when referring to the written record, how shall an individual's per-
formances be interpreted? How shall the significant be distin-
guished from the insignificant, those tests which presented a real
difficulty from those which were mere play? If in connection with
FACTORS INVOLVED IN FORMBOARD TEST. 153
one test he is rated low on muscular coordination, and on another low
on attention, are we to understand these ratings to refer to his per-
formance on the particular tests in connection with which they are
recorded or shall they be interpreted to represent his maximum
ability under any conditions whatever, favorable or unfavorable?
In all probability, the examiner himself, if asked this question, could
not answer with certainty. He would perhaps reply that such a
distinction did not occur to him, but that he likely meant them as
ability rather than mere performance ratings. These ratings might
prove to be nothing more than a rough expression of a general and
indefinite impression instead of a careful analysis of performances.
These considerations and limitations are not peculiar to the
formboard. In certain other tests it is still more important to make
a careful distinction between types of behavior peculiar to the
moment and occasion, and those which actually signify the full
strength of an individual's capacities. What is here said of the
formboard applies with almost equal force to all tests. Frequently
an individual works a test satisfactorily without having any of his
powers really tested, because no special demand is made upon them.
The test is not, however, without value in such cases as it shows
the individual to have adequate powers so far as required for a
satisfactory performance.
That analytic ratings may be of the greatest diagnostic value
and convey a definite meaning, both at the time they are recorded
and later when reference is made to them by the same or another
examiner, a careful distinction must be made between those factors
and qualities which are involved only to a limited degree, but are
not drawn out to their full extent, and those which are actually put
to the test, revealed with full force, and measured with certainty.
To make these distinctions possible and to insure uniformity in their
application, it has been found necessary to propose terms whose
meanings are restricted to the above uses. The noun, epideixis,
(from the Greek, epideiknumi, to show), and its adjective form,
epideictic, literally mean "the showing or exhibition," for the noun,
and "the shown or exhibited" for the adjective. When I evaluate
and record an individual's epideixis of attention and muscular coordi-
nation as low, I mean that on the particular occasion and per-
formance referred to, he used and exhibited poor powers of attention
and muscular coordination. It constitutes an evaluation of what he
actually did. If I meant to convey the idea that I had really tested
and measured their full strength and capacity or had other sufficient
evidence, gained by considerable experience with the indivdual or
by the results of a long series of tests, for knowing their optimum
154 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
limits, i. e. the existing innate power of each quality actually present
and available, I could distinguish such rating from the above only
by the use of a different term. The noun hyparxis, (Greek, hyparcho,
to be. present), meaning existence, and the adjective hyparctic.
(Greek, hyparktikos), meaning existent, are the terms employed to
convey this latter meaning. If I rate an individual's hyparxis of
attention low, I mean that the amount of attention which he is
capable of giving and actually possesses, or could possibly give
under any conditions whatever, no matter how favorable, is low.
It means that he could, if necessary, under appropriate conditions
give so much attention but no more.
Hyparctic ratings are justified only upon clear cut evidence
or actual determination of the maximal intensity and ability of the
specific factors rated. In the absence of such evidence in respect to
any factor the rating must be made in terms of its degree actually
discovered, but stripped of the implication that its full strength has
been tested and measured. Hyparxis has no element of futurity.
It has reference only to that stage of development which the individ-
ual has reached and his actual capabilities at that particular stage.
The hyparxis of a given boy's energy at the age of twelve is distinctly
different from what it was at the age of five. No hyparctic rating
per se indicates the future possibilities or probabilities of develop-
ment. It has to do only with actualities, with no reference whatever
to possibilities.
It is unfortunate that in practice it is unsatisfactory to attempt
to restrict the terms to either of the above uses alone. Either one
alone serves the purpose about as badly as the other. If the two
uses are born in mind throughout the rating of a performance and
recorded as separate ratings) the result is a satisfactory and helpful
analysis which for diagnostic purposes is far superior to a mere
detailed description and narrative of the performance itself. The
time to evaluate the significant features of a performance is during
its progress or immediately thereafter, not at some later date from
even the most carefully recorded observations. The important
thing is not so much what the subject does, but how he does it. The
chart is not intended to displace descriptive accounts of behavior.
It has an independent function which cannot be subsumed under
the head of description.
Owing to the large number of factors involved in performing
this test, two fundamental facts must be recognized; (1) that it is
impossible to predict what factors will be tested in a given individ-
ual, and (2) that the number of possible combinations which may
determine his success or failure is practically unlimited. Exactly
FACTORS INVOLVED IN FORMBOARD TEST. 155
what factors will be tested can be determined only by application
of the test. These vary from individual to individual and show why
the formboard cannot be used as a specific test, i. e. a test of a specific
mental function. This is true of a larger range of tests than is
generally supposed. Strictly speaking there are few if any really
specific tests; tests which can be given while the examiner takes a
vacation. There is at present too great a tendency to interpret
results mechanically. The tester gives tests with assurance that he
knows exactly what problems he is setting, what they will test and
measure, and then upon this illusion, either forgetting or not recog-
nizing that in reality it was an entirely different problem for the
child, he proceeds to interpret results.
In evaluating the different factors and qualities a five point
scale is used. The highest grade is 5, the medium or median 3,
and the lowest is 1. It is often advantageous and frequently
essential to make finer distinctions and ratings than the simple five
point system permits. Each of these general grades is therefore
subdivided into five parts, each bearing the same relation to the
other within the group that the corresponding parts of the coarser
system bear to one another. Thus the lowest grade, employing the
finer system, is 1-1, the median 3-3, and the highest 5-5. The
grade 1-3 is the median within the first or lowest general group,
and 1-5 is the highest ranking within this same general group. The
median grade is assigned whenever there is no evidence of marked
variation from the average for the sex and age group.
Explanation and Use of Terms in Chart.
The chart is arranged to include both hyparctic and epideictic
ratings. The diffeient factors are defined, or explained, and rated
only in so far as they are involved in the performance of this test.
The particular position which each occupies in the chart is in no
way intended to be indicative of its relative importance.
Physical adequacy
A large variety of physical defects and peculiarities naturally
fall under this heading, but whatever their nature, they can be
classed as anatomical, functional, or both. The specific nature and
significance of each defect and asset should be carefully noted.
Deformities, over- or under-development, or absence of parts of the
body, particularly of the arms, hands, and eyes, are classed as ana-
tomical. Under functional factors come such disturbances as
paralysis, choreic movements, and impaired volitional control.
156 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Sensitivity
The subject must have at least fair powers of auditory acuity
to understand the spoken directions. Suspicion as to hearing ability
is often aroused when the subject, otherwise awake, fails to compre-
hend the directions. He may by observation grasp the idea that he
is to replace the blocks, but fail entirely to get the idea that he is to
hurry. Rudolph Pintner and Donald G. Patterson have made some
interesting comparisons between the formboard ability of young
deaf and hearing children. They conclude that at the Ohio State
School for the deaf, "The average entering class of deaf children is
apt to be about a year backward in formboard ability and that this
backwardness is not made up during the first year in school." Stated
merely in quantitative terms, based on time and errors, their report
is not satisfying, as it fails to tell wherein the difference lies. Such
comparison is probably not fair to the deaf child on account of the
different method of giving him instructions. Then, too, a larger
number of cases or a second group of hearing children might have
reversed even these qualified conclusions. Of special significance
is the fact that the difference between the two groups of seven year
old deaf children is greater than the difference between the second
group of seven year old deaf children and the seven year old hearing
children who had had the experience of the preceding year. (3)
Visual acuity is a very important factor, as it may be responsible
for apparent defectiveness in other qualities. Poor space perception
may be due entirely to defective vision. Poor vision may cause
numerous and otherwise inexcusable errors, or may very materially
increase the time, because the subject hesitatingly goes no faster
than he is able to distinguish the forms with certainty. Although
the acuity of vision can in no way be accurately determined by this
test, grave defectiveness should be discovered or at least arouse
suspicion.
Cutaneous and kincesthetic sensations play a more important
function in the formboard test than is ordinarily attributed to them.
They are seldom given a place even in introspective reports. These
sensations have the happy faculty of avoiding detection and of
rendering valuable service unhonored. If we make them the special
object of attention either in ourselves or others, we discover that in
their absence the performance would be decidedly faulty. We
depend upon vision to recognize the different forms and to associate
the blocks with their proper recesses, but we depend upon pressure
and kinsesthesis to furnish the final information as to the fit of each
block. The eyes follow a block only until it approaches its chosen
recess, and then give it no more attention unless it does not fit
FACTORS INVOLVED IN FORM BOARD TEST. 157
securely. There may be some relation between the functional
development of tactile and kinesthetic sensations and the amusing
performance of some young children and many feebleminded who
energetically pound in each block with their hands.
Vitality
The energy used by different individuals varies from the person
who would break the board if it were at all destructible to the one
whose energy is almost zero. In many cases rate is in direct ratio
to energy. Some individuals have a high rate with no accuracy,
while others are both rapid and accurate workers. With most normal
subjects, except in the case of young children, fatiguability is negli-
gible so far as revealed by this test. Small children and the feeble-
minded often show fatigue and especially when they meet with
repeated failures on successive trials. The health of the subject has,
of course, a great deal to do with the general tone and character of
his performance.
Movement
Control has reference to the degree of success with which the
subject is able to direct and execute his general bodily movements.
Good control requires that the subject accomplish easily and readily
the intended aim of his movements. Coordination is relatively
unmodifiable muscular cooperation, refers to the finer adjustments,
and is used in a more restricted sense than control. Good coordina-
tion insures precision in grasping and handling the blocks. Initiative
has reference to the self-initiated activity of the subject, whether he
is a self-starter or requires urging. Without initiative nothing can
be accomplished. Excess initiative may cause the expenditure of
much energy without compensating success. Dexterity is manual
expertness or readiness and skill in using the hands. Dexterity for
some people is limited to the use of only one hand at a time. This
is the case with most young children. Many adults use both hands
successfully at the same time.
Complexity of responsiveness is rated by the appropriateness of
the movements made in response to the instructions of the examiner.
Poor responsiveness is illustrated by those children who begin to
gather the blocks into their arms, put them into their mouths, try
to drop or throw the blocks into recesses. Vivacity is shown by
ready, animated, and brisk responsiveness.
Attention
Analytic concentration requires that the subject give attention
to the different parts and features of the test individually in such a
158 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
way as to break it up into its component parts and attend to each
separately. It demands an analysis of the situation at the begin-
ning and at its various successive stages. Persistent concentration
requires that the subject give his entire attention to the matter in
hand until it is completed.
Distribution requires that the attention be properly distributed
over the board as a whole or unit, and that no part of the test escape
notice. Poor distribution of attention is exhibited when the child
confines his attention to a restricted area of the board in an attempt
to find the recess for a given block.
Alertness is shown when the child is wide awake and "on the
job." It is the facility with which attention can be awakened and
employed.
When the test makes an appeal to the child and arouses and
holds his involuntary attention, we are dealing with interest. With-
out interest the child may refuse to do the test, may do it as a piece
of drudgery, or as a matter of courtesy to the examiner.
Imagination (general)
Imageability has a very definite influence on formboard ability.
Its innate powers determine the intensity and keenness of an individ-
ual's images. Without imageability this test cannot be worked, for
the subject cannot directly compare block with recess. He must
form an image of the block looked at and then hold it in mind while
looking for the recess which, when found, must be compared with
the image of the block.
Associability refers to the number of discrete things which can
be present in consciousness at one time. It is generally considered
under the caption of memory span. The individual who is able to
hold in consciousness only two or three things at once is at a great
disadvantage and is bound to reveal his limitations.
Associability as the measure of possible complexity determines
to a considerable extent the complexity of imagination, but great
complexity does not necessarily accompany good associability.
Imagination (specific)
For a first class performance on this test the subject must possess
good powers of observation. He must be able, in addition to com-
prehending the test and directions, to employ his attention in such a
manner that nothing escapes his notice and that he is constantly
aware of the success, failure, and particular stage of his progress on
the test. Blocks left out entirely or misplaced and at the end of the
FACTORS INVOLVED IN FORMBOARD TEST. 159
trial still uncorrected, are some of the things which happen with
faulty observation.
Understanding is rated according to the degree of comprehension
with which the subject grasps the directions and works the test.
If he understands what he is to do and then shows that he can do
it, he must be credited with fair understanding.
There is such a difference in the readiness or quickness with
which individuals comprehend what is to be done that it is advisable
to rate quickness of understanding. A mere suggestion or hint is
sufficient to give many the clue, while others must be shown or they
would never be able to work the test.
An individual may show planfulness (1) by attempting a method
in replacing the blocks and reviewing the board systematically in
search of the correct recess when it is not seen at once, and (2) by
removing the blocks in a predetermined order to facilitate replacing
them on the third trial. It is often found very difficult to distin-
guish between an intentional plan and an accidental plan of removing
the blocks, for both look alike and serve the same purpose.
Intelligence is the ability of an individual to solve what for
him is a new problem. (7) The formboard is no more a test of
intelligence than a test of the other factors here listed. In many
performances, perhaps most performances, there is no ground of
inference either for or against the intelligence of the individual.
Perception of form is used as ability to discriminate differences
in shape between different blocks and different recesses, and to
recognize the resemblance between each block and its recess.
Trainability and retentiveness of memory can be only esti-
mated in the majority of cases. Frequently the formboard serves
as an adequate measure, especially of the former. Both are essential
for a normal performance and have a direct bearing on formboard
ability.
Attitude
Adaptability refers to the individual's behavior and bearing in
adjusting, accommodating, and fitting himself in with these new
and changed conditions. Good adaptability requires that the individ-
ual either appear accommodated from the very first or else be able
to adjust himself readily. Some conduct themselves as well as if
coached for the occasion. Others with poor adaptability are out of
harmony with their surroundings.
Assurance is used in much the same sense as self-confidence, the
difference being that confidence is founded on reasoning, while
assurance is largely a matter of feeling. A reasonable degree of posi-
160 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
tiveness or assurance is essential. There is not necessarily, however,
a direct relation between degree of assurance and formboard ability.
An absolute lack of assurance accomplishes nothing. In this case
the child does nothing without encouragement and assent from the
examiner for every move he makes.
The spirit of competition or rivalry is an important contributing
factor, and is rated under the heading of competitiveness. Some
subjects show a very high degree of competitiveness and others a
very low degree.
Painstaking refers to attitude toward or habits of work. It
is characterized by careful attention. The painstaking individual
is scrupulous and faithful in performance. He is dependable and
reliable in the discharge of his duty, i. e. he can be depended upon to
do his best, but his best may be far below the standard for his age
group. He is rated in terms of the faithfulness with which he applies
himself to the best of his ability, not in terms of his ability and not in
terms of the resulting success.
Poise as defined by Sylvester is " ability to work at one's maxi-
mum speed without losing control and getting confused. When a
child in his efforts to place the blocks quickly, over-hurries and gets
flustered so that he makes numerous and inexcusable errors or hesi-
tates in a semi-dazed way, he does so because he is lacking in this
quality which we have chosen to call poise." (4)
Shyness frequently has a definite influence on formboard ability.
When present it should be recognized by the examiner and given its
appropriate rating. An individual capable in other respects may be
shy and on that account make a poor record.
Individuals may approach the test with predetermined ideas
concerning the nature of the test and the conditions under which it
is to be taken. Such ideas, depending on their nature, may hinder
or facilitate the performance and should be rated accordingly under
their appropriate heading, H being used for hinder and F for
facilitate.
Tractability has to do with manageability or the ease with
which the subject is controlled or governed. It takes account of
how he submits to discipline, and refers to his obedience. Surprising
revelations are often made in this short and simple test.
Miscellaneous
The specific nature of the laboratory conditions under which the
test is worked must be taken into consideration in rating a perform-
ance, and should be rated in the same manner as other factors. The
child is not held responsible for poor laboratory conditions, but if
FACTORS INVOLVED IN FORM BOARD TEST. 161
they exist he might reasonably be granted the privilege of registering
a complaint. Good laboratory conditions demand the absence of
all extraordinary stimuli except the formboard.
Two methods may be employed in replacing the blocks. The
child generally picks up a block and then glancing over the board
searches for its recess. Normal children employ this method in
about ninety-nine per cent of the cases. By the other method the
child chooses a recess to be filled, sometimes taking the recesses in a
definite order across the board, and then searches through the pile of
blocks to find the one to fit the recess chosen to be filled next. If he
gets a wrong block, he replaces it in the pile of blocks and resumes
his search for the correct one. This method prolongs a trial and
gives a very bad time record. Frequently these two methods are
used by the same subject, but this latter method is generally used
only in placing one or two blocks. No attempt is made to grade
method, because no satisfactory criterion is available. A record is
kept of which method is used in making the shortest trial.
Imitation is placed under miscellaneous because it, too, cannot
be rated. It should be noted that a child usually imitates to his
own disadvantage, making a worse time record than he would other-
wise. If on the first trial the examiner throws the blocks out into the
tray the child may try to throw them into their recesses instead of
setting them in carefully and firmly. On the second trial he may
try to grasp an entire pile of blocks in one hand as the examiner did
in taking them out. On the third trial he may attempt to remove
the blocks by a mixed arrangement as the examiner did on the
second trial.
Summation Rating
The general attitude or feeling of the examiner toward the
performance as a whole, considered in terms of the impression he
has of what others of the same sex and age do, is graded as impres-
sional rating.
As another basis for summation rating the time of the shortest
of the first three trials according to the standard method is recorded
and compared with the proper chart of distribution. If the record
falls within the limits of its sex and age group, it is located in that
group according to the quintile within which it falls. If a record
lies outside its own group, the individual's formboard ability must
be rated accordingly.
Formboard age is not synonymous with mental age, and is used
only in comparing the formboard ability of children of different
ages. The individual is assigned for his formboard age the^age of
162 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
that group nearest whose median time his record lies. Thus twenty
per cent of thirteen year old boys have a formboard age of less than
ten years.
Competency (social)
This test alone does not enable us to decide definitely and
finally upon the subject's social ability and conformity. If we note
carefully and evaluate correctly the various factors involved and
exhibited, we have evidence Avhich should enable us to make fairly
reliable inferences concerning ability and conformity. We must,
however, not lose sight of the fact that such rating is merely an
estimation and not a measurement. The formboard should give
sufficient indication of the subject's weaknesses and capacities to
enable the examiner to proceed directly to the specific tests necessary
for confirmation. Its usefulness as a test varies directly as the
examiner's ability to interpret and evaluate performances. It is,
therefore, highly important that the test be kept constantly in mind
as a device for learning something about the subject's ability and
conformity.
Explanation of the Ratings of William on Chart 1A.
The formboard test was given William according to the standard
method immediately after his arrival at the Clinic. The only infor-
mation at hand was that he is a boy eight years and one month old.
He was rated by two trained observers according to the method
already described. Both rated this one performance, but made
their ratings independently. In ten factors the grades were exactly
alike, in thirty-five cases the grades fell within the same quintiles,
and in only two instances were the differences more than five points
of the finer grading system. The nearness of the two ratings,
together with facts developed during the remainder of the clinical
examination, evidence the practical usefulness of the chart.
Physical adequacy
He had neither anatomical nor functional defect to interfere
with this test. He appeared as able for it as most boys his age, and
was accordingly given median rating.
Sensitivity
So far as shown by this test he had normal auditory, cutaneous,
and kinesthetic sensations. He appeared to be hindered by poor
sight and grave^suspicion was aroused as to his visual acuity.
CHART 1 A.* ANALYTIC CHART FOR FORMBOARD WITH RATINGS OF WILLIAM.
Name: William. Date:
Sex: Boy.
Age: 8 yr. 1 mo.
School Grade: Special Class.
Physical Adequacy. . . . j Function^
3. Auditory. .
Sensitivity i Visual
'5. Cutaneous.
6. Energy
Vitality J 7-
10. Control
11. Co-ordination.
Movement  Initiative.
13. Dexterity.
Responsiveness  / Complexity. . .
16. Concentration A.
17. " P.
Attention  18. Distribution
21. Imageability.
Imagination (general).. <j 22. Associability.
23. Complexity. .
24. Observation.. ..
25. Understanding..
26. " Q
Imagination (specific).. ?< 27. Planfulness
Memory  J30. Tramability.
31. Retentiveness.
Kinaesthetic.
8. Fatiguability.
9. Health
15. Vivacity.
19. Alertness.
20. Interest. .
28. Intelligence
29. Form Perception.
32. Adaptability. . . .
33. Assurance
34. Competitiveness.
35. Painstaking
Attitude  36. Poise
37. Preperception F.
38. " H.
39. Shyness
40. Tractability
41. Lab. conditions .
Miscellaneous J f?- Method
43. Imitation
44. Shortest trial time ..
45. Formboard ability ..
Summation Rating. ? ? ? \ 46. " age
47. Impressional
Competency (Social)... ( ?? !!!!!
Ratings
Epideictie Hyparctio
3
2-3
2-3
2-3
3-1
3
2-5
3-2
2-3
3-1
3-2
2-3
2-4
3
2-5
2
2-2
3-1
2-4
2
3-4
3-1
3-1
3
2-5
3-1
2
2-5
3-1
3-1
2
3
3
3
4
3
b-r
0
53
2-1
?
2
2-3
3
* It will be observed that the qualities enumerated under the general heads ?Vitality, Movement, Attention,
Imagination, etc., are the same as on Dr. Witmer's diagnostic chart, used at the Psychological Clinic of the Uni-
versity of Pa. See Thb Psychological Clinic, Vol. IX, No. 8, Jan., 1916, p. 229.
164 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Vitality
Both energy and rate were distinctly below that employed by
the ordinary eight year old boy. They were so far below and used
in such a way that both examiners rated him as unable to employ
as much energy, even at his best, as an eight year old ordinarily uses.
As is shown by a rating of three from both examiners, nothing
unusual was noted concerning his fatiguability and health. He thus
falls far below normal in vitality.
Movement
His control is better than his energy and rate. His coordination
is better than his control, and is, in fact, good enough for his age.
His initiative is considerably below normal and falls far short of that
generally exhibited by boys of his age. Boys of his age normally
use more than he could possibly muster up. He showed low normal
dexterity for his age. The complexity of his responses was as good
as need be and was not responsible for his poor record. His epideictic
vivacity was very low.
Attention
His epideictic analytic concentration, distribution of attention,
and interest were distinctly low. Alertness was given a low hyparctic
rating. The persistence of his attention was sufficient for his age.
Imagination (general)
There is a question as to where he should be rated on imageabil-
ity. The evidence is strongly in favor of putting him entirely below
his age group. About associability there is no question, for in it he
is distinctly poor. That the low hyparctic rating of associability
here is justified, was proven later by the fact that he has a memory
span for only three digits. Complexity of imagination is also on the
borderline.
Imagination (specific)
His observation was scarcely as good as it should be for an eight
year old boy. In understanding and quickness of understanding he
comes within the lower limits of his age group. His poor perform-
ance was thus not entirely due to inability to comprehend the task.
His planfulness was about on a par with his understanding. His
intelligence was not put to any great test, but so far as revealed was
scarcely of as high grade as it should be. His perception of form was
good enough to enable him to perform the test at a greater rate.
FACTORS INVOLVED IN FORMBOARD TEST. 165
The fact that he confused some of the blocks may have been due to
poor vision, inadequate space perception or poorly directed attention.
In trainability and retentiveness he fell distinctly below the per-
formance level of his sex and age group.
Attitude
In adaptability and assurance he comes within the lower limits
of his age group. Lack of the spirit of rivalry or competitiveness
characterized his whole performance. He did not hurry or work
with a winning spirit. So far as painstaking, poise, and shyness were
involved, there was nothing unusual. They did not tend to give
him a bad record. The highest rating in any factor is in tractability.
Miscellaneous
The laboratory conditions were satisfactory. There were no
important disturbing factors and nothing in them to give an excuse
for his poor performance. His method was to find the recess for a
block after picking it up. This is the best method. He did not
imitate. His shortest trial time record was 53 seconds.
Summation Rating
His time record is much longer than that of any normal eight
year old boy. His formboard ability is very low. It is just about
that of a four year old child. His performance impressed one as
very bad, even when not carefully analyzed.
William was rated distinctly low in ability by both examiners.
This rating for his age is virtually a diagnosis of feeblemindedness.
His conformity was considered good enough for a lad of his age and
was assigned the median rating of three. The ratings in ability and
conformity are merely inferences based on the evidence obtained
from this one performance and are not offered as final diagnoses.
In less than an hour after the above ratings were completed,
William was given a careful clinical examination. He was again
given three trials on the formboard by the standard method, but
succeeded in reducing his time only two seconds, from 53 to 51 sec-
onds. His performance was but little better than on the first three
trials. His memory span was found to be limited to three digits.
Other details of the examination cannot be given here, but it is of
interest to note that he was diagnosed as an idio-imbecile, custodial
case, due to developmental degeneracy of intra-uterine origin.
Ratings and Diagnosis of Mary.
Owing to the lengthy descriptions of the chart already given,
it is unnecessary to give a detailed description of the ratings of
CHART 1 B. ANALYTIC CHART FOR FORMBOARD WITH RATINGS OF MARY.
Name: Mary. Date:
Sex: Girl.
Age: 10 yr. 4 mo.
School Grade: Special Class.
Physical Adequacy. . . . j
Sensitivity j
Vitality J
Movement
Responsiveness.
Attention
Imagination (general)..
Imagination (specific)..
Memory
Attitude.
Miscellaneous.
Summation Rating. . .. |
Competency (Social)... j
1. Anatomical.
2. Functional.
3. Auditory
4. Visual
5. Cutaneous. .
Kinaesthetic.
6. Energy
7. Rate
8. Fatiguability
9. Health
10. Control
11. Co-ordination.
12. Initiative. . . .
13. Dexterity. .. .
'14. Complexity. .
15. Vivacity
16. Concentration A.
17. " P.
18. Distribution
19. Alertness
20. Interest
21. Imageability.
22. Associability.
23. Complexity. ,
24. Observation
25. Understanding. .
26. " Q.
27. Planfulness
28. Intelligence
29. Form Perception.
f30. Trainability
131. Retentiveness....
32. Adaptability. . . .
33. Assurance
34. Competitiveness.
35. Painstaking
36. Poise
37. Preperception F.
38. " H.
39. Shyness
40. Tractability
41. Lab. conditions
42. Method
43. Imitation
44. Shortest trial time..
45. Formboard ability .
46. " age
47. Impressional
48. Ability
49. Conformity
Epideictic Hyparctic
3
3-1
3
2-3
2-5
2-3
3
3
2-4
2-3
3-1
3-1-
2-5
3-1
2-2
2-2
2-4
2-3
2-3
2-5
2-3
2-3
2-1
2-3
2-3
2
2
2-1
2-1
2-1
2-2
2-5
2-1
2-1
3
3
2-4
3-1
b-r
0
140
1
3(?)
2
2-3
3
\ . I
FACTORS INVOLVED IN FORM BOARD TEST. 167
Mary. Her ratings are included because some of them stand in
marked contrast with those of William. Reference to the chart should
give a fair clinical picture of her performance. The only information
available concerning Maiy at the time she was given this test, was
that she was a girl ten years and four months old. This same after-
noon she was given a thorough mental examination and the follow-
ing diagnosis was made: "Cerebropathy leading to imbecility and
slight spastic paraplegia: an idio-imbecile (Barr classification)."
The ratings of a normal child are not given, because they show
so little variation from the median that we can do no better than
give them a normal or medium rating in most of the factors. In one
or two of the factors there is generally sufficient variation to require
a rating slightly above or below the median, but nearly always
coming within the age group.
BIBLIOGRAPHY.
1. Goddard, H. H. The Fonnboard as a measure of intellectual develop-
ment in children. Reprint from The Training School {Bulletin), 1912, 9, 49-52.
2. Norsworthy, N. Psychology of mentally deficient children. Colum-
bia University Cont. to Philos. and Psychol., 1906. Pp. 111.
3. Pintner, Rudolph, and Patterson, Donald C. The Formboard ability
of young deaf and hearing children. The Psychol. Clinic, 1916, 9, 234-237.
4. Sylvester, Reuel Hull. The Formboard test. Psychol. Review
Monographs, Vol. XV, No. 4, Sept., 1913, Whole No. 65. Princeton, N. J.:
Psychol. Review Co. Pp. 56.
5. Wallin, J. E. W. Human efficiency. Ped. Sern., 1911, 18, 74-84.
6. Witmer, Lightner. Courses in psychology at the summer school of
the University of Pennsylvania. The Psychol. Clinic, 1910-1911, 4, 247 and
249.
7 . . On the Relation of intelligence to efficiency. The
Psychol. Clinic, 1915, 9, 61-86.
8. Young, Herman H. The Witmer formboard. The Psychol. Clinic,
1916, 10, 93-111.
