The Social Aspect of an Experiment with Retarded Children
==========================================================

By Lillian M. TobiN,
Special Teacher of Retarded Children, Talcott School,
Chicago, Illinois.
In all schools are found children who do not "fit in" with the
regular work. They are unresponsive; cannot work in groups;
are irritable or over-sensitive; will not play, rather brood in corners;
are hostile to society. Sometimes they show a tendency to damaga
things or torment animals or their companions.
They are individualistic. Every command must be given
separately to them. They will not listen unless directly addressed;
and will not respond. The result is that either their undirected
energy takes the form of mischief and they become incorrigible, or
they shrink back into themselves and become apathetic, sitting in
their places with no interest, but conscious of the indifference of
their companions.
If such children are allowed to remain indefinitely in the regular
grades, it will mean years of unsatisfactory work and annoyance
for the teachers; years of handicapping for the pupils of average
ability, and years of stunting physically and mentally for the re-
tarded children themselves.
The fact that these children have heretofore made up from 12
to 30 per cent of our criminal class is a sufficient argument that
something should be done to make them less anti-social. It is
unquestionable that the establishment of special forms of instruc-
tion for these children is "not only a humanitarian duty but a social
necessity."
Eight years ago in one of the Chicago schools a special room
was organized for such pupils, with the writer in charge. The
room was equipped with chairs and tables of different sizes; manual
training benches and tools; looms; a piano; materials for hand-
work of different kinds; large space for free plays and games. More-
over the children were allowed the use of gymnasium, baths, garden
space, etc.
The curriculum was arranged with the following underlying
principles in mind:
1. To make the children strong, healthy, happy.
2. To develop a wider range of social activities.
3. To train them to a better adjustment to environment.
(266)
EXPERIMENT WITH RETARDED CHILDREN. 267
In short, to make them better social beings; to render them if
possible capable of contributing to their own support and managing
their own affairs.
The program was arranged as follows: three-fifths of the time
was given to handwork and physical work; two-fifths of the time
to academic work. The handwork included basketry, weaving,
woodwork, sewing, crocheting, drawing, clay modeling, book-bind-
ing. The physical work consisted of free plays and games, cor-
rective work, baths, gardening. Music included singing and
rhythmic exercises of all kinds.
The academic work comprised numbers introduced through
plays and games; language, reading and writing.
The child's relationship to the school is always emphasized.
He is made to feel that he is not an isolated individual but a mem-
ber of the school, with the same privileges and also the same re-
sponsibilities as the other members.
These children attend the song festivals with the others; use
the gymnasium in their turn; have their captains to direct the
ranks; their own ball teams; their own garden.
In December and June we have a display of handwork made
during the j^ear and the other children come to see it. This helps
to develop self-respect, and also the feeling that the child is a part
of the school.
The sense of individual responsibility is secured by joint work.
The entire class helped to make some picture frames for the school;
one sawed the moulding, others filed, still others stained and polished,
so that each one had a hand in the work and each one felt a personal
responsibility in its success. Again, all the boys worked together
to make a large doll's bed, and the girls made the mattress, bed
clothes, and doll clothes.
In the garden they made fertilizer to improve the poor soil,
planted bushes, sowed seeds and cut the grass. Each one had his
bush which he planted, but all were responsible for making our
garden look as well as the other gardens. When our garden was in
good shape, we helped in the gardens of others who had not so much
time.
Holiday functions and other occasional incidental parties help
to promote the social spirit. These children, when development
begins, are strongly imitative and highly suggestible and these
qualities have been used in influencing them. The discipline has
been effected by depriving the offender of participation in the games
and holiday functions. It has proved sufficient.
268 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The following are some of the striking cases of social gain:
(a) A boy in school in the first grade for two years. He never
spoke a word; would not walk across the room without being
pushed; when outside he stood up against the building and hung
his head. At one time he was recommended for exclusion. In the
special room he failed to respond in any way at first. One day after
school, when he was sure all the others had gone, he answered yes
and no by nodding his head. A few days afterward he answered
almost inaudibly, yes and no to questions. The next step was to
get him to do this in the presence of the other children, which he
did after a few days more. Next he ran and caught a ball when his
"number" was called; then threw the ball ancd called someone
else's number, etc., etc. After six months in the special room, he
talked to the other children, played with them, ran errands, rang
the school bell, and did some good handwork. He learned to read
a few sentences and to write his name, in fact took part in all the
activities of the room.
Every month or so he would have lapses into his old habits and
refuse to respond for perhaps a day or two, and then would react
again. It is five months now since he has lapsed, and he is improving
in every way.
(b) A boy was brought by his mother and sister to be examined.
He was large for his age, had no ability in reading or writing, and no
experience in handwork. He had broken into a school building
and was to be brought before the Juvenile Court. The parents
did not want the case taken before the judge and it was recommended
that he be tried in some branch of the public schools that would be
likely to catch his interest and train him.
He was fourteen years old and pretty large, and had to begin
to read in the primer. For the first few days he felt rather awkward,
but later in one of our ball games, when he got the ball into the
basket forty-eight out of fifty times, and still later in a competition
with the sixth grade when none of them could approximate his
score, he not only began to develop a feeling of self confidence, but
was- the acknowledged leader in the room. His improvement was
rapid. He was undoubtedly a model pupil. He remained in the
room with us only a year and a half, and in that time he completed
the first, second, and third grade work besides doing some good
handwork. Repeated letters were received from the parents ex-
pressing their gratification at the change in the boy. He received a
labor certificate and his uncle took him into his office in the Board
of Trade. The last I heard of him he was making good.
This was a striking case of social gain considering the fact that
EXPERIMENT WITH RETARDED CHILDREN. 269
the boy was fourteen years of age when he came to us, and remained
with us only a year and a half.
(c) A boy was considered too low a case for the public schools.
The parents were at a loss what to do with him. He tormented them
and hurt his little sister if left alone with her. He seemed to possess
a number of cruel traits. At one time he was in an institution for
feebleminded children.
After some private tutoring he developed better coordination
and was admitted to the special center. He has been with us six
months. He runs and plays with the others, has learned to use his
hands and make things; is interested, attentive, and can write a
little. The parents say he has an entirely different attitude at home.
From being destructive his habits are becoming constructive. The
sister is no longer afraid of him. They play together and occasion-
ally have been left alone together with good results. The improve-
ment seems slight from the school standpoint, but the parents are
overjoyed. They live two miles from the school and the mother
has to bring the boy to school in the morning, and the father calls
for him in the afternoon, yet they are anxious to do it and in constant
fear of his exclusion.
The avenues of approach and development in the handling of
these retarded children are numerous. In the present article only
one phase of the problem,?namely, the social phase,?has been
considered.
The writer has kept a record of the history of the children who
have left her division during the years 1907 to 1914, and the tables
herewith submitted may be of interest at this time.
I.
Number admitted.
Left to go to Parochial School
Transferred to other public schools.
Died
Left city
Number actually treated
Boys
74
14
14
1
3
42
Girls
36
2
6
1
1
26
Total
110
16
20
2
4
68
Per Cent
of Total
14.5
18.1
1.8
3.6
61.9
270 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
II.
Number actually treated.
Excluded, for low mentality
Returned to grades and remained in
school
Returned to grades and left soon after:
(a) Working:
delivery boy
on truck
can factory
peddler
piano factory
candy factory
(b) Staying at home
(c) Transferred to other schools
(<d) Left city
(e) No information
Total
Returned to grade and failed to make
good
Left special room for various reasons:
(a) Staying at home
(b) Working:
office boy
nurse girl
(c) Working occasionally
(d) Worked a while, then married
Total
Boys
42
11
7
2
2
0
1
0
0
2
2
1
6
16
Girls
26
Total
68
18
13
2
2
1
1
1
1
6
2
1
6
23
1
3
2
1
11
PerCent
op Total
26.5
19.1
33.9
4.4
16.1
