Correlation of the Witmer Formboard and Cylinder Test
=======================================================

By Mary Hoover Young,
Graduate Student, University of Pennsylvania.
In the spring of 1915, the cylinder test was given by two advanced
graduate students in psychology to 47 men and 28 women undergraduates in Psychology 2c at the University of Pennsylvania. The
following fall, this same test as well as the Witmer formboard was
given by advanced students in psychology to 55 men and 59 women
undergraduates in Psychology lc. These tests were employed to
give the students an insight into mental testing, and to begin the accumulation of data with the view of establishing norms for adults.
As such tests come in the group generally known as mechanical or
manual tests it has seemed advisable to treat them together.
The cylinder test consists of eighteen wooden cylinders of
graduated depth and diameter, modelled after the larger Montessori
insets with duplications omitted, and fitted into eighteen cylindrical
recesses set in a circular wooden frame. The experimenter removed
the cylinders in the presence of the subject by beginning with the
smaller blocks and lastly placing the larger blocks on the top of the
pile in the inner space of the cylinder board. The subject was then
told to replace the blocks as quickly as possible. The time was
taken to fifths of a second by means of a stop watch from the moment
the subject touched the first block until the last one was correctly
replaced. Each subject was given three trials by the same method
in as rapid succession as possible. The shortest trial time is taken
as the index of the subject's cylinder ability.
TABLE I. NUMBER OF CASES AND TIME VALUES IN SECONDS?CYLINDER TEST.
Number of subjects.
Mean
Standard deviation.
Minimum
Lower quartile
Median
Upper quartile
Maximum
Min
2c
47
32.1
5.86
17.8
29.0
31.4
36.0
54.0
lc
55
34.9
7.67
22.0
29.0
34.0 ?
39.0
60.0
(112)
Combined
102
33.6
7.21
17.8
29.0
33.0
38.0
60.0
Women
2c
28
35.5
6.39
18.4
33.2
36.6
39.2
47.4
lc
59
35.0
7.89
21.0
29.0
33.0
41.0
57.0
Combined
87
35.2
7.34
18.4
30.0
34.0
38.0
57.0
CORRELATION OF THE WITMER FORM BOARD. 113
Table I contains the results of the cylinder test for both classes.
The first column of figures contains the time values for the men in
Psychology 2c; the second, for the men in Psychology lc; the third
the combined results for the men of both classes; the fourth, the
time values for the women in Psychology 2c; the fifth, for the
women in Psychology lc; and the sixth or last, the combined results
for the women of both classes. In explanation of the meaning of
the time values given in the table, it may be stated that the mean
is the average time for the group; the standard deviation indicates
variability and the reliability of the mean; the minimum is the
shortest time record of the group; the lower quartile is that record
below which twenty-five per cent of the cases fall; the median is
that record above and below which fifty per cent of the cases occur;
the upper quartile is that record above which the highest twentyfive per cent of the cases occur; and the maximum is the highest or
longest time record of the group.
Reference to table I shows that there is a close agreement
between the results for the two classes, and that the standard deviations are fairly constant. It would thus appear that the record
for either of these groups is fairly representative of what could be
expected of all similar groups. On the whole there is a tendency
for the men to be superior to the women on this test.
The students of Psychology lc were tested on the Witmer formboard by the standard method described by Mr. Young in the present
issue of The Psychological Clinic. Each student was given three
trials according to the standard method, and the shortest trial was
taken as the index of his formboard ability. Immediately after
these three regular trials were completed, the subject was given a
fourth trial in which he was required to keep his eyes closed during
the time the blocks were being removed by the experimenter, and
TABLE II. NUMBER OF CASES AND TIME VALUES IN SECONDS?FORMBOARD.
Number of subjects.
Mean
Standard deviation.
Minimum
Lower quartile.
Median
Upper quartile
Maximum
Mbn
Standard
Method
55
11.8
2.72
7.4
9.8
11.2
14.0
20.0
Eyes
Closed
55
156.0
83.94
49.0
90.0
134.0
184.0
447.0
Women
Standard
Method
59
12.6
2.81
6.0
10.8
12.0
14.6
20.4
Eyes
Closed
59
152.0
97.62
49.0
80.0
119.0
185.0
499.0
114 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
while he himself replaced them. The time was taken in seconds by
means of a stop watch from the moment the subject touched the first
block until the last one was correctly replaced.
Table II includes the results of the undergraduate students in
Psychology lc on the Witmer formboard. The first column of
figures contains the time values for the men tested by the standard
method; the second column, for the men tested with the eyes closed;
the third column, for the women tested by the standard method;
and the fourth or last column, for the women tested with the eyes
closed. The time values in table II have the same significance for
their respective groups as those in table I. By the standard method
the men are slightly superior to the women in formboard ability, but
with the eyes closed the reverse is true.
The standard deviation is relatively much larger where the
formboard is worked with the eyes closed than where it is worked
by the standard method. The large standard deviation in the former
case is apparently due to the fact that in a few cases an unusually
long time was required to complete the test. Such a distribution is
to be expected, for while there is a minimum time below which the
test cannot be worked, there is not such an upper limit. For the men
the difference between the median and maximum is 3.7 times that
between the median and minimum, while for the Avomen the difference between the median and maximum is 5.4 times that between
the median and the minimum.
The formboard worked by the standard method gives results
which lie within a narrower range of distribution than the results
for the cylinder test, while the formboard worked with the eyes
closed gives a much wider range of distribution than either of the
above mentioned tests. The minimum record for the cylinder test
is several seconds below the maximum record for the formboard
worked by the standard method, while the maximum record of the
cylinder test is only several seconds above the minimum record of
the formboard worked with the eyes closed. From this it is readily
seen that most of the time records of the cylinder test lie between the
maximum formboard record obtained by the standard method and
the minimum formboard records obtained with the eyes closed.
Just what the significance of these differences is has not been determined, but it is certain that they indicate the varying difficulties of
the tests. These three tests represent a series of progressive difficulties; the formboard worked by the standard method is a simple
test, the cylinder test is a stage higher in difficulty, while the formboard worked with the eyes closed makes a very difficult test, because
the individual is facing a new problem and feels himself in a strange
environment.
CORRELATION OF THE WITHER FORM BOARD. 115
Since three trials were used in working these tests, it would
naturally be expected that the majority of the best records would
occur on the third trial, for here practice would tend to shorten the
time. The percentage of cases where the best records occurred on
the first, second, and third trials respectively, was determined.
TABLE III. DISTRIBUTION OF SHORTEST TRIAL TIME RECORDS.
Trial.
Formboard.
Cylinders. .
Men
2%
7%
11%
34%
87%
59%
Women
14%
7%
10%
33%
76%
60%
Table III shows these percentages for both the men and the
women in working the cylinder test and the formboard by the standard method. Thus 11 per cent of the men made their best record
on the second trial of the formboard, and 34 per cent made their
best record on the second trial of the cylinder test.
Since it is the general assumption that the different mechanical
or manual tests, such as these, test the same factors or qualities in
an individual, it would be only natural to expect that success on the
one would mean success on the other. In reading over the present
literature we find the formboard listed as a test of powers of recognition, discrimination,- memory, muscular co-ordination, and trainability by some clinicians, while others consider it a test of form
perception, rate of movement, and ability to meet a new situation,
and still others use it as a test of constructive capacity, intellectual
ability, or so-called general intelligence. From casual observation,
although the cylinder test is more difficult, it would appear to test
the same factors. Such tests as the formboard are generally considered simple and are supposed to involve only a few of the simpler
mental processes. On this account they are generally referred to as
mechanical or manual tests. If these tests were simple and involved
the same factors they should show a high correlation. To determine
the facts of the case, a correlation was worked out between the
results obtained from each test.
From the class in Psychology lc in the fall of 1915, 55 undergraduate men and 59 undergraduate women took the formboard
test by the standard method and with the eyes closed during one
recitation. The following recitation the same students took the
cylinder test. These tests were not given as group tests. Each
individual was tested by himself so that no student saw any other
work the tests. The results are presented in the preceding tables
116 * THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
and are here correlated by Pearson's product moment method of
correlation. Table IV gives these correlations.
TABLE IV. CORRELATION.
Correlation between:
Cylinders and Formboard by the Standard Method.
" " " with the eyes closed
Formboard; Standard Method and eyes closed
Men
+0.466
+0.570
-0.008
. Women
+0.067
+0.186
+0.415
These correlations are scarcely what one would have expected
from such apparently closely allied tests. In no instance is there
a high correlation. Just as interesting as the lack of a high correlation, is the fact that there is no agreement in correlation between
the sexes. A significant correlation between two tests for the one
sex does not accompany an equally significant correlation between
the same tests for the other sex. Thus the cylinder test and the
formboard by the standard method which give the positive medium
correlation of 0.466 for the men, have the very low positive correlation of 0.067 for the women. Then the formboard by the standard
method and the eyes closed, which gives the insignificant negative
correlation of 0.008 for the men, has the positive medium correlation
of 0.415 for the women.
Assuming that the number of cases presented is sufficient to
give fairly reliable results, what are we to conclude about the above
tests? It does not appear that they are as simple as is generally
assumed, and furthermore it does not appear that they test the same
mental factors. The formboard worked with the eyes open and
with the eyes closed gives two distinctly different sets of results for
the men, while for the women it seems to set more nearly the
same problem. The reverse is true for the cylinder test and the formboard by the standard method. They appear to set somewhat the
same problem for the men, but different problems for the women.
There appears to be sufficient evidence to conclude that each of
these tests sets a different problem for each of the two sexes, and
tests different factors in each. If this is true, success on the formboard by the standard method means one thing for a man and a very
different thing for a woman. This may help to explain why different
investigators use the same test in approximately the same manner
to test very different factors. They consider the test to be simpler
than it really is, and thereby stress one phase to the neglect of others
of probably equal importance. The sex differences here demonstrated deserve further investigation and indicate the need of further
analysis of performances and of more careful interpretations.
