Congenital Aphasia and Feeblemindedness? A Clinical Diagnosis.1
=================================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1910, by Lightnor Witmer, Editor.
Vol. X, No. 7
December 15, 1910

By Lightner Witmer, Ph.D., y
University of Pennsylvania.
As he appeared before the class, Arthur was a well-nourished boy of nearly
eleven, good looking, neatly dressed, and respectful in manner. He sat quietly at
the table while doing the formboard and cylinder tests. He used his right hand
only, keeping the left under the table. As the demonstration proceeded, his
gentleness and stillness became more marked. He was apparently a sturdy boy,
not particularly shy, and not awkward. Yet his behavior during the hour made
an impression of unusual quietness for a healthy boy. It was something like the
behavior of an animal who has been severely frightened, and who had acquired
the habit of going softly to escape notice. His record confirmed this impression
by a history of brutal treatment when a little child. This afternoon he quite
evidently found nothing to be afraid of. From time to time he smiled up at Dr.
Witmer, and co-operated willingly. There was nothing to suggest an eye defect.
Hearing as well as vision was apparently normal.
Today his best time on the Witmer formboard was 15 seconds. When first
examined at the Clinic a few days before, his best record was 20 seconds. Then
he did the Witmer cylinders in 52 seconds. Today he did them in 45 seconds, and
again in 49 seconds. He did this kind of work very well, using trial and error
method to some extent, but performing the test mainly by the exercise of a high
degree of distributed attention and space perception. He noticed instantly if
a cylinder was too long or too short for its socket, taking it out and putting it in
the right place, which he found quickly by looking for it. As far as concerns
this kind of test, he "looks" very efficiently.
Dr. Witmer asked him to write his name on the blackboard, and his age.
Arthur wrote his name and the number 10.
Q. Ten? Ten what? Arthur made no answer.
Q. When I ask you how old you are, what do you answer? A. Ten years old.
Q. You write years then. Do you know how to write it? Do you know
what begins it? Now I will tell you how to spell it, but don't put anything down
there until I finish. You spell it, y-e-a-r-s, write that.
After some hesitation Arthur wrote y, then stopped. Dr. Witmer had him
come to the further edge of the blackboard and write the letters s, r, a, and e,
1A clinical lecture delivered to undergraduates in Psychology 2C on March 23, 1916, and reported by
A, Travis, Recorder of the Psychological Clinic. The boy's name is fictitious.
(181)
182 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
one under another. Arthur wrote them correctly; then Dr. Witmer rubbed
them out.
Q. Now what was the word you were to write on the board? A. Years.
Q. And I told you it began with a y, and you put the word on the board.
Now put down the rest of the word years.
Arthur hesitatingly added an s to the y, and stopped again.
Q. What's the second letter you have got there? S? All right, y-s. Do
you know any word that you spell y-s? Don't know any such word? Then
why did you put that down? Can you guess how the word years is spelled,?
years, ten years (pronouncing it very slowly with the full sound of each letter).
Can you guess how that is spelled? Can't guess at all? Now I'll tell you once
more how it is spelled? You rub out what you have down there. That word is
spelled y-e-a-r-s, years.
Arthur wrote ye, and stopped again.
Q. Y-e, now what was the next letter that I told you? Arthur could not tell.
To the class Dr. Witmer said,?Now observe that that word has five letters
in it. He knows how to make each one of the five letters, so that it isn't that
he doesn't know the letter and can't write it down; but if you give him five
letters in succession, he is not able to repeat them in the same order. That is a
memory span test, and my demonstration today has the object of showing you
the importance of the memory span. The memory span is fundamental in school
work. Now we will see if we can find out something about Arthur's memory span.
Q. Do you know how to spell the word cat? All right, put that down.
Arthur wrote it on the board, and also the word dog from dictation.
Q. Eight, can you spell horse?
He wrote ho, and then paused.
Q. All right, you can't spell that, very good. Can you spell desk7
Again Arthur wrote the first two letters of the word, and paused.
Q. Can you spell girl? Try girl, write it down.
Arthur wrote gar, and stopped. While writing he fumbled with his left hand
toward the eraser and loose pieces of chalk at the bottom of the blackboard, a
clear betrayal of his state of uncertainty.
Q. Can you spell cow? Right. Can you spell boy f
He wrote bog, rubbed it out, wrote b, and then stopped.
Q. That's very good. Now I'm going to tell you the spellings of some words.
Boy is b-o-y, write it down.
Arthur wrote bay.
Q. What have you put on the board? Did you put b-o-y on the board?
You have got b-a-y. I want b-o-y. Right. Now write g-i-r-1.
Arthur innocently wrote goil, to the uproarious amusement of the class, and
looked around in wonder to see what they were all laughing about.
Q. Do you remember the spelling I gave you? I will spell it again for you,
g-i-r-1.
This time he wrote giol.
Q. What did I say? Girl? I know, but how did I spell it? You write girl.
At last Arthur got it right.
Q. That's good. Now you can write desk. You write it. Let me see you
write desk. Write on the board d-e-s-k. That's right. Can you write the word
horse? Can't do that, can you? Know how to spell that? Now you write on
the board what I tell you, h-o-r-s-e.
Arthur wrote hose, omitting the r.
CONGENITAL APHASIA AND FEEBLEMINDEDNESS. 183
Q. What's that word, spell it, h-o-s-e? What does h-o-s-e spell? What
was the word that I spelled for you a short time ago, the whole word? A. Desk.
Q. Desk was one word, but what was the word you were trying to put on the
board now? A. Horse.
Q. Yes, that was the word, horse. Know what a horse is? A. Animal.
Q. Animal, yes. Seen one today? What color was it? A. Brown.
Q. Now horse is spelled h-o-r-s-e. Try it again.
Arthur got it right on the second attempt.
Q. Can you spell teacher? We'll try a shorter one, crowd. Do you know
what crowd means? What does it mean, "the place is crowded"?
A. Can't get no more in.
Q. That's right, we are just laughing because you have got it right. Now
you spell the word crowd, c-r-o-w-d. Go ahead, put that down.
Arthur wrote cowd, omitting the r, as he had done in horse.
Q. Now let's try some easy words. Put beg on the board.
He wrote deg, but when asked what he had written, repeated beg.
Q. Yes, what have you put down there? Is that b, the first letter? That's
a d. Write cart. That's right. Write thank.
Arthur wrote th, stopped and stood looking up at it. As usual he had written
as far up on the board as he could possibly reach.
Q. Now listen again, thank. What have you? You have t-h-e-n-k. What
did I tell you to write? Is that what I told you to write?
Arthur thought it was, and Dr. Witmer did not press him further.
Q. Put down a few numbers for me. Put down 1, 2, 3. Right. Put down
9, 5, 8. Right.
Arthur wrote the numbers as he did the separate letters, one below another
in a vertical column. For 7, 3, 9, 2, he wrote 7932; for 8, 4, 6, 1, he wrote 8642.
Series of three numbers, as 9, 4, 2, and 8, 5, 7, he wrote correctly. For 7, 4, 8,
3, he wrote 7432.
Turning again to the class Dr. Witmer continued,?Now you see here a very
limited memory span, and you get the distinction between intelligence and certain
other qualities which are necessary for intellectual development. I haven't been
able to produce any evidence this afternoon that this boy has a memory span of
more than three. He has a memory span which seems adequate for three, but not
for four digits or letters. Now the first time he did the Healy completion test,
he put all the blocks in the right places. That is a test of imagination, a test to
show what sort of images he has, what ideas he has. In the same way I gave him
a completion test when I asked him what horse meant, and he answered all right.
The test here is mainly in the reasons that are given, first the correctness and
then the reasons. He gave good answers for all his placements, and that is a
test which is sometimes not satisfactorily performed by twelve-year-old children.
Handing Arthur a second grade reader, Dr. Witmer said,?There, can you
read this? Arthur spelled out the word who, and read the next two words without
spelling, "Who is it,?" and paused to rub his eye. As his eyes are all right, this
was evidently a ruse to gain time.
Q. What's the next word? Spell it. A. C-o-m-e-s.
Q. What does that spell? C-o-m-e-s, that spells comes. "Who is it comes,"
what is the next word? A. W-i-t-h.
Q. What does that spell? With, "who is it comes with his,"??
A. R-e-i-n (then he stopped).
Q. What's the rest of the word? A. D-e-e-r.
184 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Q. What's that? Reindeer. Who does come with his reindeer?
A. Santa Claus.
Q. Santa Claus, yes. What's the next word, spell it.
By dint of spelling and prompting, Arthur was pulled through the first
sentence, "Who is it comes with his reindeer over the ice and snow, with a sleigh
just full of good things?" After reading the next sentence, a very short one,?
"Tell me if you know," he was asked to repeat the first sentence, but had to be
prompted on three words, omitted one entirely, and miscalled two or three others.
Dr. Witmer commented,?There you get an idea of his retentiveness.
Q. How much are 2 and 2? A. Four.
Q. How much are 3 and 4? A. Eight.
Q. How much are 5 and 6? A. Eleven.
Q. How much are 3 and 4? A. Seven.
Q. How much are twice 11, 2 times 11? A. Twenty-three.
Q. How much are 3 times 5. A. Fifteen.
Q. How much are 3 times 7? A. (After a long pause) twenty-one.
Q. Do you go to school? A. Yes.
Q. What grade are you in? A. Second grade A.
Q. What day of the week is this? A. Tuesday. (It happened to be
Thursday.)
Q. What day was yesterday? A. Monday.
Q. And the day before? A. Sunday.
Q. What day will tomorrow be? A. Wednesday.
Q. And the day after that? A. Thursday.
Q. What day do you think tomorrow will be? A. Wednesday.
Q. Tomorrow you think will be Wednesday. What day in the week do you
have no school? A. Sunday and Saturday.
Q. Did you go to school yesterday? A. Yes.
Q. Did you go the day before that? A. No.
Q. You didn't go then? Now you see, if you say it, stick to it. Would
you be surprised if I told you it was Thursday? Would you? (Arthur shook his
head.)
Q. You wouldn't be surprised. Would you believe me if I told you it was
Thursday? (Again Arthur shook his head, while the class laughed.) You
wouldn't? What day do you think this is? A. Tuesday.
Q. Would you believe it was Thursday if all these people in the room said it?
(Arthur shook his head with a sweet but firm determination.) You wouldn't?
There you see, we are all in the same class.
Arthur was now released from further examination, and returned Dr. Witmer's "good-bye" with a pleasant smile. Proceeding with his lecture, Dr.
Witmer said:
I want to give you some facts. This boy, Arthur, is ten years
and eight months old, nearly eleven years old. He told you he was
in the second grade A, which is the first half of the second grade.
Consequently he is backward in school progress. That is what we
would call true backwardness, pedagogical backwardness. It is
retardation on the education scale. He is nearly eleven years old.
He ought to be at least in the fourth grade, so that he shows at least
two and perhaps we ought to say three years of backwardness. Now
CONGENITAL APHASIA AND FEEBLEMINDEDNESS. 185
the question is, has he just gone to school? He might be a foreigner,
just imported from the other side. Our record shows that he was five
terms in the first grade, and this is his third term in the second grade.
He has been going to school eight terms, that is four years, and this
will be the end of his fourth year. He ought to be in the fourth
grade B, if he had been promoted each year. Instead of that, he is
only in the second grade. Here is a record of very considerable
backwardness.
Now I have told you there are certain scales1 upon which we rate
performances. There are the growth scales, first of all, and there are
the culture scales. For the growth scales we have species and age.
You have observed this boy physically. He appears like a normal
ten or eleven-year-old boy. There is no physical retardation observable in his structure. We observe in his behavior here, the way he
handles these mechanical tests, no physiological retardation, he has
good control over his muscles, and so on. There is no reason, therefore, to think that on the age scale he is backward. On the species
scale, so far as his appearance and behavior go, there is nothing out
of the way. He is a well-behaved boy. There is nothing unusual
about him, excepting this inability to learn, so that on the species
scale we would consider him just an ordinary normal boy.
To get where he belongs on the age scale mentally, his mental
age, we make certain examinations here. One interesting question
is,?is this backwardness? He is now in the second A, but this may
be due to the fact that he hasn't been properly taught. He has been
four years in a Philadelphia public school, but we must not assume
that he has been properly taught. Has it been his fault, or the fault
of the teachers he has had, that he has been able to spend several
years in those grades? We tried him here in reading, spelling, and a
little arithmetic. You got enough evidence, you saw enough of his
performance, to make up your mind that there is something the
matter with the boy. We can tentatively eliminate poor teaching,
and say there is something the matter with this boy, and address
ourselves to the question, what is the matter? We can ask ourselves
where he is in his school age. Certainly, so far as school progress
is concerned, he has done only the work of the first grade. You can
see he isn't fit to be advanced to the second half of the second school
year. In very nearly four years he has succeeded in getting ahead
not more than one year. He is doing work which many six-year-old
children are doing better than he can do it today. As far as our
1 Witmer, Lightner. On the Relation of Intelligence to Efficiency. The Psychological Clinic, Vol. IX,
No. 3. May. 1915.
186 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
record went here, in his proficiency in school subjects he is about like
a six-year-old child, that is, he has four years of retardation.
There is a set of tests called the Binet-Simon tests, a series presumably adapted for different ages. There is some difference of
opinion as to whether they are satisfactory or not. We employ
them to supplement our other examinations. When we gave this
boy the Binet tests, his age came out as 8.4, so that the Binet tests
show him to be retarded in mental age about two years. My examination here today would seem to indicate that he is more retarded
than that. I would say that his mental age is certainly not more than
7.5 as shown by these tests.
Of culture scales I have said there are two,?the civilization scale
and the education scale. He is well enough dressed, he goes to
public school, his people are in moderate circumstances. We would
say that on the civilization scale he is normal,?nothing to note
about that, he is not some young savage. On the education scale he
is retarded three years.
Now we have another set of scales that I would call proficiency
scales. One is the amount of proficiency, and the other is the number
of operations in which he may be proficient. What ought a ten-yearold boy be able to do? Among other things he ought to know his
multiplication tables entire. This boy certainly does not know
beyond the four-times part of the table, and I don't believe he knows
the two-times satisfactorily. There is a great limitation in the number of operations which this boy can do at ten years old, and his proficiency in the things he can do is very small. We can say that his
proficiency, for a ten-year-old boy, is small, and there is a great limitation in the number of operations, compared with what a ten-yearold boy should do,?spelling, reading,?he doesn't know how to read.
A boy of ten ought to be reading for his own personal profit. This
boy can't even read a sentence like, "Who is it?" He says, "Who,"
then he looks at the next word and says, "is," and then looks at the
next word and says "it!" with a rush like a person hauling himself
up by the arms for the last time. In the strict sense of the word
he can't read, and that is an operation to be expected of a ten-yearold boy. He is very deficient in all the school branches. But on the
formboard and cylinder test he has all the necessary operations and
he does them as well as I have seen some college students do
them.
He can write, but his proficiency is small. He can write separate
letters. He is supposed to have acquired the operation of addition
up to 99, but I am confident his proficiency there is limited. As you
saw, he said 3 and 4 equals 8, and the next time, equals 7. That is
CONGENITAL APHASIA AND FEEBLEMINDEDNESS. 187
what I meant when I said his proficiency is small and his range of
proficiencies is limited.
What does the calendar test show, when I asked him the days
of the week? Stubbornness? Not exactly. My recollection is that
of the days of the week, Thursday is this boy's special difficulty, and
his mother told me that he never seems to know Thursday. He
knows the other days pretty well, but has never been able to remember the word Thursday and hold it in mind. This happens to be
Thursday, so he took the next easiest word. I tried him on that to
see if it would turn out as they told me, and my interpretation of it is
that it is a memory defect.
Now let us come to the question of the interpretation of all this.
What is wrong with this boy? He is a very interesting case for us,
because his deficiency is in the psychological field. It is something
the matter with his memory, isn't it? Under memory I gave you
two things; one was trainability, and the other was retentiveness.
Those are the two things we want to know about memory,?how
trainable is it, and how retentive is it? But memory uses material.
If he is going to remember that crowd is spelled c-r-o-w-d, he has got
to remember it with certain memory material, certain images. Memory is based upon imagination. Under imagination we take imageability, the ability to form images and the association of these
images together, or I call it associability, and finally the complexity.
Under imageability, did you see any evidence for the opinion that his
images were defective? Not much. You might possibly consider
there is a little evidence in the fact that when I spelled b-e-g he wrote
d-e-g, and when I asked him what he had there, he started off with the
b and then he saw he had a d there. There was a confusion of the b
and the d simply, which might point to faulty images, that he hadn't
the right kind of image of the b. There were a few instances of that
kind which seemed to me to suggest that his images were not good,
but in the main there were good, and I took this completion test to
show that he did have images. I asked him about the horse, and so
on. His images are good enough for spelling and reading, but he is
not making as good use of them as he might. Now why? We come
across in this boy what seems to me to be the real difficulty, and that
is the images do not associate themselves together in his mind.
There is deficient associability or deficient memory span. If a boy is
going to say, twice two are four, five times six are thirty, and learn
his multiplication tables, each one of these sentences which he has
to repeat and fix in his mind involves the memory span, the association of images. Now if every one of the image complexes in a table
188 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
of that kind is beyond the associability point in his memory span of
three or at the most four, he can't possibly get it.
We got very good evidence here this afternoon of the difficulty
that anybody would have in trying to teach him to spell anything
more than a three-element word. If you start him in on five or six
elements, I don't think he ever would learn in that way. He has got
to be taken in hand on the assumption that his associations are
limited to three, that his memory span is limited to three. One of
our graduate students made a more elaborate examination of him,
but saw no evidence of the deficiency of association for ordinary
objects about the room, or ordinary ideas outside of school subjects,
except in some of the ideas that were presented in the sentences
given him. He didn't seem to be able to get the complexes there
very well, but the ordinary associability was good. He hasn't got
the image complexity that a boy of his age should have. The
general indications are that his deficiencies in associability and memory are rather limited to language.
Memory is a specific form of imagination. Memory means that
the images which are associated together form complexes. If you
are to spell the word complexity, that in itself is an image complex.
How many times does that have to be repeated until you know how
to spell the word? That will give you some clue as to how trainable
your memory is. How long after you have acquired the spelling of a
word will it be retained? We tested this boy on school subjects, but
his memory was not retentive. He had extremely poor retentiveness.
He did not have a high degree of trainability, and there was fundamentally lacking the power of associating images, which probably
was the chief difficulty, so that we would say that his difficulty is in
the field of memory.
The next question is, is it general? Does it cover the whole
field of memory? We asked him, what day is this? He said Tuesday. But when we asked him questions about the other days of the
week, he seemed to have a good memory for that. He seems to have
good sense when you ask him ordinary questions. His understanding is good. He understood these tests right away. His power of
attention is good. It would appear, therefore, that it was limited
entirely to the field of memory for language and number, the two
important branches of school work. But you understand that the
number work is based upon language, so it may be in his case a specific defect of language memory.
This is what we would then say about this boy: His general
difficulty, that which is fundamental, is a deficient associability, a
deficient memory span. His specific defect is a deficient memory.
CONGENITAL APHASIA AND FEEBLEMINDEDNESS. 189
He has not formed the proper idea complexes which he should have
for a boy of his age, and it would appear that the defect is limited to
language and number. We can translate this if we please into technical terms, for instance, a lack of memory or a deficient memory is
amnesia, that is the alpha-privitive and the Greek word meaning
memory, lack of memory. The lack of memory applies chiefly to
language, so we may call it amnesia verbalis, lack of verbal
memory. For a ten-year-old boy he is lacking in verbal memory.
Your memories today are dependent upon two factors. One is
the amount of training which your memory has received, that
is the acquired part of the process. The other is your congenital
capacity for forming these memory complexes. There can be
no doubt that you all differ congenitally in memory capacity.
You have all differed somewhat in the amounts of acquisition which
you have retained. We take this boy and try to study him as he
stands before us, nearly eleven years old, and he certainly hasn't
acquired language memories. Is that due to his not having had adequate schooling? No, he has been four years in school. Is it due to
the fact that he didn't receive adequate training in school? No, his
memory span is deficient. We have got evidence here today that this
boy has a congenital verbal amnesia, a defect of memory which is
something inherent in his brain. Just as one boy hasn't got an ear
for music, because he hasn't got the kind of brain which stores up
musical tones, so this boy hasn't got the kind of brain which stores
up memories of words and letters and sentences that are spoken to
him. In his case it is probably a congenital verbal amnesia.
We are finding that these conditions exist in some children.
Take this boy for instance. The principal of the school writes to me
"We consider him very slow mentally, but not feebleminded." He
doesn't make the impression upon the principal of being feebleminded. He doesn't make the impression here today of being
feebleminded. He does the mechanical tests correctly. But so far
as his standing goes, he is in the feebleminded class, and probably
as he grows older and falls further and further behind, he will probably
be diagnosed as feebleminded, not socially competent to get on with
others of the same age. At present he hasn't got mind enough to get
on with second grade pupils, and if we are very strict in our diagnosis,
I think we would have to call him feebleminded.
Some are beginning to recognize a condition in children that they
call congenital illiteracy. I would say that one line of separation
among people in civilized communities is between literacy and illiteracy, and the literate are all above those about able to do fifth grade
work. They acquire reading, writing, and arithmetic so that they
190 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
have it as a clumsy tool. They read newspapers, the sporting columns anyway,?and they read the signs. Perhaps before they die
they cease to be literate, but they do acquire reading and writing.
Those who do not acquire reading and writing as a tool, are the
illiterate. Are there any children born, who are illiterate in the
sense that no matter how hard you try, you can't teach them reading,
writing, and arithmetic? Are there children born whom you can't
teach to sing a tune? If so they would have amnesia musicalis, or
amusia, a term applying to those who are tone-deaf and can't learn
to sing. These others we can speak of as congenital illiterates, and
since it has to do with language we may call it congenital aphasia.
I would say this boy is probably not really feebleminded, but it
looks as though he had congenital aphasia.
He seemed to understand spoken words pretty well, so that the
aphasia would seem to be very largely visual, although I think there
was some auditory and motor aphasia too. When it is limited to the
reading of words, we call it alexia, that is inability to read. I run
across college students, in their papers, who must have a little congenital alexia. For instance, there is a part of the brain which you
may have studied, the medulla oblongata, and I have had students
taking this course write down "meddling obligato." I have also
found students who after taking a year of psychology, maybe two,
don't know how to spell psychology, at least not in combinations
like "physiological psychology." They just fall down in a heap like
that boy when he tried to spell girl.
The whole question, when you see deficiency of language memory, is this,?does it mean that this person didn't get an education,
or that he couldn't get an education? I assume that this boy is where
he is at the present time because he couldn't get an education. He
is not a typical case of feeblemindedness, because he seems to have
not many defects but only a few very specialized defects, and we
call his chief defect one of memory in the field of language. Inasmuch as we assume that that was with him from the beginning and
has not been acquired as a result of defective education, we say that
this boy's chief defect is a congenital aphasia, and it probably means
that he is in the class of illiterates.
We saw a couple of years ago an extremely able mechanic, doing
very high grade work, who didn't know how to write. He had gone
to school and had never learned to write. He came to us to learn
why it was he had not learned to write, although he had tried to do it.
Apparently he had congenital aphasia, or congenital alexia. When he
asked us that question we had to explain to him, "You are in the
CONGENITAL APHASIA AND FEEBLEMINDEDNESS. 191
position of the person who has no ear for music, who can't learn to
sing."
My recommendation is that this boy be placed in a special class.
He ought to be taken very well in hand. For example, I do think
that in the educational backwardness of this boy, one factor is a
faulty educational method. You can't teach a child who has any sort
of defective memory, by the word method. You might just as well
give it up. In my opinion, all of these cases have to be taught to
read by the A, B, C method,?beat it into their heads. Give them a
good deal of sound analysis. Start him anew, and quit trying to
teach him by the word method. For children who are somewhat
deficient, I find that the word method throws them into confusion
for several years. I think this boy can be taught some reading and
writing.
If you are interested in this, you will find in The Psychological
Clinic for December, 1913, my report of a boy who was taught for a
couple of years and finally learned to read. I don't think that this
boy we have seen today will ever get over his defect, but if he can
get over it enough to get out of the feebleminded class, I don't know.
He ought to be tried as though he were a normal child and were
somewhat difficult to teach. He has got to be taken in hand exactly
as we would take in hand a person who is said to have no ear for
music. Such a boy can be trained to sing so other people could
stand hearing him sing, but he couldn't earn much of a living by it.
I think this boy could be trained that much in school subjects, and
it looks as if he should be trained to a trade.
This is only the second time we have seen him. To make sure
of all the parts of the analytic diagnosis we would have to teach him
and keep him under observation for a couple of months.
