THE Public Schools and the Abnormal Childe
===========================================

By K. J. Hoke,
Second Assistant Superintendent Public Schools, Richmond, Va.
One of the criticisms which is often leveled against the public
school system of the United States is that the instruction is too
mechanical; that the public schools tend to treat all children as if
they were alike, both physically and mentally. The tendency in
modern education to reach the individual needs of the children should
meet this objection. The administrators of our public schools are
demanding that the instruction in the class-room be made more and
more individual, that the teacher shall plan her instruction to reach
the individual child instead of planning it to be presented to a large
number of children at once, and assuming that all will profit alike
from it.
In following out this principle of instruction, one of the natural
consequences has been that students of education are beginning to
know more of the individual abilities of children and are planning
instruction to train them accordingly. In this movement the
psychologists are leading the way and are providing much information that serves as a basis for more scientific treatment of children.
This information shows the wide range of abilities existing among
children of the same class in spite of the fact that they have been so
placed on the assumption that they were of the same ability. The
following figures show the wide range in ability to add correctly
in eight minutes a certain number of addition examples in a 4A grade
in the public schools of the city of Richmond:
No. children. No. examples right.
2 9
1 7
1 G
1 5
2 4
0 3
1 2
2 1
3 0
A further illustration of this principle is shown by the following
figures which give the different mental ages according to the BinetSimon Scale in a 3B grade of the same school system:
* A report to the Virginia State Board of Charities and Corrections for submission to the
General Assembly of 1916.
(238)
PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND THE ABNORMAL CHILD. 239
No. children. Mental ages.
3 8
5 9
20 10
8 11
1 12
Since this wide range of ability exists among children of a
single class, manifestly it is the function of the public schools to
determine its extent. If a school system attempts this problem,
what means are available for its solution?
In the first place, the grade and the chronological age of the
child should always be available. When this information is arranged
in a table form, it enables the teacher to locate the child who has
fallen behind his grade. The following table is given to illustrate
this point:
Chronological Ages
Gradf,
9 j 10
1A.
G
IB.
1 2
2A.
213.
3A.
3B.
The normal ages for the different grades are as follows: 1A and
IB grades, 7 years; 2A and 2B grades, 8 years; 3A and 3B grades,
9 years. All of these children are above these ages.
After the child is located in the grade, the next source of information is the cumulative record which gives his progress in school.
If a child is promoted at the end of each term, he would complete
the elementary schools in seven years, and his progress will be shown
by the accompanying record card which is the history of a child's
progress in the Richmond Public Schools (see No. 1).
This child entered the 1A grade in September, 1906. In February, 1907, he was promoted to the IB grade, and so on throughout
his entire school life. If a child is not promoted each term, his
record card will show a different progress. The accompanying
240 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
No. 1.
record shows that the child spent 8 terms or 4 years in the 1A grade
and 3 terms or 13/2 years in the IB grade, when he was taken into
the ungraded class. At that time he was 15 years and 9 months
old, had been in school 5}^ years, and had completed the work of
one year only (see No. 2).
J- / qAsa.
No. 2.
PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND THE ABNORMAL CHILD. 241
The progress of still another child is given to illustrate further
the fact that there are certain children who cannot profit by the
instruction given to the normal child. This child spent 3 terms or
l}/2 years in the 1A grade, 4 terms or 2 years in the IB grade, 3 terms
or \}/2 years in the 2A grade, and was still in the 2B grade at the
age of 15 years. He had been in school 53^ years and had completed only \l/2 years of work:
?7
Feb.
19 l?
o^ oj
ot
2L
a\
C
a
A
a
<L
C
C?
(cL
J
'{3^1/ZjL CLQJL
a
%
A
a
3 J AAA/.
JA
(o 0
(X.
A
A
CUulL \jj. 3
Ji ! o
O
O O
O O
/3
Cu
& t>\/3
Form 30-7-27-U?5 M.
s-t
CLYI
jB
A-A
/3 A jz\/3\sG CU OU
No. 3.
From these records the following points should be observed:
1. The constant repetition of the same grade kills a child's
interest.
2. Instruction for children who cannot profit from it is not
economical and business-like.
3. The presence of such children in a class-room hinders the
progress of children who can profit from the instruction of the grade.
The next means of determining the mental ability of children
is through mental and physical tests. One of these tests which is
widely used is the Binet-Simon Measuring Scale. This test, in the
hands of a skillful examiner, is a helpful aid in determining a child's
mental ability.
Figure 1 is a graphical representation of the results from the
Binet-Simon Scale applied to all the children in the first four years
of three fairly representative schools in the city of Richmond. The
significant thing shown in this figure is that 19 children or 2.6 per
242 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
cent were four or more years mentally below their chronological age;
and that 103 children or 13.8 per cent were two and three years
mentally below their chronological age. It is commonly held that
children who test three or more years back are feebleminded. A
more liberal classification is used in Richmond, as shown in the
above graph. The policy has been to place those who test four or
more years back in classes of 15 children each, and those who test
two and three years back in classes of 20 children each.
It is true, however, that the majority of the 2.6 per cent are or
will become permanently mentally arrested, and even some of the
13.8 per cent. Consequently the number of feebleminded children
in the public schools is a problem of considerable proportions.
As a usual thing, the children of the latter group can profit
from the instruction given in the regular class. Most of these children have the normal amount of mentality, but have fallen behind
because of late entrance, poor attendance, ill health, etc. All that
is needed to place them on their feet is a little individual instruction.
That these children do profit by the instruction given to the normal
child is shown in figure 2.
At the beginning of the second term, 1914, there were 72 children in four classes. At that time all of these children were too old
for the grades in which they were working. By June, 12.5 per cent
of them had caught up with their grades.
Z1I
~VLtrtss^oJOb CULL X.1 I /
I 3 Z y
/ uyJ "btbrvf I % 5 J
OtuarCUjrvoe/ /
Ho % ?cjA^ xPnt 13 /?% /f
,4o Qxi-a^cL.cL
& tjAA/ ijtLvr 7Z> K /3 2 ?/o
I2Q 3 cjA/v tv* 3 I )
100 II Z.cfo
to
1 (> lja/. -5~ y*/. Vyv 3 cjA/. 7j y-*> / y^/ / yt/ 2> y/v
Figure 1.
RESULTS OF BINET-SIMON TESTS OF 743 CHILDREN IN RICHMOND, VA.
PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND THE ABNORMAL CHILD. 243
These classes do not differ much from the regular class except
in numbers. In some cases considerable emphasis is placed on
industrial work, especially in order to arouse a child's interest. It is
true, however, that some children are placed in these classes who
cannot profit from the instruction given to normal children. They
are the borderline cases which become permanently arrested and
must be provided with instruction of a different nature.
In classes of fifteen children each the mentality is much lower,
as represented by figure 3, which shows that all the children are
four and more years below and are located at the lower extremity
of the curve.
(Jhjfc cla.cIj.cL
J ??> ^ a^AS- ^ ?y'
?-jJrw.a*u>
At..'/ 3^. 7 /ZTZ (,.f 1.4 TV
Figure 2.
REDUCTION IN OVERAGENESS OF 72 CHILDREN IN 4 SPECIAL CLASSES,
FEBRUARY-.; UNE, 1914.
'' * ( '? t y' t- 7 : j ;< La/Aj l> * f*> 3*jAs.
Figure 3.
YEARS BELOW NORMAL OF INDIVIDUALS IN ONE CLASS FOR MENTALLY
DEFICIENT CHILDREN IN RICHMOND, VA.
Figure 3.
YEARS BELOW NORMAL OF INDIVIDUALS IN ONE CLASS FOR MENTALLY
DEFICIENT CHILDREN IN RICHMOND, VA.
244 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
These children can profit very little from the instruction given
in the regular class. In fact, few of them can read beyond the second
or third reader. Progress is not expected of them from this course.
Their work is almost entirely industrial and centers around mat and
rug weaving, woodwork, handwork, sewing, cooking and serving
meals, crochet work, gardening, etc. Their number-work, language,
and reading are based on their industrial work, e. g., number-work
is based on estimating the cost of their daily lunch, the amount
of material in and cost of their rugs and mats, the cost of planting
their garden, etc. Their language work consists in writing the
daily menu for the lunch, writing the order for the store, writing
advertisements for sale of articles made, etc. Habits of industry,
orderliness, and self-control are among the big things to be taught
these children. Some skill can be acquired. Interest has been
aroused in this work by selling as many of the articles made as possible, and permitting the children to share in the proceeds. During
the second term of the session 1914-15, one of these classes, after
paying for the supplies, had about $8.00, and another about $12.00,
for distribution to the members of the class.
At the beginning of the session 1915-16, the Richmond Public
School System established a center for handling these children by
combining four classes in one building. This plan offers an opportunity for better grading and more practical work. In addition, a
psychological examiner has been employed to give a stated amount
of time each day to a more exhaustive study of the mental and
physical condition of these children. This work will be greatly
facilitated by a psychological clinic which has been established by
the Medical College of Virginia.
The results from the work with the abnormal children in the
city of Richmond seem to indicate that it is economical to have
these children removed from the regular classes, to study them so
that their mental ability can be known, and to instruct them to the
extent that they can receive instruction along lines that will help
them most. This policy is based on the principle that it is the
inherited right of every child of school age to receive the kind and
the amount of training he can profit by. To this end every modern
school plant should provide means. Teachers should be trained to
give the mental tests; accurate records of the progress of all children
should be kept and provision should be made for the instruction of
such children in classes of not more than fifteen. The children of
low mentality who are passing through the hands of the teacher of
today will become the weak-minded, helpless, and dangerous adults
of tomorrow. What are the teachers and the administrators doing
PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND THE ABNORMAL CHILD. 245
to prepare themselves to handle this problem? Surely it is a duty
which they cannot evade if they are to be educators in a broad and
modern interpretation of that word.
But after the public schools have located these children and
placed them in ungraded classes and trained them as best they can,
their work is left incomplete because the children soon reach an age
when the schools can not hold them any longer and there is no
other authority to take charge of them. Consequently they go out
into society to be preyed upon by and become a prey to society.
It is at this point that the State should assume control. A central
governing body, acting under special legislation, should take up the
work where the schools leave off.
In the light of these facts, then, some such policy as the following seems advisable:
1. It is the duty of the public schools to study the problem
presented by the child of low mentality so that the number of feebleminded children in the community can be known.
2. It is the duty of the public schools to provide that kind of
instruction for these children which will make them self-supportng
citizens if they can profit by it, and so long as the home gives its
share of proper supervision.
3. It is the duty of the public schools to provide instruction for
feebleminded children of school age in classes of not more than
15 children to a class.
4. It is the duty of the State to take charge of these children
who are institutional cases after the public schools have exhausted
their means of helping them.
By pursuing such a policy, many wards of the State would be
trained to become self-supporting in a community where they are
not brought in competition with the normal individual. Many
of these people are passing through the hands of teachers today
without their actual mental ability ever being known. The menace
of the feebleminded reproducing themselves would be cut off at its
source.
