Com-pletion-Test Language Scales
================================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
By Marion Rex Trabue, Ph.D. Teachers
College, Columbia University Contributions to Education, No. 77, 1916.
Pp. IX + 118.
In this monograph Mr. Trabue reports an attempt to derive one or more
scales for the measuring of ability related to language. He does not define
"language" in any strict sense, as he believes that on the whole ability to com-
plete his sentences successfully is very closely related to what is usually called
"language ability".
Mr. Trabue finds that his scales of mutilated sentences have an advantage
over mutilated paragraphs in that they may be used a second time to reveal
improvement. The story of a paragraph is not readily forgotten, and therefore
improvement on a second trial need not necessarily denote an improvement
in ability. But the sentences deal with a wide variety of subjects, none of which
is interesting in itself and consequently they are not readily retained in memory.
Using the same scale twice is rarely necessary, however, as the author of the
sentences has prepared several other scales (B, C, D, E) which for all practical
purposes are equal and interchangeable. Likewise scales I and K are fairly well
matched, and L and M differ but slightly in their degree of difficulty.
The sentences possess an added advantage over the mutilated paragraph
in that they are arranged as steps on a scale with approximately equal intervals
between the steps. Thus an individual is not discouraged at having a task set
for him which is too hard, nor is he disgusted at being asked to do child's play.
Furthermore it is easier to judge whether a sentence is "right," "almost right,"
or "wrong" than it is to score a paragraph. The comparison of two performances
on scales of equal difficulty is a more valid indication of an individual's ability
than his performance on a passage of prose.
The same amount of time is allowed to all pupils. Each pupil is scored two
credits for every sentence perfectly completed, and one credit for every sentence
almost perfectly completed. This automatically takes account of the time
spent on the work, the quality of work done, and the difficulty of the tests one
is capable of doing.
From a preliminary list of fifty-six sentences, which he calls the "graded
series" Mr. Trabue has derived his Scales A, B, C, D, E, I, K, L, and M. In
Scale A the two sentences for each grade are the ones which proved to be just
difficult enough to be done by 50 per cent of the children in that grade. The
relative distance between grades is calculated on the P. E. or the median devia-
tion from the median of a grade distribution. Scales B and C are chosen entirely
from the evaluated sentences of the graded series and consist of ten sentences
each, the steps being about 1 P. E. above each other. Scale C is, on the whole,
about 4 P. E. more difficult than Scale B. Seven minutes are allowed on each
of these scales, and very careful directions are given in order to make sure that
the child understands the requirements. Scales D and E are practically of the
same difficulty as B and C, but each contains four sentences which do not appear
(117)
118 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
in the graded series. Scales I and K are intended for adults and only five
minutes are allowed for their completion. The procedure is the same as for the
other scales.
Mr. Trabue's report contains results from over six thousand children,
primarily from New York and New Jersey, although records were obtained from
classes in Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Missouri, and Pennsylvania. The
results indicate no great difference in the abilities of children in the same grades
in different states. The results from Scale A show that each successive grade
makes a higher score than the grade just previous, and that the range of the
middle 50 per cent likewise moves steadily upward. This is naturally to be
expected, although the relative amounts of progress between grades are unusual
and need careful examination. Boys seem to make a somewhat lower median
score than the girls in the same grade although the difference is small and the
amount of overlapping enormous. There is also a distinct tendency for the
older pupils in the grade to make lower scores than the younger pupils. Mr.
Trabue suggests that the reason for this is that teachers are possibly inclined
to promote dull pupils on age and retard bright pupils because of their youth.
To say that a child is twelve years old apparently signifies far less concerning
his ability to complete sentences than to say he is in the sixth grade.
Mr. Trabue feels that a systematic study should be made, correlating his
language scales with other tests of knowledge and ability. Because he believes
his sentences are more accurate than mutilated paragraphs, he thinks that corre-
lations with them will be higher than with the prose passages. No such study
has as yet been published. Such correlations as have been made "have been
worked out incidentally, sometimes as a matter of curiosity and sometimes
in connection with other studies." They are reported by Mr. Trabue in an
appendix.
Natalie A. Bassett.
