Standard Tests and Scales of Measurements
=========================================

By T. Bruce Birch, Ph.D., \J
Wittenberg College, Springfield, Ohio.
Every teacher and every superintendent depends upon some
tests or scales of measurement in determining the progress of pupils,
grades, schools, or the efficiency of a school system. It is quite
apparent that the old standards are unsatisfactory for accurately
testing the product of the schools. Too much play is permitted the
subjective element, the personal equation, mere opinion, or a 'priori
judgments, in the estimate of academic attainments and educational
progress; as is seen in the great variations shown by teachers in
estimating the work of individual pupils in the same branch, in
different branches, or in similar work at different times. The teacher
seems to arrive at some degree of accuracy in estimating the progress
of pupils by the trial and error method.
Even the examination as an objective method of testing the
progress of pupils, is too crude a standard of measurement. By it
alone a teacher cannot secure any precise estimate of the progress of
pupils, individually or collectively; nor can a superintendent judge of
the efficiency of schools or school systems in terms of results. Each
teacher usually establishes a self-made standard by measuring all
pupils in terms of the grades of several. The more radically a
teacher differs from other teachers in this estimate, the more he
should have the assistance of an objective standard.
Parker2 states that when the same geometry examination papers
were marked by the teachers of mathematics in forty-three high
schools, where 70 per cent is the passing mark, the grades varied from
25 per cent to 90 per cent; while in seventy-five schools, where the
passing mark is 75 per cent the grades varied from 39 per cent to
85 per cent.
We are told that "human life is a deeper and more complicated
subject than can be probed by quantitative tests, that the important
elements in mental and moral development of pupils are of an intan-
gible character and can't be confined to terms of measurements,"
that the spiritual side of education, though real, is so vague and indefi-
nite that in all probability it defies and escapes measurement.
But when these more subtle components of education have been
'A paper read before the Schoolmasters' Club of Central Ohio, and prepared after listen-
ing to discussions at the recent N. E. A. meeting in Detroit, with the assistance of Part I of the
Fifteenth Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education.
5 Methods of Teaching in High Schools, p. 566.
(49)
50 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
excluded, there is no doubt of the fact that there are other elements
in education, which are primarily objective and can be measured
with reasonable exactness. The more clearly the objective results
of education are understood, the greater the appreciation of the
spiritual elements in education. There is, therefore, need to devise
and to use more precise methods of measurements to estimate the
progress of pupils, grades, and schools, and to test the efficiency of
school systems. Any measurement of results, says Strayer,
"furnishes primarily a knowledge of a situation which makes clear
the problems involved and which suggest a method of experiment
that looks toward desired improvement."
To prove the claim that progress in accomplishment has been
made and that the aim of education has been realized in school work,
it is necessary as Strayer says, "to secure more and better instru-
ments of precision in the measurement as obtained by scales or
units." Such objective scales are needed to eliminate or at least
properly subordinate all unsupported opinion or even cumulative
a priori judgments; to get rid of subjective variation and to reduce
the amount of variability of judgment of the same teacher or of
various teachers to the minimum. The validity of a scale consists
in its power to reduce the variability of judgment of a teacher's
estimate. This is accomplished by an objective measurement,
which is defined as the result of an attempt to establish a definite
standard under controlled conditions. "Teachers need to see the
value of controlled experiments," as Courtis stated at Detroit in the
Normal School section of the N. E. A., for "objective measurements
show that 40 to 50 per cent of pupils stand still." That statement
may be exaggerated, but it contains much food for reflection.
The aims or purposes of standard tests or scales are manifold.
It is understood of course, that the scales are not for daily use. They
may be employed to discover at the beginning of a term what pupils
know before being taught, and then again later to determine
in a more accurate manner the progress made by pupils. They
also assist the teacher's judgment in forming a basis for inference,
thus freeing the teacher from the charge of partiality. But the
primary and distinctive purpose is to improve directly the instruction
of pupils. They may lead to a definiteness in school work by serving
the following uses:
(a) To show to the superintendent, or the principal, the extent
to which their plans have been correctly interpreted and put into
operation; to furnish them and the teacher with useful facts concern-
ing pupils and classes, and to indicate general tendencies in the school
system as a whole. | This knowledge may provide" a sound basis
STANDARD TESTS AND SCALES. 51
for the supervisor in judging the efficiency of teachers, and in deter-
mining the standard and needs of pupils. Such information will
suggest some necessary changes in revision or in the introduction of
new methods.
(b) To determine the most economical and efficient method of
teaching school subjects.
(c) Not merely to accumulate educational statistics, but to
enable the superintendent to check the results of his school system
by a scientific test.
(d) To discover the variability of grades and schools, and by
the employment of the average results of several like grades to secure
a standard of measurement. Such tests can be applied especially
to the accuracy of work done.
(e) To test by a relatively stable standard what content is
retained by pupils for later use in their work, since certain content
must be basic for the interpretation of future work; and also to
indicate the standard units of work required for promotion.
(/) To secure as Whipple1 says "a relatively refined and precise
method of more accurate determination of the mental traits or the
general mental status of a pupil than can be measured by other
methods, as by inspection of his marks or his school progress in terms
of the teacher's personal estimate."
(ig) To discover the bright pupils of every class who are over-
practiced, or over-drilled, and release them from practice work.
Able pupils are often harmed by too long continuance in drill while
the dull or slower pupils may profit by more drill. In this way the
variation in a group may be reduced to a minimum. Melcher states
that "the majority of pupils are average pupils and should move
in mass," yet "there is a considerable number of especially slow
pupils and also of especially bright pupils that should not be sacrificed
to mass movement." When a pupil reaches the standard in his
grade, he may give his attention to other work, and be tested in the
lapsed branch about every ten days. When the individual standard
is in danger of becoming lowered, pupils should be put back into the
work.
Starch believes that "one-third of the pupils waste time by being
in classes in which they know practically all the material that is
being covered in the recitation period and are able to perform all the
tasks expected of them." "One pupil out of every three is promoted
too slowly and one pupil out of every three is promoted too rapidly."
If these statements are correct, there is great need of more definite
standards, by which pupils can be compared so as to ascertain whether
1 Whipple, G. M. Manual of Physical and Mental Tests, p. 549.
52 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
or not they are up to standard. "Standard scales indicate to the
teacher that there is no further need to waste time in drilling the
bright pupils; and release from drill does not discourage pupils, but
rather encourages them to excel the standard."
The present average standard is good for the sub-normal, but
not so good for super-normal pupils; indeed, it makes no provision
for the super-normal. But the standard scales provide a means of
interpretation of the pupil, determining the presence of general
ability, and the presence or absence of special ability, as revealed
especially by the mixed relation test. Thus they assist both the
super-normal and the sub-normal. They indicate to the teacher
those who should be promoted and also aid in the securing of reasons
why pupils fail. Those pupils who have not shown progress can be
selected and assigned to a normal student, or a graduate student, or
even a skilled teacher, to find out the causes for failure to make
progress. The value of properly used standard tests and scales is
seen in the increase in "good teaching, and good grading, which keeps
pupils of like ability together."
Whipple says that "the object of mental tests, practically
considered, is to secure by a relatively refined and precise method,
a more accurate determination of the mental traits or the general
mental status." According to him there are two kinds of tests:
1. Those which "aim to determine with some precision the
presence or the absence, or the amount of some specific
mental characteristic."
2. Those which "aim to determine with perhaps somewhat
less precision the general status of the child's intelligence,
his mental level, or general all-around ability as related
to other children of the same nationality, sex, age, and
social status."
Buckingham makes essentially a three-fold classification of
tests on the basis of objective means of measuring school products:
1. Scales, or tests "based upon the judgments of competent
persons."
2. Scales, or tests based upon "the ratio of correct responses to
total responses" in a typical group. These systematized
scales are based upon many responses, or the ratio
method, the per cent of correctness. The scales based
upon the determination of "the ratio of correct responses
to total responses" are somewhat dependent upon individ-
ual judgment. It is frequently a matter of opinion
whether a response is correct or not, and judgment plays
a more important role in considering the most definite
STANDARD TESTS AND SCALES. 53
subjects (spelling and arithmetic) and the least definite
(penmanship, drawing, and English composition).
3. Mixed scales or tests; where both the judgment and ratio
methods are employed in subjects ranging between the
extremes of definiteness, (as in geography, history, and
grammar) for which correct ratio scales must be worked
out.
"The movement for measurement is merely an application of
scientific methods to the study of educational problems." The
question is: whether or not tests and scales "are of value to super-
intendents and teachers generally." In reply to this question many
objections have been offered:?
1. The standards are defective?there is need to standardize the
standards.
2. Too much time and energy may be spent in performing the
tests, or at least in overdoing it.
3. The testing interferes with school work, and makes all uncom-
fortable; nevertheless the value of such testing appears,
if it leads to definite facts and results.
4. The teacher is not trained to it, does not know how to employ
the tests, may secure merely useless data; or may over-
emphasize the branch in which testing is made to the
neglect of other branches in which testing is not employed.
Intensive work of one group upon a certain branch may
distract from the other branches; but the teacher must
see that the other branches are not neglected. Teachers
must not set too high a standard by over-emphasizing
particular branches, for there is no justifiable reason for
speeding up in one branch at the expense of others. In
fact, there should not be any speeding up before the
fourth grade at least.
5. Teachers usually do not know which tests are best, but a
detailed study of individual tests soon informs the teacher
concerning the particular purpose and application of a
special scale to given conditions, pupils, or groups of
pupils.
6. The best teachers are selected to instruct the abnormal
pupils. That is not the case as regards these standard
tests of school products, for the tests are submitted by
the regular teachers to all the pupils of their group.
7. The tests are determined by traditional psychology, by past
theories. Such is not the case, for they are born of
practice rather than of abstract theory.
54 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
8. The employment of standards may lead to the disregard of
the value of grades and the teacher's personal estimate.
This is not true, for the results of the use of standards
may mean very little, or may give rise to many errors, if
the other helps are entirely disregarded.
9. They tend to uniformity. The one great weakness of the
tests and scales is that the tests result in the standardizing
of the individual pupil. They aim at the attainment
of a grade of work rather than establishing units of work.
Promotion is a transfer to other levels of work, and
should be made with due consideration to age and units
of work done. The purpose of tests is to establish a
median level which agrees with the average of growth over
a long period, and then group pupils and promote pupils
as tested. No promotion is determined on the basis of
the test, but the teacher does promote when he sees a
pupil bright along all lines; or when a pupil manifests
special ability the work may be fitted to his ability.
10. These tests aim at the standardizing of pupils, and may lead
to the making of many classes, at great financial outlay.
There should also be a standardizing of subjects. The
characteristics manifested by pupils at certain ages should
be discovered, and then such subject matter selected as
is best adapted to the nature of the pupil during such
periods; and especially should standardizing studies
go hand in hand with standardizing pupils in the seventh
and eighth grades.
Instead of many institutions trying to do the work of standard-
izing tests, a department of research should be created in the school
of education of a university, preferably a state university. Such a
department should cooperate with the state superintendent of public
imstruction, so that all the forces under the immediate control of the
state could be unified for economical and efficient work, both in devis-
ing scales and standards, and in formulating directions for the practi-
cal testing of them by public school teachers. Within the university,
students of education, who should be chiefly graduate students, can
be trained to a proper conception of the importance of the work, and
can be given such knowledge of the technique of standard tests and
scales, as will enable them to devise new standards and to test them
in a specific and practical way within the state.
Just as there is in many state universities an agricultural exten-
sion department to carry on the work of instructing farmers, so there
STANDARD TESTS AND SCALES. 55
should be an educational extension department, organized to carry
on this work so important to the school system and so vital to the
highest welfare of the state. Such a department could send out
trained students of education to assist in breaking down opposition,
in creating a correct attitude towards tests, and in developing a proper
conception of the value of standardized tests and scales. It may
also train the teachers to use the tests intelligently and effectively.
There is great need of wise direction of testing in a definite, purposive
way. There is danger in an excessive number of measurements
unless sufficient directions are given to the teacher employing the
tests. After the teachers have secured the data in their school labora-
tory, instructions should be given relative to a proper procedure
in examining the results and diagnosing and correcting weaknesses.
It is very difficult to find causes and to correct them.
The university may then test all the results. In fact, the school
of education should be a clearing-house and repository for records
of results obtained within the state, and also a distributor of the
conclusions drawn from a large body of definite facts. State-wide
tests continued over a long period of time may in this way be coordi-
nated and made most valuable to the schools of the state.
Superintendents, principals and teachers, who are at present
indifferent to this work, will soon discover the value of systematic
cooperation, when they are shown the reasonableness of the procedure
and its practical value to them. They naturally do not like to
be annoyed by many different institutions which seek permission
to send ill-trained investigators into their schools.
The only way to get a teacher to know how to use the scale is
to have him use it in his own laboratory?the school room. It is not
sufficient merely to tell him how to use it. There is need of a psycho-
logical clinic conducted by regular instructors, so that scientific
training may be given under controlled conditions. It is unwise to
use more than one scale at a time, or to emphasize too many points
at once. . The scales should be used over a long period of time. Theo-
ries Avill not always work out in detail, especially over a short period.
The teacher must "not only directly measure ability to give
information," but also "indirectly measure ability of a general sort,
including the power to think." The practicability of indirect
measurement is clearly evident although errors may appear.
In order to prevent error, as far as possible, Courtis1 advises the
standardizing of standards by annalyzing and controlling the factors
involved, and recommends the following procedure:
1 Courtis, S. A. Outline of Standardization of Teachers' Examination
56 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Factors involved; as illustrated in a reading test.
"A. Mechanical factors.
1. Structure of sentence.
2. Length of sentence.
3. Size of type.
4. Spacing.
5. Length and character of the line.
6. Position (upside down, or not).
7. Difficulties due to word recognition.
"B. Content factors.
1. Familiarity.
2. Incentive.
3. Content and experience factor. Difficulty of
word determined by frequency and recency
of use, interest, emotional atmosphere sur-
rounding conditions of use.
4. Need of an analysis of the vocabulary of children
in terms of frequency and conditions of use.
5. Final test of equal units is reaction of unselected
groups of children.
"C. Condition factors.
1. Testing conditions.
(1) Incentive; instructions, examiner, man-
ner.
(2) Timing and length of tests; accuracy,
fatigue, distribution.
(3) Physical conditions; light, heat, paper,
ink, etc.
2. Scoring and tabulation.
(1) Objective marking; approximate methods.
(2) Need of simplicity.
(3) Judgment scales subject to change. The
actual constructing and testing of
conditions is a scientific activity, and
involves a real problem; for it is a
great task to devise on a scientific
basis tests and examinations that are
valid and capable of administration by
class room teachers, and unless those
factors are present, measurements will
prove ineffective, except for supervis-
ion purposes."
STANDARD TESTS AND SCALES. 57
While these standards are for school use, their demands should
be higher than the standards society requires; for it is hardly possible
that pupils will be trained above the necessary level of actual life.
Many conclusions were brought out in the discussion of aims
and purposes. The following is a brief summary:
1. School communities secure better results in the treatment
of fundamental branches where scales have been used.
2. A decided improvement in teaching is to be noted.
3. A large body of definite fact is secured.
4. There is a reduction of the average running expenses in
teaching, and also in management.
5. The need of scales for all subjects has been demonstrated.
6. A correlation may be established among pupils who are
tested in several branches, as in reading, writing, and
spelling.
7. The variability seen in the teacher's estimate of a pupil's
progress is reduced to a minimum.
8. Pupils, teachers, and community, are incited to greater interest
in the subjects tested. This interest should be communi-
cated to other branches where tests are not already
employed.
