Nervous Children
==================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
By Beverly R. Tucker, M.D. Boston: Richard G. Badger,
1916. Pp. 147.
Dr. Tucker writes as a neurologist, but not for neurologists. What strikes
most forcibly a student of psychology is his apparent failure to grasp the psychological problems of nervous and mentally deficient children, and his lack of any
reference to the large and growing psychological literature on their training.
His book has no bibliography, not even an index of names. Freud and Cornell
he quotes, but he says nothing about Dr. Barr's work on "Mental Defectives,"
and Dr. Goddard he cites only to misspell his name in connection with a very
inadequate reference to the Binet-Simon tests. No other tests are mentioned
except medical ones. "Following chiefly Professor James," Dr. Tucker defines
psychology as "the explanation of consciousness." In three pages he attempts
to discuss sensation, perception, memory, imagination, habit, will, and
emotion, and is moved candidly to admit, "In this chapter we have been very
brief and very superficial." With the exceptions noted it would appear
that like too many other conservative physicians, Dr. Tucker ignores the work
of all but medical men.
Most of his advice to parents seems discreet and sound, especially with
regard to sex hygiene. "Individual cases," he says, "will have to be worked out
by those in control and to these it is right to say: be deliberate, wise, and cautious." But with regard to conduct one is led to the conclusion that Dr. Tucker
believes a child had better not have been born, if he cannot be respectable.
Dr. Tucker is master of a fine literary style. His book will be found readable
by nearly everyone, and may be an admirable "first book" for one who knows
little about nervous children. That it can'possibly serve alone as a source of
information is not to be thought of. It might satisfy an idle curiosity, but it is
by no means extensive enough or intensive enough to be used either as a text or
as a reference. A. T.
