Schools and Classes for Exceptional Children.
============================================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
By David Mitchell. Cleveland:
Survey Committee of the Cleveland Foundation, 1916. Pp. 122. (The
Educational Survey, Leonard P. Ayres, Director.)
This is one of the twenty-five sections of the report of the Educational
Survey of Cleveland, conducted in 1915. Twenty-three of these sections are
to be published as separate monographs; in addition there will be a larger volume
giving a summary of the findings and recommendations relating to the regular
work of the public-schools, and a second volume on industrial education. In
the present monograph Dr. Mitchell divides his discussion under seven heads,?
I. Provision for exceptional children in Cleveland," II. Why we have special
classes; III. The socially competent; IV. The socially incompetent; V. The
selection of feebleminded children; VI. What should be done for the feebleminded; VII. Summary and conclusions.
"Cleveland," observes Dr. Mitchell, "has been a pioneer in providing
advantages for children who did not fit into the regular grades. In more than
one instance this city had the first class of a type in the country. That other
cities have been given the credit for the first organization is probably due to
the fact that in Cleveland successive reorganizations have tended to disrupt
the continuity of the work."
Dr. Mitchell found that "In Cleveland 22,275 children have been in the
schools at least one year longer than should have been necessary for them to
reach the grades in which we find them. Of these children, 6731 have repeated
two years of their school life. Some are behind as many as four, five, or six
years." He would divide the exceptional children into two groups by the
criterion of social fitness,?"Can a child be educated for self-support and
an independent existence in the community? If so, he is socially competent.
If not, he is socially incompetent." He recommends, "The socially competent
should be placed in special classes in the regular schools, to be trained for association with normal people. The socially incompetent should be sent to special
schools to be trained for permanent segregation."
Taking up first the various groups of the socially competent, Dr. Mitchell
says, "The 'Cleveland plan' for the instruction of the blind is highly desirable
and should be continued. A division for the instruction of the blind and semiblind, under the direction of a supervisor, should be created. Many more children
should be included in these classes. ... In dealing with the deaf child Cleveland should follow the same progressive plan which is followed in the treatment
of the blind. . . . The organization of special classes in regular schools should
be fundamental to further plans for the crippled. . . . By providing open air
rooms in the regular schools Cleveland has adopted the wise method of educating
together those who must live and work together. The success of the children
is sufficient to warrant the extension of the opportunity to all who might profit
by it."
In 1901 the first "steamer" class was organized in Cleveland. The purpose
of the "steamer" class Dr. Mitchell explains to be "the rapid acquirement of
(58)
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 59
the English language. The progress of the children amply justifies the expense
of all advantages given to them. The advantages should be given to every
child who does not speak English. .. The work of the classes should not be
handicapped by the presence of feebleminded children."
"No provision has yet been made for the children with defective speech.
Probably more than 1000 Cleveland children require special speech training.
Speech classes should be organized in many schools. The teacher should be a
qualified articulation teacher, with special training in pedagogy and psychology.
? ? . No feebleminded children should be admitted to these classes."
''Restoration classes," Dr. Mitchell recommends, "should provide opportunity for the retarded to advance, and for the doubtful ones to prove their
ability. The teachers of these classes must be among the very best in the
school system and because of this should receive extra compensation." With
regard to incorrigibles he says, "The present school is doing excellent work,
but the treatment of these children requires a more social point of view. Special
classes where the children would not be altogether separated from other types
of children should be tried. A diagnosis of mental status should precede transfer
to a class for incorrigibles."
"The socially incompetent are the insane, the epileptic, and the feebleminded. Socially the epileptic do not differ from the feebleminded. Lack of
ability for self-maintenance distinguishes the feebleminded from the normal.
It is high time to discover the reasons for the excessive retardation of 2000
Cleveland school children. . . . For socially incompetent children Cleveland
has organized different types of classes. ... It is probable that a considerable number of feebleminded are still in the regular grades. . . . For many of
the children the expenditure is out of all proportion to the results obtained."
In Chapter V Dr. Mitchell discusses the selection of the feebleminded as
conducted at present by the Division of Medical Inspection. He explains why
the Binet tests as used in Cleveland are inadequate, and mentions some of the
many other tests which might give further information essential to a sound
diagnosis of mental status. "The person who conducts the mental tests," he
believes, "should be thoroughly competent in that work. . . . Competency
m this field involves ability to use a wide range of psychological tests and
measures and a grounding in the theory and practice of applied psychology so
thorough as to equip the psychologist to keep fully abreast of the important
developments rapidly taking place in this branch of science. At the present
time no one possessing these qualifications is in the employ of the Cleveland
Board of Education. . . . The only difference between the normal and the
feebleminded is that in the case of the latter the limitations are an insuperable
barrier to the maintenance of an independent existence. With the acceptance
of this notion there is eliminated any serious contention that the medical
practitioner is the only qualified diagnostician of mental status. . . . The
physician who has not had a training supplementary to the standard course
in the medical school is in the same relation to the problem of feeblemindedness
that the student with the regular arts course in the college is to the problems
of the medical sciences. Diagnosis of mental status should be made by a clinical
psychologist." Dr. Mitchell recommends the organization of a Division of
60 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Examinations, with a clinical psychologist as head, who will take all responsibility
for the activities which lead to the segregation of a child. The department
should cooperate with the present Division of Medical Inspection, which would
continue to make the physical examinations. Trained social workers would
be needed to investigate the home environment, and a recorder to keep the
permanent records.
"The feebleminded may be divided," says Dr. Mitchell, "into three main
groups. The individuals of each group should be trained in the things for which
they have ability. . . . The abilities of the pupils should determine the type
of teachers who would be selected for the different classes." He discusses the
cost of an institution for the feebleminded, comparing data furnished by the
training schools at Vineland, N. J., and Waverly, Mass. He concludes, "For
the welfare of society all the feebleminded should be permanently segregated
when they reach maturity. Cleveland is in a favorable position for the beginning of an institution. . . . Many parents would be glad to be relieved of
responsibility for the care of these unfortunates."
All the recommendations are once more summarized in the final chapter,
in a way which makes the findings of the report available for quick reference.
A. T.
