A Death-Blow to Spiritualism
=============================

306
Art. XII.?
Spiritualism may be pronounced as being on its last le"-s;
it made a desperate effort to promulgate its erroneous
doctrines, but has signally failed. Meetings have been held
during the past year in various parts of England, by a certain
class of the community, to uphold this form of charlatanism.
The following letter from one of the chief supporters of Spiritual-
ism appeared m one of our contemporaries at the time when it
was announced that a Committee had been formed for the pur-
pose of investigating the working of the Lunacy Law. The
summons to the votaries of Spiritualism, however, did not have
the desired effect, and its supporters were conspicuous bv their
absence:? J
flr'^Wtlllt,y0U?k,md'y,aIl0W me in -vour columns to remind your
readers that the Select Committee of the House of Commons' <? to
inquire into the operation of the Lunacy Laws as regards the security
of personal liberty mil commence its sittings at eleven o'clock on
Thursday next, and continue them on subsequent Tuesdays and Thurs-
days. Greatly as this question concerns the general public, recent
events have made it of especial interest to Spiritualists and all others
who leaving the beaten paths of orthodoxy and commonplace, dare
to utter their own thoughts, whether in science or religion It is im-
possible that this inquiry should close without going deeply into the
rights of conscience and iree thought, since the most serious charges
against the Lunacy Commissioners and the madness-mongers arise
from incarcerations, alleged to have been solely on account of
Spiritualism or other intellectual eclecticism. I earnestly trust, there-
fore that all who conveniently can will attend the Committee, as a
mark of public interest in its proceedings. Ladies may be glad to
know that seats are not provided, and that therefore it is well to go
furnished with a camp-stool. ?
Louisa Lowe,
Hon. bee. of the Lunacy Law Reform Association.
64 Berners Street, W., March 12, 1877.
The writer of the above letter offered herself as a witness
before the Lunacy Committee, and little did she think, when
she drew attention to her case, and by the evidence admissible
in consequence, that the death-blow would be given to Spiritual-
ism. It might have been better if the Secretary of the Lunacy
Eeform Association had wisely hidden from the public gaze the
letter which we here append, and received by her in answer to
A DEATH-BLOW TO SriRITUALISM. 307
a request to be re-examined before the Committee. Our readers
will be able to j udge for themselves what opinion is formed by
the House of Commons as represented by their Committee on
Spiritualism.
House of Commons : July 3, 1877.
Madam,?I am directed by the Select Committee on the Lunacy
Laws to inform you that when the Committee entertained the idea of
recalling you, it was before the evidence furnished by your own
pamphlets and letters had convinced them that you had been under
insane delusions. The production of these documents has, in fact,
altered the case. The Committee understands you now wish to raise
the question as to whether the author of these pamphlets and letters
ought not to be considered of sound mind; this is, in their opinion,
entirely foreign to the purpose for which they were appointed, and,
therefore, not wishing to express any opinion on your present state,
they consider that they would not be justified in reopening this ques-
tion, and that they must consider your cass as closed.?Your obedient
servant, C. E. Austen Leigh.
We are not at all surprised at the view taken by the Com-
mittee on Spiritualism. We have frequently shown it to be
either an" imposition or a form of madness, more often the
latter. It has become apparent to us that Spiritualists cannot
argue in any way to prove the truth of their doctrine; they can
abuse, and this is generally characterised by a certain tone
peculiar to this indeed " peculiar people." Poetical effusions
received anonymously through the post, conspicuous by the
absence of a stamp, is one way they have of venting their wrath
upon those who endeavour to expose their erroneous ideas ; again,
pictures of spirits sent on envelopes, with blasphemous quotations
subscribed, is another of the numerous methods adopted by Spiri-
tualists to portray their ire, and at the same time to betray their
madness.
We maintain that ere long it will be a thing of the past.
It has been revived from time to time, but never has it received
such a frightful blow as that administered by the Lunacy
Committee. Whatever are the results furnished by the evidence
afforded by witnesses to the Committee, we may rest satisfied
that they have pronounced Spiritualism to be a delusion.
This we have long contended, and we are glad to find the House
of Commons endorse our opinion through their Committee as
representing the whole House.
It is a surprising thing to see this community in possession
of two organs in which they can express their delusive ideas, and
the absurdities they abound in must be read to be fully appre-
ciated. It is really amusing to take up one of these extra-
ordinary productions and read the accounts of the supposed
308 A DEATII-BLOW TO SPIRITUALISM.
spiritualistic revelations, the productions of either a diseased
imagination or an inventive faculty. Accounts are given of the
wonderful healing power of these people, and cases are cited in
illustration where internal weakness, deafness, and other com-
plaints are treated with considerable benefit by these powers.
We read that a young lady offers to cure cancer, consumption,
dipsomania, or insanity by postal or other treatment; and not
only this, but takes pupils in the healing art. Such prepos-
terousi nonsense needs^ but small comment. We admit that it
is a difficult thing to imagine the poor victim suffering from
organic disease, reduced to the utmost extremity, or the chronic
tippler, who is rapidly drinking away his very existence, spend-
ing their guineas for postal treatment. Anyone who for one
moment can believe in this must either be a fool or a lunatic.
"W e pronounce Spiritualism to be a form of imposition pro-
fessing to have religion as a background, and we trust that the
day is not far distant when its present believers will either
confess their disbelief and ignore what we consider as a dis-
grace to all humanity, or, still believing in the reality of what
is a delusion, be safely kept under proper care and treatment
in a well-regulated asylum. We speak strongly on this
subject, as we have seen so much mental alienation caused bv
" Spiritualism." J
% must indeed be discouraging to the various supporters of
Spiritualism to see their beloved doctrines suddenly dashed to
the ground, and pronounced to be madness by a Parliamentary
Committee. We are glad to see such trash exposed; it has had
its day, and the believers in its insane doctrines will soon become
few and far between. In order to prove its absurdity no
reasoning powers are required. It is a matter of sheer common
sense, and we maintain that the real believers in its erroneous
views are^ only fit to be^ treated as persons of unsound mind
and the victims of delusions, and should be taken care of by
their friends. A pamphlet published at the beginning of the
year gave rise to much discussion on the alleged increase of
mental disease which might justly be attributed to the baneful
effects of Spiritualism, and much discussion ensued. What was
there stated is in accoidance with well-substantiated facts, and
the Lunacy Committee, having pronounced supposed spiritualistic
revelations to be delusions and its believers lunatics, have by
their verdict given the death-blow to Spiritualism.
