Clinical Studies
=================

By Sir John Eose Cormack, K.D.,
F.R.S.E., M.D., F.R.C.P.,"Chevalier of the Legion of Honour,
Physician to the Hertford British Hospital of Paris. London : J.
Churchill, New Burlington Street. Paris : Gralignani, 224 Pue
de Pivoli.
Sir John Rose Cormackhas produced two volumes on clinical
medicine, the result of his private and hospital practice in Paris,
Edinburgh, and elsewhere.
In the first volume much valuable information is given on
the various epidemic fevers, and more than two hundred pages
are devoted to the consideration of "The Epidemic lever"
which prevailed in Edinburgh and other towns in 1843?1846.
In 1843 the same author published a treatise on this epi-
demic form of fever, now known by the name of " relapsing
fever." A good deal of this is reproduced by him, but with
considerable additions, and he now places before us all that is
yet known of this peculiar epidemic. I he account is very care-
170 REVIEWS.
fully put together ; and a reproduction of what has been out of
print for some time, and consequently so difficult to obtain,
especially when it bears directly on an important question, is a
subject for congratulation, especially when the matter has been
collected together by much labour and hard clinical study by
the bedside and in the post-mortem room.
A number of cases illustrative of the symptoms and treat-
ment of relapsing fever are carefully compiled, and the patholo-
gical changes in cases which have proved fatal are given, and
the description concludes with statistical details and practical
inferences. It is the most complete history of relapsing fever
that has yet been published, and we heartily recommend it in
all its details to those who are interested in the subject.
The remainder of this volume is taken up with the conside-
ration of cholera, nephritis from scarlatina, puerperal convul-
sions, granular degeneration of the kidney, infantile remittent
fever, and other matters of special interest.
An account is given of the epidemics of cholera, entering
into the minutest description of the various forms of treatment,
with a careful analysis of each.
With regard to the arrest of the serous diarrhoea which
precedes the state of collapse as well as of the cramps, the follow-
ing drugs are specially mentioned : creosote, turpentine, sul-
phuric acid, nitric acid, nitro-sulphuric acid, nitrate of silver,
quinine, gallic acid, alum, and acetate of lead. The combination
of quinine with a mineral acid, or with iron, appears to have
had great success, as also creosote in doses of two or three drops
in mucilage every hour. This latter remedy is the one especially
mentioned by the author. The other diseases in this volume
are ably treated by Sir J. R. Cormack.
The second volume of these clinical studies commences with
the Gold Medal thesis on " The Presence of Air in the Organs
of Circulation." This thesis is divided into four chapters, each
being more or less a complete essay. The causes and conse-
quences of the entry of air into the various veins are fully dis-
cussed, and cases are given in illustration of this interesting
subject.
The fatal results of the entrance of air by the uterine veins is
carefully placed before us, and appear to favour the formation of
emboli and fibrinous formations in the organs of circulation.
We are told that " the causes of most of the unexpected sudden
deaths which occur some days after delivery, when all seems to
be going on well, are embolism and fibrinous tormations in the
organs of circulation. In the puerperal state?as also in some
diseases?the blood has a tendency during life to coagulate the
heart and large vessels. This tendency does not depend upon
REVIEWS. 171
Jin excess of fibrin in the blood, but upon a condition, induced
by different causes, which determines an abnormal clumping or
aggregation of the red corpuscles."
Some instructive and interesting chapters are given on reflex
convulsions of infancy, diphtheria, and the paralytic affections so
often associated with it, congenital syphilis, concussion o e
brain, general paralysis with insanity, and sharp attac s o in
sanity in women. Cases are here cited of general paralysis
in which cures have taken place. We must con ess a
in our experience the diseases known in England as genera
paralysis of the insane, or general paresis, is quite incura e,
and when once the symptoms have become developed, it s ow y
but insidiously progresses. It is due to organic disease o e
brain, probably softening. Another peculiarity of is com
plaint is that it is rarely, if ever, met with in females. ^ e
have, however, read the case of Miss A. B., described as^su ermg
from symptoms of " general paralysis with insanity, at page
495, in which recovery took place.
This is indeed a most remarkable case. The patient appears
to have had all the symptoms of a typical case of general paiesis,
the extravagant delusions, ideas of grandeur, and thickness in
articulating and in speech. Her attack appears to have lasted
for seven months, and the symptoms, progress, and result of t us
case have led the author to the conclusion that there exis e
congestion of the left corpus striatum and optic thalamus prior
to and at the time of her illness, and when first put u"~er ."
ment. Had our space permitted it, we should have publis e 11s
case in extenso, the interest in a psychological pom o view
being so great. In our next issue we hope to pu is 1 ur ei
particulars concerning it. Other cases of geneia para ysis
given, all being of interest. The volume conclu es W1
account of some short attacks of insanity occumng in w ,
chiefly due to uterine or ovarian excitement, associa e
hereditary predisposition _ s of clinical
We cannot speak too highly of tnese ywu ,, i
studies. They are most complete in their debciip 10 ,,
guage is elegant in the extreme, the statemen sare ,
by facts, the result of practical experience, an we * clinical
careful perusal of them to all who are eager to study clinical
medicine.
