A Guide to Therapeutics
========================

334 KEVIEWS.

By Robert Farquharson, M.D.
Edin., F.R.C.P. Lond., Lecturer on Materia Medica at St.
Mary's Hospital Medical School, &c. London: Smith,
Elder, & Co., 15 Waterloo Place. 1877.
At the commencement of his undertaking the author furnishes
us with a highly interesting treatise upon the course and pro-
gress of therapeutics during a considerable number of past
years.
bome brief rules for prescribing are laid down, and the
combination of drugs is ably dilated upon. In the case of
diuretics three or four members of this group will often act
when one produces little effect. In rheumatic fever several
alkaline remedies appear to act better together than when one
member of the group is only administered. The unpleasant
symptoms of lodism are often mitigated by spiritus amnionic
aromaticus, and the chances of discomfort attendant upon the
subcutaneous injection of morphia are often diminished bY the
exhibition ot atropia. Speaking of the mode of administra-
tion, we learn that the metals are best given in the form of
pill or in a small quantity of fluid, whilst the purgative salts
are best employed in large quantities of fluid. In reference
to period of administration, drugs of a lowering effect are best
given with or after meals, in order to counteract such a result
and cod-liver oil is most conveniently taken after food since'
oily matters are best absorbed when the lacteals are in full
working order; again, it is a well-established fact that anthel-
mintics are always most efficacious after a long fast. As regards
large and small doses, purgatives and emetics are best employed
in one considerable dose, whilst tonics, astringents, diuretics,
require steady repetition at certain short and regular inter-
vals. In the treatment of acute tonsillitis or catarrhal febrile
disturbance the most reliable administration of aconite is in
drop 01 half-drop doses every hour, half-hour, or every ten
minutes; ipecacuanha in minim doses will often check obstinate
vomiting. Certain medicines must be given in very large
quantities; thus, to tranquillise irregular muscular movements
we must prescribe succus conii in at least Jj doses, and even
more is frequently required; in nocturnal incontinence of urine
belladonna must be pushed up to 5j or 5jss of the tincture.
Idiosyncrasy is a matter of great moment in the exhibition
of certain lemedies, since purgatives act very differently on
different^ persons, and others require immense quantities of
anaesthetic vapour for the induction of complete insensibility.
Ihe influence of habit calls for every consideration, since medi-
cines often lose their effect when continued for lengthened
periods. It is well known that the habitual arsenic-eaters of
REVIEWS. 335
Styria are enabled to consume quantities of that substance
which would prove inevitably fatal to the novice.
The accumulative property of certain drugs is a noteworthy
fact. How often do we observe the twitchings from strychnia,
the cardiac depression of digitalis, the paralysis from alcohol.
Incompatibility may be of two kinds, viz. chemical and
physiological. The chemical variety consists in the reaction
of one drug upon another. Add decoction of cinchona to iron,
and an unsightly black mixture, consisting of tannate of iron,
is produced; strychnia and corrosive sublimate will not go with
gelatine. As regards physiological incompatibility, the rationale
is that one drug is so far antagonistic to another that the
mixture of the two is inert. Thus belladonna and opium,
atropine and prussic acid, aconite and digitalis, strychnia and
calabar bean, and, in a marked degree, caustic alkalies with
belladonna, hyoscyamus, stramonium, or tobacco, are opposed
to one another in combination.
In prescribing for children Dr. Farquharson impresses upon
us the important fact that these little ones can often take with
impunity, and even with decided benefit, quantities of active
remedies which will correspond to a full adult dose. He
attributes this to the much greater destruction and construc-
tion of tissue in early life, whereby the organs of elimination
are in unusual activity, and hence disposed to excrete medicinal
substances with special promptitude.
Arsenic may be freely given to children, and at the age of
five or six the author would unhesitatingly commence with v and
push this even up to i^x if necessary : prussic acid may be given
in -ny to r?|_iij at the same age. Strychnia is well borne, tinc-
tura ferri may be taken in large quantities, and excellent results
have followed the administration of 3j ?f the latter three times
daily in a child of six. Children are strangely capricious, for
whilst they strongly object to bitter or acid substances, they
readily take oils, and appear to derive satisfaction from sucking
in cod-liver oil.
We heartily agree with Dr. Farquharson's views with regard
to writing prescriptions in our native tongue, since by this
means the chance of mistake is limited, and that mystery is done
away with which, beyond anything else, has tended to keep back
the progress of our art.
In constructing a general plan of arrangement for the doses
of drugs, a few rules are laid down. Thus, in general, tinctures
may be prescribed in doses of from 5SS 3\j? infusions and
decoctions from sss to sij, powders from two to ten grains,
pills four to ten grains.
In stating what we know concerning the properties of each
drug, we?
33G REVIEWS.
" Take first its local or external action ; then its influence
on the brain and on the spinal and sympathetic system of
nerves.
? This will lead us up gradually to the effect on the heart and
blood-vessels, whose functions are presided over and ruled by
nervous influence. The effects of the drug on respiration and
temperature will next be considered; and we then proceed to the
alterations of secretion in the following order : Urinary intes-
tinal, salivary, cutaneous, etc. '
"Then other actions which come under no heading, and
which may be called specific.
" Finally, we must consider the various modes of elimination
from the body, the antidotes, contra-indications, and best modes
of prescribing; winding up, in most cases, with a prescription
which will, as far as possible, combine efficiency and elegance
with palatability. J
The grouping of drugs is beset with no inconsiderable diffi-
culties,for whilst opium is an astringent, it lays claim under
some circumstances to be called a purgative; it is diaphoretic,
sedative, and antiphlogistic, and the confusion inseparable from
hunting it about among its various headings must of necessitv
perplex the mmd of the student and occasion great loss of
time.
In the work before us the arrangement of Garrod and other
popular text-hooks has been adopted, with one modification, that
the general principles of Therapeutics are removed from their
usual position at the end of the book, and a systematic elassifi-
cation is scattered through its pao-es.
In order to explain the general aspect of the book, it may
not be out of place to quote the following passages. It will be
seen that Physiological and Therapeutical properties are placed
in parallel lines, and this scheme is preserved through almost
all its pages.
CHLOEAL.
Local Actions.
Physiological Therapeutical.
Applied externally chloral has It has been recommended as an
been by some authorities supposed external application in neuralgia,
to have sedative properties, and it rheumatic and other painful affed
is also an undoubted antiseptic. tions; used as a dressing to
ulcerated surfaces, it seems to act
well by removing the foetor of
discharges and lessening pain;
and it has been successfully em-
ployed in solution for the pre-
servation of anatomical prepara-
tions.
REVIEWS. 337
Constitutional Actions.
Physiological. Therapeutical.
1. Nervous System.?1. Brain. 1.?Chloral is an excellent
?Chloral produces an antemic hypnotic, causing sound and re-
condition of the brain, and thus freshing sleep without the diges-
causes sleep by imitating the tive disturbance which usually
natural anatomical arrangement of follows the use of opium.
that process.
(1) The alkali of the blood is
too feeble to liberate the chloroform,
and the albumen is considered an-
tagonistic to such a process.
(2) No smell of chloroform can
be observed in the breath and no
ana;sthetic effect is produced on
the sleeper in moderate doses.
2. Spinal Cord. ? The reflex 2.? Chloral is of service in some
irritability of the spinal cord is spasmodic diseases, as chorea,
very decidedly lessened, and the re- whooping cough, asthma, incon-
spiratory centre becomes weakened tinence of urine, labour, after-
and eventually paralysed. pains, etc.
3. Sympathetic and General 3.?Chloral, having no influence
Nervous System.?The vaso-motor over sensory nerves, has no power,
system is enfeebled ; but no special per se, of allaying pain, and is
effect seems to be produced on therefore useless in that class of
other nervous structures, unless we cases where opium is of such
believe any part of the loss of signal service.
muscular power sometimes ob-
served in those who have taken
chloral for some time to be due
to an action on the motor nerves.
II. Circulatory System Chloral II.?Chloral, weakening cardiac
has a powerful action on the heart, action, must not be given Avhere
lowering and weakening its action we have any reason to suspect an
by paralysing its contained sympa- enfeebled state of the heart
thetic ganglia. muscle.
We must sincerely congratulate the author upon his handy
and admirable volume. We have followed its pages with the
highest interest and gratification. To the student in Materia
Medica it cannot fail to be of the utmost service, whilst the
more experienced reader may derive from it much profitable
information. Both in style of composition and clearness of
arrangement Dr. Farquharson's " Guide to Therapeutics " may
well merit a position amongst the best known and accepted
works upon the subject in our language.
