General Paralysis
===================

59
Art. V.?
I. Rechevches sur les Centres Nerveux: Pathologie et Phy-
siologic Pathologique. Par le Dr. V. Magnan. 1876.
II. Rechevches sur VAnatomic Pathologique et la Nature de
la Paralysie Generate. Par les Docteurs Henry Bonnet et
Poincare. 2e Edition. Paris, 1876. Pp. 154.
III. Historique du Delire des Grandeurs. Par M. le Dr.
Ach. Foyille, fils. Paris, 1871. Pp. 55.
Tiiere is at present an embarras de richesse of observations on
General Paralysis. The subject is obscure, almost mysterious,
and invites, even demands, further investigations. There are
not less than three works on the pathology of the disease
noticed in this section. That of M. Magnan claims special
attention, because he is a distinguished physiologist, a psycho-
logist intrusted with the charge of a large hospital for the insane
in Paris, and the initiator?perhaps unwilling, certainly unde-
signed initiator?of that agitation which commenced with his
advent at the meeting of the British Association at Norwich, and
closed, we shall hope, with the legislative enactments respecting
vivisection. He has, besides, a discovery?or the extension and
interpretation of that discovery attributed to Bayle?to propound.
His text and theory is that the fundamental lesion of this
affection is a General Diffused Interstitial Encephalitis which
involves accessory structural changes of different characters.
^Regarding the malady as a genuine Phlegmasie, but without
condescending on its origin, he regards the primary and most
palpable form of the Interstitial Degeneration as Colloid. This
term is of such recent introduction into scientific language, that
it seems prudent to explain what it is intended by the author to
describe or define. This transformed matter is presented under
the aspect of a hyaline substance, semi-transparent, slightly
refractory, and at certain points of a bluish tint; when existing
in isolated masses of small size, it preserves the form and
aspect of whatever cerebral elements it may have invaded.
When more abundant and collected together in patches, they
are unequal, irregular, and fissured in various directions and
depths. This product of inflammation, which is not affirmed to be
tubercular, is not of fatty nature, because, insoluble in ether or
chloroform; it is not amyloid, because unaffected by tincture of
iodine, solutions of potass and soda, and is dissolved in concen-
trated acetic acid; and, lastly, it is not inorganic, as there is no
60 GENERAL PARALYSIS.
reaction with hydrochloric acid. Its solubilty in hot water,
especially when potass or soda is added, is supposed to establish
the possession of a peculiar chemical constitution.
In examining the cerebrum as the principal seat of paresis,
many authors have detected granulations on the ependyma of
the ventricles, and have recognised these as the consequences of
inflammation; but M. Magnan claims priority in having deter-
mined this locality as the centre, or it may be one of many centres
of that disorganising process which is indicated by the symptoms
of general paralysis, which penetrates throughout all parts of the
encephalon, and produces those secondary pathological appear-
ances which have previously been identified as the cause of the
disorders of mobility and sensibility which follow. The progress
of the degeneration, or morbid formative change, as it is called,
from the stage when the ventricles have become dilated, their
ependyma thickened?when their surface, especially in the fourth
ventricle, is covered with granulations?must be upwards along
the connective and involving all tissues, must be gradual, insidious,
and can only be traced by the more serious and more advanced
alterations in structure. This interstitial irritation?the phrase
is M. Magnan's?by whatever law or influence disseminated, is
propagated by nuclear proliferation, pervades the white matter
in common with the cortical substance, and the capillaries, which
are thickened, tortuous, and massed together; but, although
the nervous tubes are rarely implicated, the cells of the cortical
layers are sometimes found infiltrated with granulations, but
preserving their form. This condition obtains towards the third
or terminal period of the disease, and is not compatible with the
preservation of life, although death does not necessarily ensue
when a similar amount of disorganisation appears in the cells
of the medulla.
It may be expedient to sketch more minutely the features
presented by the morbid changes in the cells. The superficial
stratum of the grey matter may be found intact, but in the
middle and inferior portions the cells are seen to have brilliant
nuclei, tending towards colloid, while their normal aspect is
preserved. But the walls of the cell nearest the lesion are
transformed into a shining refractory hyaline substance, the
colloid infiltration having been propagated to both. The state
of the blood vessels should also be particularised. When a
slice of brain is cut perpendicular to the axis of the capillary a
colloid envelope is distinctly seen, there being visible in its
orifice a mass of red and white globules. The opening of the
vessel is sometimes regular, but often displays considerable
inequalities and eminences. Around the canal there may be
frequently discovered a ring of connective tissue, finely streaked,
GENERAL PARALYSIS. 61
and so bright as to sliow that it has partaken of the colloid
change. Around such rings, "when the walls of the vessels have
become, as it were, rudimentary, there may be perceived cylin-
ders composed of several concentric layers of hyaline, differing
in thickness, and almost or altogether obscuring the course of
the vessel.
The second of these envelopes is furrowed in different direc-
tions, across which at certain points may be observed one or more
nuclei so disposed as to resemble the presence of vesicular cells,
fusiform, radiated, in fact, cell elements of various forms. More
narrowly observed, these lines and spaces may be recognised as
disintegrated fragments of hyaline. These nuclei are spherical,
distended, and present various shades of brilliancy, according
to the point from which they are viewed. Occasionally colloid
constitutes the inner face or wall of the fibrous rings, its con-
centric layers furrowed and separated, in the middle of which
are seen nuclei, which justifies the belief that the connective
tissue is the framework of the interstitial deposit. It seems,
consequently, that this degeneration, like others, acquires a
basic tissue, which is itself under the influence of the morbid
formative irritation affecting the whole organ, and is thus pre-
pared for the whole series of subsequent changes. (P. 12.)
These microscopic features, as well as those conspicuous to
the naked eye, may appear first in the brain and its appendages,
and afterwards in the medulla; or they may appear first in the
medulla and afterwards in the brain ; and they may appear
simultaneously in both organs; or, in other words, the progress
may be upwards or downwards along these nervous tracts.
According to priority in the development of these pathological
conditions are observed perversions of mind, of motility, of sen-
sibility. Should the brain be originally attacked, the psychical
signs predominate, or are exclusively manifested ; should the
medulla be the primary seat of the disease, muscular pain,
tremor, in fact, ataxic symptoms, spreading gradually to the
lips and tongue, disturbance of the internal viscera correspond-
ing to the portions of the spinal column involved, precede
alienation, and greatly augment the difficulties in diagnosis;
and, lastly, when the whole cerebro-spinal axis participates at
once in the colloid degeneration, the characteristic indications
of paresis will appear simultaneously, or in rapid succession.
But in addition to the diffusion of colloid over the great centres,
and especially within the medullary canal, where there may
likewise be detected thickening of the meninges, serous, and
purulent effusions, and other subsidiary or supplemental altera-
tions, and followed by perversions or abolition of general sensi-
bility; the nerves of the special senses are likewise involved,
62 GENERAL PARALYSIS.
entailing impairment or abolition of vision, hearing, etc., which
is adduced as a proof that sclerosis, as it is vaguely designated,
involves all parts subservient to nervous action.
We have scrupulously excluded from this vidimus of M.
Magnan's observations all except what he has claimed, or may
be disposed to claim, as original, in order to present his opinions
in as simple and succinct a form as possible. Perfectly reliant
upon the trustworthiness of post-mortem teaching, rigid in his
deductions, and arrogating the credit of a discoverer, he con-
sents to dismiss the visible alterations rather summarily and
suspiciously, as depending upon constitutional, and not local
morbid action, except when those alterations are taken together:
the only alterations, in fact, which Bayle, Calmiel, and the
great majority of pathologists have relied upon ; to relegate the
appearances seen by various investigators in the Corpus Callosum,
the Pillars of the Fornix, in Paresis, to that refuge for the des-
titute, the category for exceptional cases; but is compelled to
admit that the Colloid Degeneration, upon which he has so
fully insisted, is far from being constant in Paresis, and that
it may be met with in other diseases remotely connected, or in
no degree connected, with that under consideration. In illus-
tration of this latter proposition examples are cited where the
affection of the Ependyma of the fourth ventricle signalised has
been met with after Muscular Atrophy, Chronic Alcoholism, Senile
Dementia, Tetanus, and the Tubercular Meningitis of children.
The contents of this volume could not easily be divined
from its title, or that of its principal component parts. It is
an Omnium Gratherum of able, but rather incongruous, essays
and lectures, which have previously done good service, on the
Physiology and Clinical Pathology of the effects of Alcohol
and Absinthe; on Hemianesthesia as a consequence of the abuse
of stimulants; on the Strait Waistcoat; on the Statistics of the
admissions and relative proportions of cases of insanity from
abuse of alcohol into the hospital of St. Anne during the
gloomy reign of Communism.
The object of the first of these disquisitions is to establish a
generic distinction between the intoxication produced by alcohol
and that produced by absinthe; this differentiation is demon-
strated by experiments upon the lower animals. Drunkenness
and a number of signs common to the toxic consequences of both
of these stimulants, follow the rapid administration of large
quantities of both poisons in quadrupeds; but where alcohol alone
is exhibited the succeeding paralysis is at first confined entirely
to the muscles of the posterior part of the body, and the subject
is agitated by fearful illusions ; whereas when absinthe is given
the muscles of the anterior part of the body are first palsied,
GENERAL PARALYSIS. 63
hallucinations ensue, and towards the close the characteristic
and diagnostic sign appears, in convulsions, varied in their
seat and extent, but representing genuine epileptic seizures.
The distinctions will be best indicated by introducing two
typical experiments. In dogs, we are assured, absinthe, whether
introduced into the stomach or injected into the veins, excites
delusions, fear, anger, contractions of the muscles of the neck
and trunk amounting to episthotonos and pleurothotonos, and
ultimately general convulsions and death. One animal, under
five grammes of the essence, is graphically described as with-
out provocation rising to his feet, his hair erect, his aspect
ferocious, with his fiery eyes fixed upon a bare wall; then as
rushing to and fro against an ideal enemy, barking, gnashing
his teeth, and then appearing to tear what has roused him to
fury; the scene ending in convulsions. When dogs are treated
in the same manner with alcohol, the phenomena, both
psychical and physical, are widely different. They become
slightly excited, rush or reel, or leap to and fro, then pass from
hebitude into semi-stupor, comatose sleep; anaesthesia and
paralysis succeed, at first confined to the hind, but ultimately
involving all the extremities, with general relaxation of the
body, but never convulsions. When death terminates these
manifestations, the pathological appearances are not worthy
of further record than that they resemble those met with in
drunkards, such as fatty or steatomatous degeneration, espe-
cially of the liver. It may interest our vivisectors to know
that the opisthotonos and other modifications of convulsions,
commencing in tonic and ending in clonic spasm, have been
noticed in dogs after the removal of the cerebral hemispheres.
Whenever absinthe is swallowed by man, the immediate
impressions, if not pleasures, are a feeling of nausea and then of
giddiness ; and when the dose is large, or the debauch repeated
or protracted, epilepsy may be induced, but does not invariably
follow. As a most suitable and a solemn corollary of his ex-
perience upon this point, M. Magnan alludes to the recherches
of M. Marce, of Bicetre, who first, in 1864, determined the
power of absinthe to produce delirium, etc.; secondly, he quotes
the reports of MM. Marce, Contesse, and Morel, who, during
years undisturbed by moral or political convulsions, calculated
that in 6,000 lunatics about 20 per cent, could be traced to
the abuse of alcohol; and thirdly, to the fact that in the asylum
of which he is superintendent there were received during four
months of the eventful years of 1870 and 1871, 1,589 insane
persons, in 387 of whom the mental disease was complicated
with alcoholism, either as a cause or a consequence. But when
the darkest months during which this social storm raged
64 GENERAL PARALYSIS.
were reached, it is found that the proportion of dipsomaniacs
rose to 48 per cent., while in the corresponding month of
the preceding year it amounted to 26. This disparity may be
so far explained by the facts that the insane drinkers in the ranks
of the National Guards during the first year would escape detec-
tion, and that law, order, and the preservation of peace, health,
and personal safety, had all disappeared, amid the general con-
fusion of the second year. It must naturally be very difficult at
all times to ascertain the precise nature of that excess which has
been consummated in derangement; but our author has come
to the conclusion that absinthe was less accessible, and brandy
was actually served out to the belligerents during the Com-
mune?a circumstance which must materially affect his subse-
quent enquiry. Perhaps, as a result of this, of the inebriates
admitted in 1871, only five individuals laboured under epilepsy,
four of whom took absinthe; several, however, in addition to
other intoxicants. In 1870, of 155 dipsomaniacs admitted, 17
were epileptics; of these 16 appear to have been absinthe
drinkers, although not exclusively so. In reference to the
occurrence of convulsions in patients who had limited their
potations to wine or alcohol, M. Magnan believes that he
could trace a predisposition to epileptiform or apoplectiform
attacks. It is quite evident that, however suggestive these
statistics may be, the data furnished are altogether insufficient
to demonstrate a more intimate connection between indulgence
in absinthe and convulsive seizure, than between them and
the abuse of other stimulants.
In a chapter devoted to the mental manifestations during
the acute and chronic stages of alcoholism, the author has re-
corded many valuable conclusions upon, first, the early invasion
of delirium and tremor in absinthe drinkers, as well as the painful
colouring of their delusions ; secondly, upon the permanence of
delusions independently of delirium in insane inebriates; thirdly,
upon the tendency to Suicide and General Paralysis in this class,
giving a table in which, of 438, 34 had attempted to commit sui-
cide, and 10, homicide ; fourthly, on the enfeeblement of memory,
judgment, imagination, blunting of the moral sense, and general
degradation, which are the results of frequent attacks of delirium
tremens or continued intemperance; fifthly, on the culminating
physical alterations, especially fatty degeneration, which close
a similar course; but we must regard as superfluous his ex-
haustive portraiture of the fancies, follies, extravagance, and
varied tempers and tendencies which mark the progress of
inebriation, seeing that these are generally the faithful represen-
tations of the dispositions, the habits, or constitutional con-
dition of the individual.
GENERAL PARALYSIS. 65
Besides these grave lesions of the understanding, chronic
alcoholism is often accompanied with diminished or abolished
sensibility of one side, technically designated hemianesthesia,
the sequence probably of congestive, hemorrhagic, or other con-
ditions of the brain or medulla. This deprivation comprehends
the sense of resistance, temperature, and so on, is not merely
cutaneous, but extends to subjacent organs; but the sensation of
cold is sometimes experienced in the member affected, which is
invariably less warm than that of the opposite side. The con-
tractility of the muscles in the paralysed region continues unim-
paired. The border limits of superficial anesthesia are sharply
defined, extending to within a few lines of the Median line;
but when profound and general, all tactile impressions without
the co-operation of vision, whether imparted by the hand of a
companion or the limbs of a compass, are with regard to the parts
implicated obscure, imperfect, and topographically incorrect. As
has been noticed by other observers, this condition often persists
while the impaired motility which contemporaneously indicated
the supervention of brain disease disappears. The sclerosis and
subsequent disease of the organs of circulation upon which these
phenomena are supposed to depend often invades the nerves of
the external senses and the surrounding tissues, so that the eye,
ear, nasal and buccal membranes lose their special function as
well as the general sensibility by which the exercise of that
function is effected and regulated. It may be stated as an
instance of minute observation that the sclerotic tissue of the
eye is less sensible to physical irritation than the cornea in such
cases, the explanation of the difference in degree being afforded
by the origin of the nerve supply. But such suspension of
sensation is not necessarily connected either with alcoholism,
apoplexy, softening, or sclerosis; but may originate in func-
tional disturbance or in some structural but unknown condition
of the encephalon. The seat of this obscure cause has been
sought and supposed to be found in various regions of the organ,
supposed on theoretical, sometimes on physiological, grounds
to preside over the perception of normal sensible impressions.
Longet and Vulpian localised this power, and the opinion has
been generally adopted in France, in the annular protuberance;
Todd and Carpenter regard the optic thalamus as the point
where tactile impressions enter consciousness, and the corpus
striatum as the tract through which volitions are propagated;
Turck, guided by several pathological observations, concludes
that impairment of the external senses may be traced to various
changes, such as extravasation of blood and ramollissement, in
either hemisphere; Charcot found lesions in the posterior half of
the optic thalamus and adjacent part, in cases where the paralysis,
- PART I. VOL. III.?NEW SERIES. E
66 GENERAL PARALYSIS.
tremor, and anesthesia existed on the same side. M. Magnan's
own investigations have led to the belief that the optic thalamus,
the lenticular nuclei, the internal capsule, and the radiated tract
are the portions of the brain chiefly implicated in the morbid
manifestations of sight, hearing, &c. These perplexing con-
tradictions in physiological pathology, accentuated though many
of them may be, instead of exposing the worthlessness of such
inquiries, or that they lie outside the domain of science, should
be accepted as suggestive of further and more laborious observa-
tion and in a different direction.
M. Magnan is an apologist of restraint in the management
of the insane. He denounces the camisole as entailing evils
such as necrosis of the elbow joint, unheard of even during the
epidemic furor against all bonds which agitated England about
thirty years ago ; and prefers a loose jupe or maillot, the arms
of which terminate in culs-de-sac, which are affixed to the
dress, as imposing no restriction on the thorax or abdominal
muscles, and as free from all similar objections. Among the
evils enumerated death appears as an occasional accident. But
what mainly concerns our present purpose is that he conceives
it important to state the comparative mortality of insane
inebriates under the two different methods of coercion; thus
the proportion in Bicetre Avas as 8 to 1*30 in St.. Anne's, the
mode of medication being analogous in both, except that the
camisole was employed in the former, the maillot in the latter.
It is expedient to mention here that many of the facts and
opinions of M. Magnan have previously appeared under other
forms and collocations in his L'Acoolisme, 1874.
II. From the preamble of the work of MM. Bonnet and
Poincare it might be reasonably anticipated that a Terra
Incognita had been explored, a North-West passage discovered,
a Gordian knot unravelled ; that the difficulties involved in the
origin and progress of General Paresis had been solved. Such
expectations are scarcely realised ; but the authors have de-
veloped an ingenious and perhaps new explanation of the
pathology of this obscure disease, which is deserving of investi-
gation. They initiate the inquiry by describing the first stage
in the history of the observation of the malady as mythological,
attributing the views originally entertained to defective ana-
tomical and physiological knowledge, and to the ambiguity of
the terms used to record clinical observations. To Haslain is
traced the mere discovery of the symptoms now recognised as
indicating a distinct nervous affection; but to Georget, Esquirol,
and, above all, to Bayle, is awarded the merit of having recorded
its principal features and characteristics. In our own opinion,
GENERAL PARALYSIS. 67
while the latter author may be regarded as having presented
the morbid anatomical appearances which were supposed to
explain the nature of the hitherto unknown affection, Calraiel,
who is still alive, was the first psychologist who formulised the
whole subject, and assigned to its dual aspect and to the physical
and psychical signs their true position among mental diseases.
Our authors not merely dispute the propriety of the designation
of general paralysis, and the rank it has assumed in systems of
nosology, but they prefer to define it as an interference with
vaso-motor and reflex action, which gradually attacks and
destroys the functions of every organ ; but, while admitting the
accuracy of Bavle's observation as to the presence of congestion
of the brain and its envelopes, they dispute the relations which
these were supposed to occupy in the causation of the mental and
muscular phenomena, holding them to be secondary, or, rather,
one of a series of structural changes, the primary origination of
which constitutes the central fact in the theory which they have
propounded. The following propositions precede, and are per-
haps intended to preface, the special objects of the monograph:
1st. Is this malady a cause or a consequence of insanity ?
2nd. Are the somatic symptoms invariably and inevitably
connected with mental disturbance ?
3rd. Are the structural changes in the brain the cause of
the paralytic condition ?
4th. Do not other lesions exist to which the symptoms may
be referred ?
5th. Is the affection developed insensibly, or is its progress
marked, step by step, by specific mental signs ?
fitli. Is the advance of the physical and psychical changes
parallel, or may they not reciprocally mask each other so that
certain indications of one or other may appear latent ?
Curious transcendentalisms occasionally crop up in other
forms, but they do not obstruct nor obscure the really plain and
practical bearing of the discussion. A copious catena of
opinions and authorities in connection with the pathology of
paresis is supplied, which shall be cited in an abbreviated form,
as it bears upon the history of what is pointed to as a new
disease, as a product of civilisation, and even by MM. Bonnet
and Poincare as an outcome of luxury and irregularities in
digestion and nutrition.
Bayle designated the disease chronic arachnites; Calmiel,
diffuse chronic meningeal encephalites, and, with a long train of
disciples, held it to be of inflammatory origin. To Baillarger
two sets of anatomical alterations, congestion of the membranes
and chronic hydrocephalus, with atrophy and softening of the
brain, appear of different import. He adds likewise a patho-
K 2
68 GENERAL PARALYSIS.
gnomic cretiform expansion radiated in the grey substance.
The objections to the early opinions, according to Marce, are
the impossibility of conceiving a malady appearing in a chronic
stage, of the non-appearance of exudation in its progress, and
of its prolongation during many years.
Brunet and Lancereaux speak of a neo-membrane, or a pachy-
meningitis, the formation of which they explain by the exuda-
tion of aparietal layer from its walls,which is insensibly organised,
and which bears the marks of fatty degeneration. The rupture
of these vessels leads to the occurrence of arachnoid cysts.
Erlenmayer explains the atrophy which has been noticed
by the successive, by the repeated, effusion of serum, the ner-
vous elements being replaced by an amorphous substance. While
Calmiel described the adhesion of the pia-mater to the grey sub-
stance, and the formation of vascular loops in the capillaries,
where the inflammation was intense; and while others described
the intimate soldering of this membrane to the surface, so that it
cannot be separated without rupture of vessels, and the difference
in coloration, and density,of the grey matter itself, even its ramol-
lissement, M. Parchappe localises this degeneration inthe middle
layer of the substance, the superior and inferior remaining
healthy. " Although Grratiolet has demonstrated distinct cortical
strata, it has been contended that a scalpel could not separate
and individualise these with such accuracy that any deductions
could be established so as to justify reliance upon the pathognomic
sign propounded by M. Parchappe.
M. Frcerichs adduces the induration of the grey matter as
connecting the pathological condition with sclerosis. Although
the alterations in the white matter are slight, they exist, and
consist chiefly in hardening or softening, the augmentation of
the fluid of the ventricles, the thinning of their parietes,
which resemble indurated ependyma. Asperities are found
upon the surface, which were formerly detected by Joire in the
fourth ventricle, and are, according to Rokitansky, exudations
of plastic albumen; and, according to Meyer, hypertrophy of the
epithelium of the arachnoid.
M. Luys' conviction, that in the softening of the cortical
substance of the cerebellum may be discovered the source of
general paralysis, is asserted by M. Magnan to have been
founded on exceptional cases. Inflammation of the same
organ has been elected by M. Bouillaud as the source of
the disease; but this view may have been so far governed
by the supposed connection of this portion of the nervous
system with the regulation of motion. In dealing with
the results of microscopic anatcmy, M. Luys represents the
vessels of the pia-mater as of considerable size, the walls of the
GENERAL PARALYSIS. 69
capillaries as incrusted with granulations, the surface of the
membrane presenting scattered cell granules and molecules, and
extravasated blood globules. The opaque plates consist of hyper-
trophied cellular tissue, in which the vessels are infrequent
and small. The grey substance is greatly developed, with pal-
pable vascular arborisations, often in the form of a plexus.
The calibre of the capillaries is almost always contracted by the
incrustation of minute granules, or by cells deposited chiefly at
the bifurcations, which are of irregular shapes, often break down,
and discharge, their contents. The nerve tubes are malformed,
their contents escape, and they present little more than a mass
of debris.
M. Rokitansky has detected three distinct pathological ap-
pearances: 1st. Where a mass of connective tissue embraces
in its network the nervous element, and, in chronic cases, is stiff,
fibrous, and induces adhesions of the pia-mater; 2nd. The
tubes are varicose, broken, while the cells appear swollen;
3rd. The presence of anyloid or colloid bodies.
Wedl's special observations on these points are: The contrac-
tion of the capillaries and small blood-vessels, in consequence of
the cells upon their walls, leads to obliteration, their conversion
into bands or connective tissue, and the consequent impairment
of the nutrition of the part. He has further described hyper-
trophy of the cortical substance.
M. Salomon looks upon the degeneration of the adventitious
membrane of the vessels of the pia-mater, and of the connective
tissues of the cortical substance, ultimately involving the cells
and reducing them to an inert mass, as the seat of the disease.
Dr. ErtzbischofF attributes the hypersemia of the cortical
layers to the extreme development of the embryoplastic
element in the capillaries; which, compressing the vessel with-
out and within, diminishes and ultimately destroys the cavity.
This stasis necessitates granulation and adhesion. The majority
of German pathologists localise the disease in changes of the
walls of the vessels, and in the development of the connective
tissue; but Meschede sees the essential characteristics of paresis
in the degeneration of the cerebral cells, but especially of those of
the cortical substance, which he depicts as of abnormal shape,
and as filled, nodulated, or surrounded with fatty and pigmentary
granulations.
Lockhart Clarke in like manner signalises the conversion of
the cells of the convolutions into pigmentary bodies, irregularly
shaped and about to break up. He adds that, contemporaneously
with this change, the spinal marrow, especially in chronic cases,
is softened, even to the consistency of cream; or there may be
granular degeneration in its grey matter or its surroundings.
70 GENERAL PARALYSIS.
Westphal has, like our countryman, discovered in certain
cases granular degeneration in the posterior column of the
spinal marrow, which did not, however, extend higher than the
peduncles of the cerebrum, so that the alteration could not be
regarded as secondary, or as proceeding from the pathological
condition of the convolutions. He likewise adverts to a cross
alteration between the posterior column and the posterior por-
tion of the lateral column, which he refers to local myelitis
inducing necrobioses, by what he calls functional inertia.
M. Magnan, while writing copiously upon the structural
changes in paresis, selects as the diagnostic feature nuclear
proliferation of the interstitial tissue ; parenchymatous changes
are consecutive, and characterised by granular transformations.
It must be further noticed that this description involves the
presence of fatty degeneration and the consequent destruction
of the Myeline sheath, and that the bias of this pathologist is?
in harmony with that of Lockhart Clarke and Westphal?that
the morbid process ascends from the spinal marrow to the brain
rather than that it descends from the brain to the spinal
marrow.
The second section of the volume is entitled, " The Clinical
Philosophy and Physiology of Paresis." It is appropriated to a
rather promiscuous assemblage of the causes, causative and
collateral influences which may lead or tend to the production
of this neurose. The following introductory remarks are note-
worthy : Idiots and imbeciles are entirely exempt from this
degeneration; that the flushing swelling of the countenance in
certain individuals, even after a moderate repast, indicates the
effect of ganglionic influence upon nutrition; that, when eating
is indulged in to repletion, the immediate effect is the exhaustion
and enfeeblement of the sympathetic system, the ultimate effect
being paralysis or symptoms of vaso-motor and reflex disturbance;
that intemperance and irregularities in conduct, of whatever
kind?syphilis for example?may create or accelerate the course
of paresis. This course is divided into four stages: 1st, that
of delirium, with or without slight physical lesions; 2nd, that
of defective co-ordination of movement, exaggerated sentiments,
alterations in the secretions, with continued delirium; 3rd, that
of special dementia, with greater stupidity and degradation than
in other forms, control of muscles diminished, habits dirty; 4th.
perception of impressions by external senses abolished; insensi-
bility to pain; extinction of functions of relation and organic
life, disturbance in circulation, complete adynamic ataxy,
marasmus. It is affirmed that the dynamic signs are developed
at an earlier stage than the organic; but, even if advancing
simultaneously, the different degrees of intensity in these may
(3ENERAL PARALYSIS. 71
conceal the progress of either. Optimism and ambitious ideas
constitute the essential mental characteristics; but lypemania
may exist, without, however, altering the special form, or leading
to the fallacy of confounding the affection with other forms of
alienation. Previous to the establishment of complete delirium
or delusions, there may be traced deviations from healthy men-
talisation, which, though faint or latent, should be accepted as
prodromata. It might be difficult to determine upon what
cerebral change these precursors may depend, but it may be
confidently believed that the gradual evolution of physical and
psychical symptoms corresponds intimately with structural alter-
ations in nervous substances. Accordingly, there are found grave
morbid appearances not merely in the brain, spinal marrow,
and their dependencies, but in the viscera subservient to organic
life, which must be embraced in constructing a correct and
exhaustive pathology of the disease under consideration. The
universality and connection of these conditions may be repre-
sented as a circle, along the links of which the pathogenic pro-
cess primarily moves from below upwards. As a penumbra or
illustration of their theory of an ascending morbific current
from an abdominal origin, the authors have sketched the phe^
nomena of intoxication. It is conceived, from the universal
distribution of the plexus of the sympathetic through the
viscera, that the excitation following the absorption and assimi-
lation of stimulants must be incessantly propagated to the
spinal marrow, to be from thence passed along every nerve dis-
tributed to the organs of circulation throughout the economy.
From this excitement arise various changes in the vital functions,
and especially in the brain. While, consequently, alcoholic
intemperance directly induces paralysis, it remotely injures the
fundamental laws of nutrition and of the ganglionic system.
This influence of the great sympathetic creates congestion at
every point, but especially where it acts upon the brain. Ori-
ginating at the ganglions at the base, the congestion radiates
to all the contents of the cranial cavity, even to its osseous
walls. By a sudden transition from the effects of .an artificial
and temporary poison to those of permanent morbid action, MM.
Bonnet and Poincare represent the changes in nervous matter
in paresis as all flowing from the congestion originating, they
believe, in the ganglia of the sympathetic, transmitted along the
spinal cord, ultimately involving every tissue within the cranium,
and eventuating in, simultaneously, the degeneration of blood-
vessels, cells, and nervous tubes and the mental and motor per-
versions which distinguish, in so marked a manner, general
paralysis from all other diseases of the same class.
The third section of the treatise contains a large collection
7 2 GENERAL PARALYSIS.
of cases which may be divided into Wo series, the first of which
is intended to show the symptoms and general pathological
results of the disease as exemplified in impaired nutrition, gan-
grene, and widespread necrobiosis. The second and detailed
series describes the local and specific lesions in which the origin,
nature, and symptoms are supposed to be detected. The chap-
ter is followed by eleven plates, which, although not boasted of
as precisely exact, exhibit with sufficient fidelity the microscopic
appearances which the authors have observed, and upon which
they base the doctrine which they have initiated and support.
This doctrine may be epitomised in the following terms:?
1. There are proliferations of the cellular tissue around the
vessels of the nervous tissues; but these do not diminish nor
efface their continuity, nor, consequently, interfere with the cir-
culation, or, in other words, induce sclerosis.
2. The essential change in the encephalon consists in fatty
degeneration of the cells; but there are likewise noticed, though
more rarely, free fatty globules mingled with granular matter,
sometimes free, sometimes agglomerated; such masses of ferru-
ginous granulations are not enclosed in a common membrane;
pigment, hematosine are met with in the walls of the vessels;
sometimes the fatty granules form enormous agglomerations
upon the periphery of the vessels; often large fat globules, free
or mingled with blood disks; but the nerve tubes are unchanged.
3. We have found no other alterations in the spinal cord
than ferruginous granulations adjoining the ependyma.
4. The cells of the whole chains of the grand sympathetic pre-
sent a brown, rusty pigment much more intense than in other
subjects, such as those who have died from old age or typhoid fever.
In the cervical, and often in the thoracic ganglia, there is an ob-
vious substitution of adipose for true nerve cells, which are com-
paratively rare, in which we recognise the primary origin of the
disease, while the alteration of the vessels of the encephalon
of itself can be held as secondary only. There is always a
marked pigmentation of the spinal ganglia, and of those con-
nected with the cranial nerves. The fat globules substituted
for the nerve cells in the ganglia of the grand sympathetic are
often blackish.
5. All such alterations proceed from irregular or defective
nutrition, and assimilation such as occurs in the luxurious, the
intemperate, the abstinent, the studious, which entail fatty
degeneration and its subsequent manifestation in ataxy, and
enfeeblement of all the functions of relative and vegetative
life.
It should be added that in addition to the rusty coloration,
and the presence of superabundant cellular and fatty tissues in
GENERAL PARALYSIS. 73
the cervical ganglia, there has been discovered distension and
even varix of the vessels, which, in common with the morbid
changes enumerated above, is supposed to suspend the innerva-
tion upon which the health of all parts of the nervous system
depends, and ultimately to issue in that cerebral conges-
tion, adhesion of membranes, and cell alterations, which have
hitherto been esteemed the proximate anatomical cause of this
affection.
This analysis has already exceeded the proportions to which
MM. Bonnet's and Poincare's clever disquisition is fairly
entitled; but the objects of scientific criticism would be alto-
gether baulked were we not to mention that, with pathological
appearances closely resembling those described above, but in the
abdominal ganglia, M. A. Voisin* has found connected, hypo-
chondriacal insanity, suicidal melancholia, altogether indepen-
dent of muscular complications, and in striking contrast with
the exaltation of the sentiments and imagination, and the delu-
sions characteristic of general paralysis.
III. Such grave questions have been proposed by and to
psychologists, as whether general paresis is of recent birth and
growth ; whether Pinel, living about one hundred years ago?a
keen observer and benevolent innovator?did not observe disturb-
ance of the muscular system in conjunction with the monomania
of pride and aggrandisement, which he did actually observe; and
whether, until 1820-30, the affection had altogether escaped
medical notice or record. M. Foville has essayed to answer or
elucidate these inquiries. He considers that he has discovered two
examples of the malady in extreme antiquity; one of these, cited
from "Heraclides de Pont," by Claudius JElianus, occurring in the
fourth century. The patient conceived that all the vessels entering
the port where he resided were his property, registered them, sold
them in imagination, and, subsequent to his recovery under
medical advice, luxuriated in the splendour and delights of his
delusions.
The other is taken from " Horace," who paints a visionary
attending an empty theatre, seeing and applauding imaginary
tragedians, who in all the other relations of life was a sane and
sober citizen, and who recovered reason under the use of helle-
bore. His cure brought to him regret and misery. We suspect
that the curability of these individuals, who evidently laboured
under partial delirium, removes them from the category under
consideration.
By an acrobatic feat, displaying marvellous agility, but
* Lemons Cliniqucs tur Lcs Maladies Merit ales. Par le Dr. A. Voisin. Paris,
1876.
74 GENERAL PARALYSIS.
betraying the barrenness of the intervening- space, the third
instance outside of medical literature is found in the astro-
nomer, the possessor of all power over the heavens and the
earth, in the happy valley depicted by Samuel Johnson.
Sneering, like Shakespeare, at the potency of a name, and
exposing the long prevalent fallacy of comprehending many
varieties of derangement under the generic titles of mania and
melancholia, it is demonstrated that cases closely allied to,, if
not identified with, those of general paralytics, such as of the
woman who conceived that she supported the world on her little
finger, that the slightest motion would involve universal ruin;
and that of the youth who proclaimed himself monarch of all
that he surveyed, were so classed. But the author confesses
that until the eve of our own time night brooded over the
inventive faculties of the early, mediaeval, and modern physicians,
and that the only light shed upon the complication of which he
treats was accidental and partial, and when reference was made to
insane ideas of greatness and grandeur. Linnaeus, the real
inventor or originator of classification, followed by Sauvage,
applied the same rigid and narrow principles in the definition
and distinction of diseases as had been employed in botany.
In the Vesanise of the latter is included a happy melancholy,
a lively moroseness, under which the patient feels joy ancl
gaiety, and has ideas of wealth, power, and even of divine
attributes. Cullen, Boerhaave, and Van Swieten all accept the
melancholia moria of Sauvage as a distinct species of disease;
while Plouquet rushes back into the infinite, or rather the
indefinite, in establishing 196 species of these affections; so
that it was not until a school, a secession, had separated from
the general mass of the medical profession, nor until the bright
sunrise of Esquirol and his disciples, that clear and precise ex-
perience dawned upon the minds of scientific men. The soli-
darity of Arnold, in his opinion as to the nature of alienation,
may be contrasted with his multitudinous metaphysical divisions
into genera and species; and it should be recollected that
among the latter are placed two varieties of the insanity of
Vanity, and that none of his compeers or compatriots appear to
have outstripped him in the progress of discovery. Haslam,
Eush, Dubuisson, Esquirol, and many others, have in turn
signalised grandiose notions as features of alienation; but to
Bayle is due the discovery, if it be a discovery, that with these
mental deviations were conjoined affections of motility, that
this combination constituted one distinct individual disease
depending upon inflammation of the membranes of the brain,
and designated by him chronic arachnitis. While Bayle em-
braced the whole subject, detecting and describing the different
GENERAL PARALYSIS. 75
stages of downward progress, and electing optimism as the
diagnostic mark of this neurose, and while he was opposed by
Greorget and others on the very ground that he gave undue
prominence to this symptom; but for Calmiel, not merely as
the first and most catholic monographist of general paralysis
as a unified group of symptoms, but as having placed these in
their due rank and relations, must be claimed the merit of
having described the intractability and fatality of the malady,
its marked preference for the male sex, and the various but
invariable phases which its history presents. In his judicious
estimate there is due allowance made for intellectual enfeeblement
as a precursor of other symptoms, cheered, however, by pleasurable
if not happy fancies and follies, and for the exceptional develop-
ment of depression, hypochondriasis, even lypemania, in the
course of the mental degeneration. In the present day many
instances are mentioned where melancholia appears to take
the place and play the part of exuberant joyousness; but we
have always held the opinion that this transformation may be
traced to the exhaustion prevailing towards the termination of
life; for general paralysis may be styled an asylum disease, a
disease consigned to seclusion towards its close; whereas optimism,
extravagance, misconceptions and miscalculations of health,
wealth, real position precede the cognisable commencement, and
may predominate over the character for years, or for a whole
life, and may be interpreted as the manifestations of natural
dispositions and habits of thought. That the mania of pride
and ambition may exist independently of paralysis is true; that
the malady may follow as the last stage of other, even depressive,
modifications of insanity, is likewise true; but that lypemania
is encountered more frequently than optimism as the primary
stage, as has been affirmed in his latter writings by Calmiel, is
not supported by experience in this country. This is an age
of differentiation, and that malady which was recognised by
Bayle, &c. as one, has been split up into acute, progressive,
chronic, necrobiosis, and into psychical modifications determined
by the original or acquired tendencies of the individual.
Even Esquirol contended that the association of motor with
sensory affections might be a mere complication ; and even down
to the epoch of Trelat, there have been suggested speculations
upon the difference between a madness which revolved upon
egoism, and that of riches, property, power. That all paralytics
may become delirious may be doubted; but the question is
whether such a delirium assumes a particular aspect, that aspect
being partial, limited, ambitious, and whether, as Billod and
some recent writers have affirmed, these restricted limits may
not include a vast number of grandiose ideas. But amid this
76 GENERAL PARALYSIS.
multitude of counsellors and plethora of counsel, Brierre de
Boumont is orthodox to the creed of Bayle. It would be vain to
discuss here how far paresis can be created by our own conduct,
or rather the non-regulation of our mental constitution; how far
the will enters into and may dominate the mind during the
process of decay; whether this power be greater or less than in
simple monomania, or whether all delirious conception may not
be tinted or tainted by exalted feelings; but it is worthy of record
that Baillarger has recently introduced a new element of diag-
nosis, and that while he admits ambitious mania as the ini-
tiatory stage of paralytic dementia, he conjoins with this
embarrassment of speech; or, should that be absent, an inevitable
descent towards deterioration and death. But he admits a class
of exceptional cases in which the ambitious mania appears in
circular mania, and in conditions resembling the maniacal
form of paresis, but ultimately or permanently ceases and gives
place to lypemania. Upon this formula M. Baillarger confers the
name of congestive mania, and argues that it should hold the
same relation to paralytic dementia that simple mania does to
dementia. This denomination has become popular within a
privileged circle, but not beyond. M. Falret, at the head of a
numerous phalanx of psychologists, including Parchappe, Dela-
sauve, and Brierre de Boumont, rejects these propositions, and
argues that the delirium of grandeur, incoherent, wandering,
contradictory, united to affections of motility, distinguishes
general paralysis from its commencement and continues to its
close, and that the brief simulations of amelioration offer no
exception to this rule; and contends that the morbid indivi-
duality thus recognised is in no degree affected by the transitory
development of proud or vain delusions or emotions during the
progress of other mental affections. M. Foville concurs in this
definition, but confesses the existence of anomalies which it
does not include, and which increase the difficulty of diagnosis.
The coincidence of ideas of aggrandisement with partial deli-
rium, altogether unconnected, either at the commencement or
the close, with paresis, prompted M. Dagonet to propose the
term Megalomania as more significant than monomania of this
state. But this appropriateness has not been homologated by
others, except the word be limited to the combination of morbid
pride and delirium, to distinguish which it was suggested, and
be not substituted for other forms of monomania or partial
delirium. The views of the originator of this specific term
have been advocated by M. Broc in his thesis on that partial
delirium in which the predominating passion is the exaggerated
sentiment of personality. In a later, but unfinished, work,
M. Baillarger says that congestive mania is not the first stage
GENERAL PARALYSIS. 77
of paresis, nor of simple insanity; that the mania of ambi-
tion may exist without general paralysis ; that general paralysis
may exist without the mania of ambition; and, in fact, ap-
proaches the opinions of every author who has written since
Bayle, and who, without adopting his propositions in their
breadth and detail, have recognised the specificity of general
paralysis, and that, in the majority of cases, it is characterised by
the mania of ambition. An attempt has been made to distin-
guish non-paralytic mania of ambition by describing the mental
state as slowly elaborated, fixed, and systematised from paralytic
mania of ambition in which the mental state is multiple, mobile,
inconsistent, motiveless, and bearing the stamp of fatuity; but
this distinction has not secured the approbation of other psy-
chologists.
The present state of the discussion may be represented by
the following propositions:?
1st. A certain number of authorities have accepted the
opinions of M. Dagonet as to megalomania.
2nd. That all authorities concur in holding that the central
and essential symptoms of general paralysis is, at one period or
another, the delirium of ambition.
3rd. That M. Baillarger almost alone affirms that this deli-
rium of ambition does not necessarily eventuate in general
paralysis, but in passing or permanent re-establishment of
health ; his opponents retorting that this restoration is merely
apparent and deceptive, where the patient is removed from
medical observation; but where, could his path be followed, it
would be found to terminate in the full development and general
results of general paralysis.
We have endeavoured to extract all that can be regarded as
historical, leaving much that is metaphysical, argumentative,
and controversial, from the able excursus of M. Foville, which
formed a part of a work to which was awarded, we think de-
servedly, the Civrieux Prize of the Academy of Medicine, and
which first appeared in the Annates Medico-Psychologiques.
