The Physiologist as a Preacher
===============================

45
y
Art. IV.?
BY J. MILNER FOTHERGILL, M.D., M.R.C.P.
" The wages of sin is death."
In essaying to preach from a physiological standpoint, it is not
for one moment assumed that preaching from other standpoints
must be abandoned. For the present, however, all other aspects
than the physiological one are left in abeyance. This is abso-
lutely necessary 5 but no reader must entertain the suspicion
even that the other standpoints are forgotten, or under-esti-
mated. It is essential to be clear about this, else misconception
will, and must follow. If the reader commence with a false
or a wrong impression, it will warp his judgment all through,
and vitiate his conclusions; and I am anxious that the matter
shall have as much fair play as the diversities of human thought
will permit. Consequently the ground must be cleared of all
sources of error, so that the superstructure?whatever it may
be, good or bad?shall be seen distinctly, and not here and
there be obscured by the presence of other matter.
The origin of this paper is the fear expressed by many
worthy persons that the progress of the knowledge of the natural
man, and especially the growth of physiology, tends towards a
practical infidelity, which will loosen the bonds of morality, and
hand humanity over to an unrestricted hedonism. Pure and
unmitigated self-indulgence, it is asserted, is the certain and
inevitable outcome of physiological knowledge, with theistic
tendencies. If man is the product of evolution, and the charac-
ter of the individual is formed for him by his ancestors, why
then, it is said, he is released from all responsibility of action;
his life here is hedonism so far as is attainable, and hereafter
he becomes simply a log for hell fire. Such, without any
rhetorical display, is the view taken by many persons of the future
of humanity. The objections of these persons to the pursuit of
the knowledge of the natural man are based on the view that
such knowledge tends to undermine practical morality, and to
turn the aims of humanity towards mere sensuous indulgence.
But are the facts with them ? I believe that the creed of the
physiologist is the most practical, the gravest, and, in certain
senses, the grimmest that has yet been evolved in the history
of humanity. Instead of luring man into a conviction of irre-
* Tjtiovii (pleasure).
46 the physiologist as a preacher.
sponsibility, it points out to him the grave responsibility of every
action, and the impossibility of escaping the consequences of
deeds done. Just as he knows that a breach of the physical
law of gravitation is followed by consequences of an unpleasant
character, so he is conscious that a breach of moral laws is
also followed by results that are painful. A man falls from a
house, and breaks his leg in consequence ; a man gives himself
up to self-indulgence, and finds himself unfitted for heroic
action. A man resides in a neighbourhood where all sanitary
laws are set at defiance, and a physical deterioration follows,
which is manifested in a diminished resistance to epidemic
disease; a man lives in a society of persons of lax principle,
and his psychical deterioration manifests itself in lowered power
of resistance to temptation when it offers itself in some tangible
concrete form. The man who lives amidst foul physical sur-
roundings presents little resistance to the stroke of cholera ;
the man who lives amongst gamblers and courtesans finds the
temptation to commit fraud too strong for him under the pres-
sure of impecuniosity. To the physiologist the one is just as
much a natural consequence as the other. He knows that just
as the man who resides in a filthy abode is liable to be attacked
with typhoid fever, or that he who lives in a malarial district is
subject to the probability of ague; so he who lives freely on
large quantities of animal food, with stimulating drinks, in hot
climates will suffer from biliary disorders from which the frugal
and self-denying are free. He also knows equally well that a
life of self-indulgence leaves the individual in his old age a
moral wreck, deprived of all capacity for noble action. The
deterioration is as clear in the one case as in the other. In
each the results are the consequences of actions, the inevitable
outcomes of a line of practice, or of conduct. He knows per-
fectly well that while such is the rule there are exceptions in
certain instances. Some individuals escape?why and how need
not be discussed here, as the pursuit of this part of the subject
might lead to divisions of opinion; and it is essayed here to
keep strictly to that on which there can be unanimity of opinion.
Possibly, as we shall see, the inherited constitution has an equal
influence over the result in each case.
It is easy to avoid all doubtful questions, all debatable
ground ; there is almost an infinity of space where there can be
perfect agreement. Let us review, in the first place, the results
of indulgence in the pleasures of the table?the gratification of
the palate. Too great indulgence in sapid substances depraves
the taste, until the ordinary foods lose their attractiveness, and
all the cook's skill is taxed to give to food a flavour which will
render it acceptable to the vitiated palate. Self-imposed hun-
THE PHYSIOLOGIST AS A PREACHER. 47
ger and sustained exercise can alone restore the primitive taste
for food, and endow the gustatory nerves with their pristine
sensitiveness. The only method of restoration attainable is by
practising the very opposite of the natural inclinations. Or if
the practice or habit of indulgence is continued by dint of an
unusually powerful digestion, and no failure of appetite or
digestive power comes to the rescue, then the habitually over-
worked kidneys fail to depurate the blood of its waste matters,
and gout, in some of its Protean forms, is the consequence.
The very dyspepsia of which so many complain, is the means
par excellence by which graver maladies are avoided. A clergy-
man of a very gouty family, whose brothers had all died before
him from gouty ailments, said truthfully enough, " I have been
a dyspeptic for fifty years. Thank God for it! " Even in cases
where the individual himself escapes, his children have to take
the consequences, as we shall see they very commonly do, ere
this enquiry is ended. " The children of gouty parents ought
more especially to follow the hygienic and dietetic laws laid
down in these pages if they wish to escape much suffering.
As a rule they ought to be all but water-drinkers throughout
life ; they have to pay the penalty of their progenitors' excesses
or dietetic errors." (" Nutrition," by J. Henry Bennett.) The
transference of the sins of the father to the children is sternly
true.
Again, take the instance of indulgence in drinks which
contain alcohol. Can anyone be blind to the consequences of
indulgence to excess in alcoholic drinks, in the form of physical
degeneration, of early decay ; or to the effects of sustained
indulgence upon the character of the individual ? The phrase
a " drunken blackguard " is indicative enough of the moral
degradation which results from chronic indulgence. What
effect has drunkenness upon the progeny of the drunkard ?
Even where idiocy is not reached, there are evidences of the
evil wrought by the father in the mental characteristics of his
children. The children of the drunkard are also suffering the
penalty of inheritance.
Or, again, a man gives himself up to sexual indulgence,
and, whether married or single it matters not, lives a life of
hedonism. Does this lead to elevation or degradation of
character ? Is this the training adapted to develope the highest
qualities, or does intellectual languor or decay accompany the
physical prostration which is so induced ? Again, we see that
excessive indulgence leads to satiety, and the capacity is in
many lost, only to be recovered by a long interval of abstinence.
Mere hedonism leads to degradation, mental and physical, in
those who indulge to excess therein?
48 THE PHYSIOLOGIST AS A PREACHER.
A dire effect, by one of Nature's laws,
Unchangeably connected with its cause.
The temptation to avoid what is unpleasant by a lie is one
which swiftly grows, and soon lays the mental structure in
ruin. The drunkard, the glutton, and the satyr do not present
a more terrible spectacle of decadence or monstrosity than the
liar. The temptation to resort to falsehood is ever more and
more irresistible, and the habitual liar is one of the most
offensive of the objectionable morbid specimens of humanity.
Once the fatal facility of lying established, the downward
progress of the individual is inevitable. It does not follow
that the individual may not be wealthier or more prosperous
for his facility. This is very possible. If becoming wealthy
were to be the sole end and aim of humanity, then wealth
would take the place of everything, and the lie would not only
be condoned, but looked up to as a clear means to an end. But
the pursuit of wealth is not the unalloyed satisfaction, when
attained, that some seem to imagine, as we shall shortly see.
" No amount of repentance for lying can deprive lies of their
tendency to weaken the mutual confidence of men, and thus to
dissolve society. The lie, once told, must work its effects, as
surely as the stone dropped into water must give forth its
arrested motion in rippling circles."? Fiske.
But even in the event of the lie being successful and re-
maining undiscovered, the character must undergo deterioration
from the consciousness of resort to falsehood. The remem-
brance of the lie lies away amidst the accumulated residue of
the memory, and taints all around it. It is as impossible to
have perfect mental health with a diseased spot remaining
persistently, as it is to have perfect bodily health with
a morbid growth existing in the organism. There may be
apparent perfect health ; but time will reveal the actual facts.
Lying, or the tendency to it, may be handed down from father
to son, like any other taint, and seems to be a characteristic of
some families, and to run through every member of it in more
or less thoroughness. In one family with which the writer is
acquainted such is the case ; and, though the favourite form is
untruthful boasting, in temptation it takes other forms; nor
does there seem any strong sense of shame when the lie is
discovered. The mental degradation is such that the normal
sense of shame is either not induced at all, or, if so, not to any
perceptible extent.
It is the transmission of qualities by inheritance which is
the most appalling side of wrong-doing to the observant physio-
logist. It is the grim fact that a man's offspring must take
THE PHYSIOLOGIST AS A PREACHER. 49
and endure the consequences of his deeds, that evokes grave
thought, and causes a sense of horror at certain sins. If the
wrong-doer always bore the consequences himself, the certitude
of these consequences coming would be more deterrent to the
doer, though less sternly significant to others. Just as a man is a
spendthrift, and thereby his children are reduced to poverty, so
the gourmand leaves his children to suffer for his actions in the
form of a gouty taint which necessitates the greatest self-denial
on their part throughout life; they, in fact, have to exercise the
self-denial their progenitors lacked, or to suffer in consequence.
The drunkard leaves even a more terrible inheritance behind
him, for he too often leaves to his progeny an impaired or im-
perfect nervous system, which lacks the power to resist tempta-
tion to like indulgence, even if the wish to do so exists. The
degradation of the intellectual centres, which is the certain
outcome of protracted alcoholic indulgence in the individual, is
inherited by his children in the form of a vitiated constitution.
If persons indulge in excessive and undue sexual intercourse,
their offspring are apt to exhibit in their temperament the
passions amidst which they took their genesis. The erotic ten-
dencies of the bastard are well known to all observers. It is
this transference of consequences from parent to child, this pro-
traction of sequelae which is so strongly borne in upon the
physiologist, and which gives him a truer insight into the nature
of sin than anyone else can possess, unless they, too, have
transferred their belief in a dogmatic statement to an obser-
vant attitude which will fully bear out that belief. The decla-
ration " I shall visit the sins of the fathers upon the
children to the third and fourth generation of them that hate
me," finds, in the researches of the physiologist, the strongest
and most convincing proofs of the truth embodied therein. The
sins of the fathers are visited upon the children unto the third
and fourth generation, and far beyond them. The consequences
of wrong-doing are felt by the wrong-doer's progeny as long
as there are any of them to bear them 5 unless that progeny
have set in action new forces to counterbalance those already set
in action before them, and so a new equilibrium found?so that
they are once more in harmony with their surroundings. There
is no destroying the potentiality of force; it must be met and
neutralised, or counterbalanced, by setting some new force in
action.
But there are many matters beyond those gross and palpable
ones just given for the sake of illustration, on which there is
no difficulty presented to any mind in drawing the right deduc-
tions. There are many comparatively innocent aims or objects
of ambition whose consequences are not those originally sought.
PART I. VOL. III.?NEW SERIES. D
50 THE PHYSIOLOGIST AS A PREACHER.
A keener attention than is ordinarily given to the subject is
required to see how the consequences are brought about in these
cases. For instance, a man is given to athletic pursuits and
to muscular exertion. There is nothing wrong per se in this,
but it is found that such pursuits tend to restrain the intellec-
tual development, and the athlete's offspring have in them the
inherited tendencies to unintellectual energy.
Again, there does not seem anything intrinsically pernicious
in the pursuit of wealth, and with many now-a-days the self-
made man of the people, who has risen by his own efforts, is the
type of what man ought to be. But there is a great deal to be
urged on the per contra side of this matter. It may be dis-
puted most strongly how far the pursuit of wealth is either an
unalloyed pleasure, or, when attained, an unqualified advantage.
A man who gains wealth swiftly is being brought into new sur-
roundings as rapidly as his balance waxes at his bankers. His
family aspire to a higher social grade as their wealth increases,
and they get the entree into a circle or environment quite
different from that they previously occupied. Happiness con-
sists in being in full harmony with the environment. But the
adaptability of the individual to new surroundings may not be
in proportion to the growth of wealth, and then the amount of
happiness is restricted. To follow the individual himself. In
order to acquire wealth speedily he has to push business, to grow
less and less perfectly scrupulous, to drive harder bargains, to
be less considerate for the feelings of others ; in fact, when the
ideal is attained, and an estate is purchased, when the otium
cam dignitate is about to be grasped, it turns out to be a
phantom. The whole training of the individual has in reality
tended in the very opposite direction, and probably the sense of
unhappiness is never so vivid as when the coveted position is
gained, and the would-be gentleman discovers that he is not,
arid never will be, the gentleman he had ever craved to become.
For harmony with his new surroundings something more and
beyond the mere, command of wealth is essential; and that
something is visibly wanting, and but too clearly unattainable.
In fact, the more rapidly wealth has been attained, the more
thoroughly has the training of the individual been away from, and
not towards the goal of his wishes. The more strenuous his
struggles the more irksome the life of ease ; the less the consi-
deration for the feelings of others involved in the rapid acquisi-
tion of wealth, the less the capacity to take on this essential
characteristic of a gentleman. Having acquired the position
craved for, it is found to be far from comfortable, as regards
the individual. Now, as to his family. He has probably looked
forward to what has been done by a small proportion of others,
viz., to the founding of a family who would take up and keep a
THE PHYSIOLOGIST AS A PREACHER. 51
position in the social world. It is undoubtedly true that the
position won by self-made men has been held by their descen-
dants for generations; but only in comparatively few instances.
It is given but to few to possess that adaptability to new
surroundings which, as has been said before, is essential to
happiness, to self-contentment. Too commonly this adapt-
ability is wanting, and the family maintains an equivocal
position by a profuse expenditure. Not unfrequently, too, there
co-exists a false pride, so called, and the son of the self-made
man strives to hold himself aloof from his source of revenue,
and the business or concern is neglected, and the profits reaped
by those who are interested in it; or it gradually falls to pieces
from sheer obsolescence. At the same time, there is a heavy
expenditure; for as it is their ambition to be wealthy, so these
persons can feel little or no happiness outside a large expen-
diture : their sense of satisfaction is in strict proportion to the
cost of each pleasure. Consequently, sooner or later this brings
about the natural results, and the heavy or increased expendi-
ture, with a fixed or decreasing revenue, dissipates the wealth
on which their position was founded; and the grandchild slips
back into the position his grandfather rose from. In manufac-
turing districts it has become almost a proverb that wealth will
not last over three generations! And why ? Because other
qualities than the possession of wealth are requisite to the
adaptation of the individual to new surroundings, which that
wealth cannot purchase. Unless the individual who aspires to
work and earn a fortune in order that he may taste the sweets
of affluence, and that his children may live long in the land
to enjoy what he has toiled for for them, possesses intrinsic
qualities beyond mere money-making powers ; instead of being
on the surest road to happiness, he is in all probability on the
track to certain disappointment and bitter mortification. He
has fatally mistaken his potential powers and the requirements
of the position to which he aspires, and defeat and humiliation
are the necessary results.
It is clear, then, that the pursuit of wealth is a delusion and
a snare as a means of attaining happiness. When the nature
is so low as to rest perfectly satisfied with the mere possession
of wealth, without making any changes in the surroundings,
then happiness, such as it is, may be attained; but to such a
person the term " miser " is applied?i.e., this person is miser-
able, is unhappy beyond all others, as the term implies. This,
however, means that he is miserable according to other people's
conception of happiness, not according to his own.
Looked at from this point of view, the acquisition of wealth
is far from being a sure means of securing happiness. In fact,
D 2
52 THE PHYSIOLOGIST AS A PREACHER.
can there be many roads that are bo essentially delusive, so
absolutely lacking in the potential elements of success, contain-
ing so certainly elements of necessary failure, as that of the
accumulation of wealth for the attainment of self-satisfaction or
contentment ? There have been, and undoubtedly are, those
who do possess the other faculties beyond the mere money-
making power, and they attain their ends with more or less
mixed satisfaction to themselves, and capacity to retain their
position on the part of their descendants. But they are the
minority, and the very small minority too ! No wonder, then,
that there are those who see beyond, and disbelieve the lying
promise of wealth, and who recognise clearly the fact that the
acquisition of wealth is not the road to contentment.
The man who aspires to make a fortune and found a family,
as the phrase runs, should first ask himself gravely, if he would
avoid bitter disappointment, how far he himself and after
him his children are fitted to the new surroundings he seeks.
Will they be able to withstand the temptations of their new
position, or to take upon them the higher duties which an
elevated position, in the way of example to others, entails, which
wealth and leisure bring with them ; or will they merely regard
wealth as the means to the gratification of their passions ? If they
possess no higher feelings than the mere pursuit of hedonism,
no further ambition than a handsome house, a stylish equipage,
and a sensuous life, then certainly they will soon recede from
their new position; and in sinking back they will experience
in misery the equivalent of their progenitors' satisfaction in
making the ascent. If these other and higher qualities are
wanting, probably much misery and pain would be avoided if
the aspirant to wealth remained in the ranks to which he
primitively belongs.
The possession of the musical faculty is often a source of
great satisfaction and of no little pleasure to its owner;
indeed, I am not quite sure that the tendency amongst
musical persons is not towards regarding themselves as rather
superior to those who do not possess this faculty. And yet it
is probably true that any great development of this capacity,
especially if there co-exist a decided inclination to indulge in the
gratification afforded by listening to music, and undue time be
so spent, is accompanied by a corresponding neglect or deficiency
in other directions. The time so given up to music, whether as
practice to maintain efficiency, or as sheer pleasure, is afforded
at the expense of other culture; and musical families, though
usually most amiable and pleasant, are not uncommonly
poorly and imperfectly informed. Their fancied superiority
is purchased at the cost of more solid attainments. If the
gratification, the sensuous pleasure derived from this possession
THE PHYSIOLOGIST AS A PREACHER. 53
of the faculty, be kept within limited bound?, so as not to
trench upon other more important matters, little harm is done;
but unlimited indulgence not only encroaches upon the time,
but unfits the individual for graver and more important study.
Even the pursuit of knowledge and pure intellectual culture
has got its drawbacks of the most serious character. It would
seem at first that this, the purest of all forms of occupation
self-enforced, would be free from disadvantages, and be a
simple, unalloyed good. And yet it seems that those who
* pursue knowledge are par excellence the martyrs of humanity.
By such pursuit their race is cut off. Gregg terms it " the
tendency of cerebral development to lessen fecundity " ; and it
appears that he and Herbert Spencer, quite independently of
each other, noted the general evidence furnished of the limited
progeny of intellectual nations, and the tendency to sterility
in highly cultivated beings. The demands of the brain in
sustained culture tax the system so much, that there remains
an insufficient amount to maintain the efficiency of the repro-
ductive system. Sir Isaac Newton throughout life was con-
tinent; and it is asserted by American writers that the
increasing sterility of American women is largely due to the
excessive demands of the over-taxed nervous system. The
well-read intellectual women of the North-Eastern States are
not fertile as a rule, and the fecundity for which the early
settlers in these regions were so remarkable has passed away,
and the descendants of the pilgrims of the Mayflower are, if
we are to trust to the statements of some of the most influ-
ential American writers, a perishing people. They have been?
for we must learn to speak of them in a past tense?a noble
people, and their expatriation in defence of their individual
rights was followed by the grandest experiment ever tried, viz.
that of a state founded on the rights of every man to have a
voice in its government. But they did not restrict this right
to themselves; they courageously extended it to the Celt,
degraded by centuries of subordination to the ruling Saxon;
to the imperfectly developed Negro, in the infancy of civilisation;
and seem about to extend it to the Mongol, almost a human cry-
stal from centuries of a static condition. Yet it would seem that
this very intellectual grandeur has its consequences in sterility,
and that their mental activity is a direct cause of their decay.
This is indeed a melancholy and sombre fact, that high cerebral
development is fatal to the continuance of the race. One
would have thought that so pure an aspiration might have
been freed from such serious consequences; but it is not so. It
would appear that there are persons who store up energy, and
others who manifest it. The healthy, stalwart, but not too
64 THE PHYSIOLOGIST AS A PREACHER.
mentally active country families, are those which furnish the
men who themselves manifest great mental activity; they are
the storers up ot energy in a static form; they do not manifest
much force themselves, but they furnish the organisms which
manifest it actively. The manifestors of force, on the other
hand, are active-minded, energetic creatures; they are, as it
were, the finished products, and they perish when their work
is done, leaving but rarely progeny behind them. This is not
only seen in continent bachelors like Newton, who die child-
less ; it is seen in the increasing sterility of active-minded
families and races, in the tendency towards extermination by
diminishing fertility. This is, however, but what we might
expect. Compare the marvellous fecundity of some of the
lower forms of life, or even of some fishes, with the few chil-
dren of the most prolific races of men. The more finished the
product, the more sparingly is it produced.
The system of education which is pursued by civilised
nations is inimical to much fecundity. During the period of
most active growth, at the time of the evolution of puberty,
when the changes go on which give the organism its reproduc-
tive power, then the system is most heavily taxed by repeated
demands upon it in the form of educational pursuits ; and the
growing girl becomes a well-grown but not too intellectual
matron if the reproductive instinct keep the upper hand ; but,
if the nervous system prevail, then the organism is partially
blighted, and the girl becomes a bright intellectual companion
for man, but is apt to be a barren bride. These, as said before,
are as truly martyrs to humanity as are those who have
voluntarily perished to promote the welfare of their faith. It
is, indeed, but another phase of faith, another form of self-
sacrifice. Humanity may be doomed to reproduce itself from
its less perfect forms ; but it benefits by those higher organisms
who perish in its behalf.
It would seem, then, that mediocrity, inherited and self-
promoted, is the only safe line for man to adopt. Every form
of activity seems to bear with it an inherent drawback, which
is more or less fatal to the continuation of the species. And
so it is if we speak of the individual, but not if we
speak of the race. Mediocrity can only be maintained in the
race by its containing every form of individual. The intel-
lectual being, therefore, is as essentially necessary to this
mediocrity as are the lower forms of humanity. Mediocrity of
the race is not maintained by mediocrity in every one of its
constituent units.
The physiologist, looking at the human organism as but one
link of a chain, sees in this chain the " man." Then he sees
THE PHYSIOLOGIST AS A PREACHER. 55
distinctly that the wages of sin is death ; that the race of the
individual who sins must die ; that he shall lose his share in
the great human heritage by the extinction of his race. It is
but the extension of the idea from the individual to his
progeny, and then the physiologist is in the most perfect
harmony with the ethical philosopher and the theologian. If
a race of beings persist in living in defiance of what we under-
stand as moral laws, or, in other words, out of harmony with
their surroundings, then they will perish inevitably: their only
chance of preservation lies in their developing, more or less by
the efforts of the individual, a new equilibrium betwixt them
and the environment; or, in other words again, a repentance
which shall extend to works. It is clear to the physiologist
that " the soul that sinneth it shall die," and that " the wicked
man shall perish," if the extension given above but be admitted.
If a man commit offences against the laws of his Creator, he
must take the consequences which will follow therefrom. And
to these conclusions we are shut up. No contrition, no re-
pentance can do away with the persistence of force. All re-
pentance is fruitless which does not call out an equal force to
neutralise that of the past. The consequences can only thus be
averted. If not so averted, then the only escape for man is to
die before the consequential results of his actions have had time
to come home to him; and in doing so to leave behind him no
progeny, no children or children's children on whom they may
fall. Such are the plain teachings of physiological knowledge;
and if some worthy persons think this a demoralising and
degrading creed, tending to deliver up man to his lusts and
his passions, they are welcome to their belief, but they must not
ask me to share it.
There is a still more serious aspect than this of man being but
a link in a chain of beings, and which points out man's responsi-
bility in the gravest and grimmest form. It is the influence
exercised by each individual over his progeny. We are all of us
the outcomes of the co-operation of countless ancestral forces
extending back into almost illimitable time. Each of us in his
turn will exercise an influence, however small?and ultimately
perhaps imperceptible, but nevertheless still there?upon his
progeny far away into the distant future. Every act of self-
development by volition will excite vibrations which will not
be lost for ages, if, indeed, ever at all. The cultivation of the
individual will exercise a distinct influence over his offspring for
good or evil. As the influence exercised by the progenitor
nearest in time is the most potent over the individual, so this
influence will be most potent over his children. The influence,
consequently, is the strongest upon those to whom each is most
56 THE PHYSIOLOGIST AS A PREACHER.
personally attached. It ia diminished as time goes on, and as
other influences spring up and obscure it?as other forces come
into play. It is a serious thing, then, for the man who
assumes the responsibilities of marriage and reproduction, to
consider all that he is taking upon himself. He may no longer
then do that which seemeth unto him good, feeling that the
consequences of his actions will perish with him. He has
incurred a wider responsibility in calling into being organisms
which will in their turn feel what he has done, and perhaps
suffer for his actions. Whatever his self-culture, so will they
be modified. As the deeds of his ancestors influence and affect
him, so will his actions in turn tell on them. If their heritage
will be a sound body with a healthy mind, free from the taint
of sin, then he may confidently exercise the rights of manhood.
But if a deteriorated physique, a depraved mind, and selfish
indulgence are to be their inheritance, then surely it were well
that the man should die in time; for of all his sins the calling
into being of other organisms will be the gravest, the worst,
and the least defensible. Death, indeed, would be a good, and
not an evil.
This gradual formation of character, by the slow accumu-
lations of the race, involves incalculable responsibility in the
being who is, or intends to be, a link betwixt the past and the
future. The past is not dead, even though the poet assert it.
It exercises its influence, unostentatiously it may be, upon the
present and the future. Our actions may die with us, if we
leave no descendants. But to each man who aspires to connect
the past with the future this question must come home. How, and
in what direction, shall I modify my children, and affect their
inherited character? Their inherited character?the product
not only of forces acting upon their progenitors, but of the
self-education of each ancestor?will determine their line of
conduct in the different affairs of life. Under whatever cir-
cumstances placed they will have marked tendencies to move
in certain directions, to act in a certain manner. The different
arrangement and aggregation of forces in families constitute
family characteristics. In one the tendency is to great activity,
in another to procrastinate, while in a third there exists a
marked inclination to resort to the lie, to untruth, in emer-
gencies or in difficulties. Each form of conduct is determined
by the arrangement of conflicting forces in the different
individuals; each indeed moves along the line of least resist-
ance. But what is the line of least resistance in one, is not
that line in another. The course which recommends itself to
one is perhaps, of all alternatives, the most distasteful, the
most impossible to the other. It is a terrible subject for thought
THE PHYSIOLOGIST AS A PREACHER. 57
this consideration?that all beings in determining their actions
and their conduct are moving in the line of least resistance.
Whether it is in ordinary action, just like the welling over of
water in the easiest direction, or whether we are acting under
high emotional tension, like the explosion of nitro-glycerine,
the cleavage will and ever must be in the line of least
resistance. When we are acted upon by conflicting forces,
tempted by varying objects, pressed upon by hopes and fears,
restrained on one side by duty, led in other directions by
passion, the line of action will be at last in the line of least
resistance. The direction will be different with different
persons ; it will not always be identical in the same individual;
at one time one force will act more powerfully than another, or
the impressionability to different forces will vary. In strongly
marked characters the action will vary least; in the courageous
the direction will be ever towards heroic conduct; in the faint-
hearted, towards cowardice. But what, after all, enables one
person to be courageous so as to be capable of heroic actions,
and what makes the other a coward ? The character of each
is, in its broad outlines, and often in its finer lines, the
outcomes of forces acting upon their progenitors for a thousand
years. Base action in the past?maybe the outcome of a
wounded conscience?will influence the decision in the present;
and the choice of the individual betwixt good or evil will turn
upon some inherited trait of character, for which he is not
primarily responsible. But if he is in so far irresponsible for
his own action, he is in just so far responsible for the action of
some descendant, whose conduct will be influenced by his self-
culture. Self-education tends to modify inherited tendencies;
and by unceasing effort other forces may be brought to bear
upon a certain facet of the general character, until a radical
change may be brought about. A man may be naturally a
coward, and afraid of death ; i.e. his inherited instincts and feel-
ings are to avoid death almost at any cost. But he is married,
and has children, and when he sees these objects of his affec-
tions threatened, he faces death heroically. A new set of
forces are brought to bear upon him through his emotions;
and without these new forces his conduct would have been quite
different, and he would have fled instead of fought. Each man
is thoroughly responsible for his own treatment of his inherited
characteristics. As the progress of the race onwards has been
achieved by slow accretions and the advance of each genera-
tion of individuals upon the past, so in the formation of the
character of a family each link of the chain of beings has an
influence which can be exercised for good or evil. He may
ignominiously give way to lower impulses and exercise a
58 THE PHYSIOLOGIST AS A PREACHER.
degrading influence, or he may struggle with natural tendencies
so as to diminish their potency in his progeny, and so lead to
improvement in his descendants. By his own conduct and
actions he is, albeit unconsciously, influencing theirs for good
or evil. Each individual is exercising an influence over the
direction of the line of least resistance, in which his descendants
will move; and so incurs the gravest responsibility as to the
ultimate consequences of his conduct. This is, indeed, a
matter for serious thought; not only may the self-education of
the man materially influence his own action, but it will neces-
sarily give a direction to the action of his progeny. This
influence over the conduct of his descendants is unavoidable;
it is inseparable from reproduction. " The fathers have eaten
sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge." What-
ever may be a man's inherited proclivities, it is his bounden
duty to hand them over to his children the better, and not the
worse for him. In calling children into being he should bear in
mind the line of least resistance ; and should do his best to make
sure that their movements in ordinary matters, as well as in times
of trial and temptation, shall be along a line which shall take
a respectable, even if unequal to an heroic direction.
It is, indeed, this influence which each individual must
exercise over his descendants that gives to action, and to the
sources of action, their grave responsibility. The individual,
in determining his own action, is adding his individual factor
to his inherited characteristics, and posterity will inevitably be
influenced thereby. The wicked man?the man who outrages
the laws of his Creator?must die, and die childless too, if he
desire to avoid the direct consequences of his evil actions. The
observations of the physiologist bear out the sternest dictates
of the ethical philosopher, the denunciations of the prophet,
and the teachings of the theologian. There is nothing in the
revelations wrought by the knowledge of the natural man
which is demoralising in its tendencies. The creed of the
physiologist is, that there is no escape from the consequences
of evil done, except by calling new forces into action?or
perishing utterly before the consequences have had time to
come home. There is nothing whatever in the lessons of
physiology which tends in the slightest to diminish the sense of
what is due from the created to the Creator ; there is nothing
which in the slightest degree diminishes the physiologist's entire
agreement with the lines?
Though tho mills of God grind slowly, yet they grind exceeding small;
Though He stands and waits with patience, with exactness grinds He all.
