Psychiatric Aid in the Grammar Schools
========================================

MENTAL HEALTH

By PAUL HALMOS, B.A., Dr.Juris.
In the great majority of our Grammar Schools
" teaching " means subject-teaching to classes.
It is by no means always a " talking-down " process
on the part of the teacher: there are a few people
in the teaching profession whose dynamic person-
ality infuses life into the drab routine of even a
Mathematics or French syllabus. Most of the
" experienced" masters are " good disciplin-
arians " who regard their inevitable percentage
of failures with philosophic equanimity. Their
successes are the good examination results and these
are shown up to the novices of the profession as
criteria of educational achievement. There are
only a few day-school heads who have the courage
of disregarding percentage figures related to the
general school passes and failures and who devise
their timetables without too much worry about
school certificate turnover. They cannot be dis-
respectful of their parent-clients' demands and
forgetful of university standards because their
value as headmasters is more often than not
assessed on the basis of examination achievements.
And while the school certificate factories go on
with their hum-drum shifts?with occasional short
intervals of " workers' playtime " in the form of
a weekly football match or of the meeting of the
Current Affairs Society?some yearly products of
school-leaving fifth and sixth formers enter life
hopelessly unequipped, hesitating and bewildered.
The picture will, no doubt, raise an indignant
protest from the complacent senior member of the
Common Room and a doubting look on the face
of the eager novice who is only too willing to change
and improve things but cannot pluck up courage
to experiment on account of his own emotional
attachment to the traditional ways in which he
himself was brought up. They will both agree in
saying: " Surely, this is an exaggeration ! It is
not as bad as all that ! "
In a sense it is not. The Grammar School is
not responsible for infantile traumata and pre-
school maladjustments. It is not responsible for
family disorganization or present-day social dis-
organization. In short, it is not responsible for
the neurosis of parents. But the vicious circle
must be broken somewhere and it ought to be top-
priority task of our educational system to attempt
to do exactly that. Here the writer is preoccupied
with the Grammar School sector of our education
but his conclusions are claimed to be applicable?
mutatis mutandis?to other sectors of primary and
secondary education. The special responsibility
of the Grammar Schools lies in the stubborn refusal
by their academically trained staffs, to avail them-
selves of modern techniques which have recently
been developed to counteract family maladjustments
and to facilitate social adaptation within the school
community. One should have expected more open- |
mindedness, more insight and more enterprising
leadership froni those whose own educational j
opportunities have been so much more favourable- ?
The Mathematics master of Pinks Major knows
only that Pinks hasn't done his homework but
does not know that Pinks is an enuretic child who
gets thrashed by father every morning when he
" has done it again The French master is
delighted by little Hopper's proficiency in les verbes
irreguliers but he has no idea how much little
Hopper is disliked by his class-mates and ho^
many kicks and sneers his top-boy has to endure-
Later, probably Pinks will fail in Maths., Hopped
will get a distinction in his subject, and neither
them will know the first thing about co-operative
work and satisfying social contact.
The case of Francis, aged 12, in form lie of 3
Grammar School for boys, may bring out the
seriousness of unobserved and consequently ufl- j
treated social maladjustments in our day schools- |
The writer carried out a sociometric test by a
questionnaire containing two questions, "1. Natf>e
three boys in your form with whom you would
to share desks in the coming term. 2. Name
those boys?if there are such?with whom y?u
would definitely not like to share desks in the
coming term: (you may leave this question ufl'
answered unless you have a serious objection t0
any boy or boys in your form)." .
Out of 28 boys only two were left entirely un' |
chosen. One of these, Francis, received seve'1
objections. There were only three other sing'
objections to other boys who also received choice5'
and so it was manifest to the writer that he W#
confronted with a serious case of isolation an
rejection. In his capacity as assistant master of a
academic subject he had had no opportunity 1 i
establish Francis's isolation before this test W# |
taken and he would not have had any opportune
without such an enquiry.
In the course of casual interviews with the seve^.
objectors it was found that they all complained
Francis being dirty and smelly. The writer, 11
being in a position to approach Francis's pareI\
on his own account, reported the case to the hea.^
master. The headmaster interviewed the boy
mother and tried to impress on her the seriousne^
of the school's findings, but the mother, who W
four other children and had to manage on a
working class wage, did not show much ufl1&
standing or co-operate satisfactorily. Furti^
observation of Francis revealed that the boy was \
sullen, suspicious and unsociable member of }f
form and that the objectors' reference to Franc1 ^ I
lack of cleanliness was to a substantial degree
rationalization. No appeal to social work agenc
MENTAL HEALTH
j^as possible because their intervention would have
een resented and protested against by the mother
and would not have been legitimate anyway owing
0 the absence of any palpable form of maltreatment.
How, when and where can the subject-master
apply methods of readjustment under the existing
Astern of education ?
It seems obvious to the writer that at least three
storms are essential if a beginning in mental
i Wyfcxis 1S to be ma^e within the framework
j t the educational system. (1) Psychiatric training
future teachers or/and the employment of
Psychiatric social workers by a group of schools.
c J Regular psychiatric education of parents pre-
eded by intensive press and wireless propaganda
0 ensure their attendance. Such education would
e more effective if the lecturers were those under
J and the parents would be invited to the schools
red6- t*le*r ch''dren actually attend. (3) The
Action of the academic-vocational syllabus and
?. Production of free group-activities in the
h^ary school-time. The extension of the school
Qj,Vlng age will permit us to slow down the rate
t, academic-vocational instruction and to postpone
e date of the general school examination. In
| be?St Continental countries no one can matriculate
I hu?W a^e Why rnust we be in such a
rry ? Jhg extension of the school leaving age
9Vldes us with an excellent opportunity; are we
prln? to employ so many more Maths, masters,
CLerich masters and other subject masters to take
Wear8e. the increased school population or are
adi to use this opportunity to heal, to re-
Jfjst ? Are we going to spend this extra year on
Ho or on social skills ? We may ask:
I SocW mai?y our schools have carried out the
the10,?16^^ tests devised by Dr. Moreno to establish
som ? ?ree ?f social isolation in which a child
,et'rnes finds itself within the school-community ?
reso ow many graduate assistants have the skill,
a '^^ftdness and the opportunity to embark on
apD me of group-readjustments whenever this
i have^if desirable ? Such methods and schemes
acc0 n usec* in the United States and their
tra;^11*8 ou8ht to be available to our teachers'
But"8 Colleges-
?duc t^le. social psychology and sociology of
train *s not yet a particular interest of the
adve1^ colleges. One only has to look at the
Thev ements ?f the Emergency Training Colleges.
/ in Lr^Vant lecturers in Geography and Woodwork,
seem !story and Physical Training; they don't
how t Want anybody to instruct the future teachers
the p? eal with the Pinks Majors, the Hoppers and
j Francises.
moremust be admitted, however, that some of the
the academic training institutions have realized
teacup a sociological training of future
i ^annf?'- appointment of the late Professor
I Ed ein^ t0 Chair of Education (Institute
cation), was a move in this direction.
The inculcation of a sociological awareness into
the student teacher is merely the beginning of our
immediate task. The teacher of a class of thirty
or over may feel that the individual attention which
is so desirable is well nigh impossible. There are,
however, two considerations which he should bear
in mind: (1) It is only under the present conditions,
when sizeable curricula must be covered in a certain
number of years, that there are not an adequate
number of group activities set aside for the develop-
ment of group-habits and of creative co-operation.
It is usually after seven or eight periods of teaching
that the assistant master is expected to run hobby-
clubs, chess-clubs, to produce plays, etc. If these
activities are incorporated into the regular time-
table (at the expense of " subject-classes "), free
group work will not be an additional strain on the
assistant. (2) Those who have conducted such
group activities with an eye on their therapeutic
possibilities have found that repeated individual
attention is required by the school " problem
group " only?a minority, but an infectious,
disorganizing minority if not attended to. Hand-
work and hobby afternoons (and not 45 minutes
periods), production of plays, excursions, etc.,
should occupy generous slices of the school-day
instead of miserable, few minutes periods of it,
or instead of the notorious practice of delegating
these activities outside the school-hours into the
evening. If such activities are democratically
organized and the teacher's role becomes advisory
instead of authoritarian, he will be able to exploit
the advantages of an observer and attend to
individual cases. To what degree his intervention
ought to be therapeutic is a matter for further
enquiry. Needless to say that he will have to be
fully informed of the family background of his
pupils. It is only in rare cases that subject masters
or even form masters are acquainted with the social
background and history of their pupils. If there
are any such recorded data to be, found on the
school premises they are most likely to be in the
Headmaster's bureau. These data are not usually
revealed by discreet Heads. No " sociological
awareness " is of much use to the young teacher
if Heads and seniors do not partake in at least
some of this awareness. The present state of affairs
when some school staffs are not only distrustful
but often derisive of Child Guidance Clinics
reflects the tone predominant in secondary
education.
No doubt, class instruction under disciplinary
conditions is as yet inevitable with the present
teacher-pupil ratios, but the time has come to
venture outside the traditional barriers and away
from the following things: (1) The lecturer-
audience relationship in the class-room necessi-
tating rigid disciplinary measures. (2) The over-
whelming amount of time spent on vocational-
academic instruction and practically nothing on
the development of social skills. (3) Very limited
Concluded on page 11
Continued from page 7.
lifePOrtunity for spontaneous participation in group in psychiatric community work. Education with-
. out mental prophylaxis is a failure. In its present
and to lnih ^aS a'so come *? exPl?re what manner form it is a tamed, convictionless version of its
what extent school staffs could participate mediaeval predecessor.
