National Association for Mental Health Current Educational Activities
=====================================================================

For Medical Officers

In addition to the two Courses on Educationally
Subnormal Children already held this year (in
conjunction with the University of London), a
third Course is to be held in September. This is
already full, and there is a long waiting list.
A special Course on the same lines will also be
held in July for Medical Officers taking the Course
for the Diploma in Public Health at the London
School of Hygiene.

For Teachers
------------
Two Courses for teachers of Educationally
Subnormal Children are being organized for the
Ministry of Education?the first at St. Gabriel's
L.C.C. Training College, Camberwell, beginning
on July 10 th?the second at The Hayes, Swan wick,
Derbyshire, begining on August 18th. Each
Course will last three weeks. Application for
admission is made through Local Education
Authorities and the final selection is determined
by the Ministry.

A Course of Instruction in the use of the Revised
Stanford Binet Intelligence Scale, is being held
during the present term on one evening a week.
Four of the sessions consist of lectures and
demonstrations, and the remaining six are devoted
to supervised practice. The Association is prepared
to arrange a further Course on these lines in the
autumn if there is a sufficient demand.

In addition to meeting frequent requests from
Education Authorities for lectures on the education
of educationally subnormal children the Association
has undertaken, for the Kent Education Committee,
a series of courses designed to stimulate discussion
on educational matters as well as to offer practical
help. The subjects include school records from
the psychological point of view, emotional development- from birth to adolescence, the testing of
intelligence, and remedial teaching. For providing
this interesting opportunity the lecturers would
like to thank the County Authority,- and would
also like to pay a tribute to the teachers who
heroically attended first in snow and then in subtropical heat ! Up to July 1947, twenty-five
courses of eight to ten lectures will have been given
under this scheme.

The Week's Course for staffs of Preparatory
Schools held at Easter?another new development
?was attended by 42 teachers. This Course
was necessarily experimental in content and
approach, but was so much appreciated that a
second one is planned for 1948.

Lecturers in connection with these Courses
include Miss Gibbs, Miss Mackinlay and Miss
Stephen (the Association's Educational Psychologists), Miss Wilshire and Miss Culham (visiting
lecturers in Education). The work has been
carried out under the general direction of Miss
Gibbs.

For Children's Boarding-Out Officers
A Nine Weeks' Course is being held during the
summer on one afternoon weekly, for Officers of
Local Authorities engaged in the boarding-out
of children. The aim of the Course is to give those
already engaged in this work a deeper insight into
the emotional needs of children with special
reference to the difficulties of children deprived of
home life, and the application of such knowledge
to the practical problems of boarding-out.
The Course, which began on June 3rd, is being
attended by 52 students.

In October, it is planned to hold a month's fulltime Course designed to meet the needs of Matrons
and Superintendents of Children's Homes, whilst
projects for a later date include a Course for House
Mothers and Assistants in such Homes.

For Staffs of Occupation Centres and " School "
Departments of Certified Institutions
Students attending the Year's Course are now'
back in London for their final term, after a period
of five months spent in practical work in Occupation
Centres and Institutions in various parts of the
country.

The 1947-48 Course will begin in September
and applications from prospective students can stn'
be accepted. Particulars will gladly be sent by the
Education Secretary to anyone interested either
on their own behalf or on behalf of possible
candidates known to them.

A Week's Refresher Course held at King s
College Theological Hall, Westminster, in Apr11'
met with such appreciation from the 42 workers
in Occupation Centres and Certified Institution5
in attendance, that a further Course on similar
lines is planned in the autumn, to be held at a
centre near Cheltenham.

INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS ON MENTAL HEALTH, 1948
Plans are rapidly progressing for the organization of
the International Congress on Mental Health to be held
under the auspices of the National Association for
j Mental Health in London, August 12th-21st, 1948.
There are encouraging indications that the Congress is
attracting world-wide attention, and the various countries
have been invited to help in forming " Preparatory
Commissions or discussion groups, who would be in
frequent contact with those which have already been set
up in this country. Their function is to survey the
various aspects of each day's topics, to collect and digest
Material from all sources, and ultimately to decide on
what aspects are most important and can best be dealt
with in the limited time of the Congress. In addition
. to the five Preparatory Commissions already formed in
this country, a sixth Commission is being set up with the
assistance of the Society for the Psychological Study of
Social Issues. Its function is to explore the methods
by which action can be obtained to give effect to any
4 resolutions and conclusions which emerge from the
Congress deliberations.

Dr J. r. ReeS) Chairman of the Organizing Committee,
recently visited America for the express purpose of
discussing the Congress with the American Psychiatric
Association, the International Committee for Mental
hygiene and various other groups. He found a very
alive and genuine interest in the purpose of the Congress,
r and received generous promises of financial help. A
number of Preparatory Commissions, on a line with their
English counterparts, are to be organized and each of
these will be in close touch with the Congress secretariat
ln London.

Arrangements are being made to publish monthly
ulletins for distribution in countries where groups are
tormed, and these will include progress reports and
cpmments and conclusions of the Preparatory CommisSl0ns in relation to digested material.
. At the meeting of the American Psychiatric Association
m New York, on May 19th, Dr G. Brock Chisholm,
C.B.E., M.C., Executive Secretary of the Interim
Commission of the World Health Organization, in the
course of his address expressed the hope that through
the International Congress on Mental Health there
would develop a permanent organization largely for the
purpose of advising the World Health Organization
on all aspects relating to mental health, and he went on
to say :

" Perhaps never before in history has there
been a more important meeting of any kind than
that Congress can be, if all the people qualified
and obligated to attend, do so, and if they can ar
the same time ignore all sectional interest, all
local or national loyalties, all matters of personal
or individual prestige or advantage, and by a free
pooling of their knowledge and experience, offer
even a little, but concrete hope for a frightened
world ..." " buring these next two years
there is an opportunity for psychology and psychiatry to justify their existence in the eyes of the
world?for .the first time to contribute very
importantly and recognizably to the future peace
of the world by becoming real leaders in the
planned development of a new kind of human
being, one who can live at peace with himself and
his fellow men. All this can be done if, at the
International Congress on Mental Health,
even a few principles of mental health, even a few
signposts for the bringing up of children, even
a little hope for a sorely beset and anxious world,
can be agreed on by qualified people from all over
the world.''''

We have pleasure in announcing that Dr Rees has
been elected President of the International Committee
for Mental Hygiene in succession to Dr Adolph
Meyer, who had from its inception been President,
but has now found it necessary to retire from active
work. Dr Rees' election will also help in the running
of the Congress, since to have the President of the
International Committee in London rather than in
America will greatly facilitate organization.
