The Description and Measurement of Personality
================================================

:Author: Raymond B. Cattell. New York: World Book
Company. 1946. London: Geo. Harrap & Co.
Pp. xx+602. Price 15s.

Dr. Cattell explains that his book is the first of two
volumes. Fifteen years ago, so he tells us in his preface,
he left an academic laboratory to take charge of a psychological clinic where there was " an embarrassing abundance of research material mainly handled by overworked
medical men untrained in research methodsHe
then planned a book on " the empirical study of personality ", which was to embody " quite militantly
a truly scientific approach, and make a definite break
with the majority of writings having intuitive foundations
such as then commanded the field in the clinical study
of personality ". He began with what he calls the crosssectional approach ; and, as time went on, this has
expanded into the present volume. But this is to be
regarded partly as a preliminary to an equally systematic
account of the " development of personality ", which
will form the topic of a later volume.

Dr. Cattell's approach to the problems of personality
is by means of psychometric measurement, with the data
interpreted throughout by factor analysis. This, as
Professor Terman points out in his introduction, " does
not betoken a lack of interest in the other applications
of psychology to life situations Dr. Cattell certainly
" inveighs against the blind application of clinical
methods that have not been scientifically validated ".
But that is not because he wishes us to substitute a
statistical for a clinical procedure, but because he wishes
(in common with most academic psychologists) to bring
the two together.

By " psychometric measurements " Dr. Cattell means'
very much more than mere test-measurements. He
has one short but systematic chapter, summarizing the
evidence for " traits discovered through objective test
measurements But in the main the assessments on
which he chiefly relies have been based either on selfinventories or on ratings of actual behaviour. Some
psychologists may feel, as Prof. Terman suggests, that
Dr. Cattell is " putting his case a bit strongly when he
says that the self-inventory represents the nadir of scientific inventiveness and subtletyand dismisses the
Rorschach test as " something analogous to a patent
medicine ". Nevertheless, in view of the recent revival
of magnified claims for tests of temperament and
personality, it is welcome to find a writer, like Dr. Cattell,
tempering enthusiasm with scientific caution, and
reminding us that tests of personality are still in a theoretical rather than a practical stage.

Perhaps the most interesting feature of his book lies
in the large number of group factors, both on the intellectual and on the temperamental side, which the author
is led to accept. Earlier writers in this country, with
first-hand experience of work with school children,
have insisted from the outset on the need for groupfactors to explain the special abilities and the special
disabilities they encountered, as well as the wide divergences of temperamental types. Spearman, on the other
hand, whose influence for a while ousted the methods
of Karl Pearson and his followers in the sphere of statistical psychology, was so convinced of the supreme
importance of the single general cognitive factor (which
he preferred to call g rather than intelligence) that he
spread over the whole notion of group factors the same
shadow of doubt as had hung for so long over the
notion of " faculties " and " temperaments
To British workers Dr. Gattell's book will be invaluable
because it compresses into a single volume an admirable
summary of the numerous researches carried out on
personality during recent years in America. Apart
from slight differences of detail and nomenclature, their
results seem in the main to corroborate the scheme of
personality developed by earlier investigators - on this
side of the Atlantic. Thus Dr. Cattell's psychographic
scheme (or, as he prefers to call it, " list of modality
divisions and sub-divisions ") agrees very closely with
the scheme which was put forward in the pages of this
Journal many years ago as a basis for child guidance
work and has been freely adopted since. His own
scheme, though slightly more elaborate, agrees in
distinguishing between (1) abilities or cognitive traits,
which he divides into those that are (a) inborn or native
and those that are (b) acquired or achieved, and (2)
temperamental and dynamic factors, which again he
subdivides into (a) those that are innate and constitutional and (6) those which, like sentiments and complexes,
are acquired.

His long and comprehensive survey leads him to
enumerate something like 30 or 40 different factors.
But these he eventually reduces to 12, which he considers to be manifested in all his data. Here again it
is interesting to see that factors that were early distinguished in this country have reappeared in American
investigations, though sometimes under slightly different
names or with slightly different descriptions.

It is true that, as more than one reviewer has pointed
out, Dr. Cattell's style is a little slapdash, and his terminology often cumbersome and forbidding. The names with
which he baptizes some of his ultimate factors, though
perhaps suggestive, are scarcely elegant or succinct;
and the classical purist will assuredly protest against
such hybrid neologisms as " metanergs " ipsative
" monovariate and " subsidiation ". Nevertheless,
as a conspectus of factorial studies, his volumes will
prove a mine of information for the practical research
worker, and will yield a stimulating and at times a provoking study for the psychological theorist. C.B.
