Psychology of Women
=====================

Vol. II. Motherhood.
:Author: Helen Deutsch, M.D. William Heinemann Ltd.
London. 25s.

This book is the logical successor of Vol I, which
dealt with the psychology bf girlhood; although it is
better read in conjunction with the previous volume,
it is a separate and self-contained work of considerable
value. Like the previous book, it deals mainly with the
psychology of normality, though many instances of
abnormal reaction are also "described by way of
illustration.

Dr. Deutsch's views are based throughout on psychoanalytical technique and are fundamentally of the
Freudian school. Where, however, the author has
formed her own opinions at variance with established
views, she does not hesitate to describe them, with full
arguments as to their validity. In general she supports
her opinions convincingly, and it is clear that they are
based on a very extensive experience and careful thought.
Nor is her experience restricted to clinical work, for she
makes full use of sociological, literary and anthropological approaches. The danger that such an approach
may lead to pseudo-philosophical rather than to logical
scientific thinking is not entirely avoided in this book,
but the results undoubtedly gain by this integration into
the wide social framework.

The psychological aspects of motherhood in its widest
possible sense are considered in detail, from the period
of conception through the various phases of pregnancy
and labour to a final consideration of the mother-child
relationship. Such a method results in some repetition,
but this failing is not so marked as in the author's
previous volume. There are additional?and valuable?
chapters on the psychological aspects of adoption,
illegitimacy and the stepmother relationship. It is
unfortunate that the menopause is dealt with only
relatively superficially in a final chapter. The essential
importance of this difficult period is stressed, but a more
detailed approach would have been valuable.

Dr. Deutsch's views on sterility, and abortion are
especially interesting; without minimising the importance of physical and endocrine factors, they indicate
the immense importance of the psychological side to
the clinical and sociological aspects of these problems.
These, sections in particular could be read with great
advantage by many obstetricians. It is doubtful if the
author's views on the misuse of anaesthesia in childbirth will meet with general approval, but her opinions
are stimulating and clearly must be given consideration.

For British readers it is perhaps unfortunate that most
of the author's clinical and literary material is drawn
from American and Central European sources. Although
the fundamental psychological pattern is the same, in a
book which deals with wide sociological problems some
translation to the British cultural level and way of living
is necessary before the results can be fully assessed or
accepted. It would, for example, be of value to adapt
Dr. Deutsch's views to the more widespread practice
of domiciliary midwifery which occurs in this country.
The author's style is not always very lucid and this is
not an easy book to read; it is essentially a book for
those with a considerable " background " of psychopathology. Nevertheless it is a valuable contribution
to the psychological understanding of this problem.
Its value is that of a thesis which stimulates thought,
rather than as a reference book. It is to be hoped that
the additional volumes on abnormal psychological
reactions, promised in the preface, will not be long
delayed.
