Mental Health
==============

Editorial

Interest in Society is nowadays widespread and
the ways in which it shows itself are varied and
changing. Indeed, the meanings borne by the word
" social " through the past century are themselves
significant enough.

The wider aspects of sociology and its relation
to other sciences are no doubt extremely fascinating;
they are also most complex and deserve much
careful study on the lines indicated most admirably
by Dr Kershaw in a volume modestly entitled
An Approach to Social Medicine (reviewed elsewhere
in this number). It is however not these aspects
but the practical handling of specific cases which
form most of the daily work of many of our readers.
What are, or what should be the relations of the
Social Worker to the General Practitioner, the
Psychiatrist (in Mental Hospital and Outpatient
Clinic) the Probation Officer and the Education
Authorities ? There are obviously many different
opinions and it is too early to attempt to lay down
firm principles. But it is already appropriate and
possible to provide more detailed information
about the Services which the Social Worker can
use, and discuss how he or she can do so to the. best
advantage to both. We are, therefore, publishing
a series of articles written, by invitation, to describe
some of these branches of work. The first of this
series will appear in the next issue.

Again, there are certain specific problems which j
may present themselves in any of these fields. |
Social Workers in particular may therefore be glad
of a comprehensive survey. One of these is the
case of the repatriate, whose difficulties were at
first overshadowed by the more acute (and
dramatic) need of the released prisoner-of-war,
and who is now being neglected for the opposite
reason?that iis, the pendulum has swung the other
way, and the resettlement of both ex-prisoner and
ex-serviceman is regarded as an easy matter.

It is true that generally their resettlement into jobs
has been much easier than was expected: but their
resettlement into their families is still an acute
social question as Social Worker^ and the divorce
figures testify. The reasons for this are no doubt
partly social and partly psychological: Dr Ratcliffe's
article, in this issue, will be welcomed as a most
enlightened and stimulating study from one whose
interest has already been turned into practice.
