Group Psycho Therapy? Theory and Practice
==========================================

50 MENTAL HEALTH
Reviews
By J. W.
klapman, M.D. Hememan. 21s.
Emotional disorders have been well described as
disturbed adjustments of internal relations to external
relations. In their treatment, much consideration has
been given to the internal life of the individual, and the
science of psycho-pathology making huge strides towards
an understanding of the complex life of the internal
world has provided important pointers for basic individual
therapy. It has, of course, long been recognized that
manipulation i.of the external environment to suit the
particular needs and limitations of an individual may also
be an effective step in therapy, but modification of the
material environment can rarely be effective enough,
for the external world is a world not only of things, but
of people and, in the world of feeling, it is the people
who matter most. Relations to people cannot be
modified on demand; they are not one-way but are
inter-reactive, not simple but complex, not fixed but
dynamic, and fruitful now of great rewards but then of
painful frustrations.
The study and treatment of inter-personal relations
are, therefore, proper activities for those concerned with
emotional disorders in the individual and it is not strange
that in recent years, with the growth of the regard for
man as a social creature, therapy of groups or, a different
thing, of individuals in groups, has been attempted.
Workers with groups are agreed that difficulties abound
and that much experiment is needed to answer even the
most elementary questions. What is a group ? How
many people should make up a group ? What kind of
problems respond to group treatment ? Is mass therapy
effective group therapy ? Is the aim, treatment of the
individual by the group, or of the group by one or all
participants, or of the group by the group ? What is
the role of the group therapist ? What procedures are
useful in group therapy ? What is known of the dynamics-
of group formation and activity ?
This book is less concerned with the delineation of a
theory and the description of a practice than with an
uncritical survey of some current theories and practices
considered to be relevant to group psycho-therapy.
It is, therefore, unprovocative and unchallenging and
also unpatterned.
Because of the stress on description and review rather
than elucidation and definition, group therapy is given
the vaguest terms of reference and one is left to believe
that any earnest attempt at therapy of more than one
patient at a time may be dignified by the term. A crowd,
a number of individuals listening to a lecture, an associa-
tion of people met for a common function?any, or all of
these by the author's standards can be a group. Pro-
cedure can be empiric, or rational, analytic, didactic,
pedagogic, hortative, but it is apparently psycho-therapy
"so long as it restores a desirable (sic) state of intra-
psychic equilibrium". The book must disappoint
those seeking knowledge of the dynamics of group
behaviour and a rational science of group therapy. It
is a further disappointment that the reader is asked to
accept the most questionable a priori statements as
basic material for working hypotheses and to view group
behaviour and individual illness in the light of concepts
which, to say the least, are suspiciously like personal
beliefs.
The book appears to have been written for psychiatric
" hill-billies" and contains a good short American
isolationist history of group therapy. There are useful
short accounts of the practices of Marsh, Schilder,
Wender, Slavson, Redl, Moreno, Lazell and some
others, but the reader may be astonished in the second
chapter by the short anthropological survey of the
origins of social needs. After an account of inverte-
brates emerging from primaeval slime, it tells of apes
" subsisting on tender shoots, nuts and fruits, although
not above sucking the eggs found in nests and, on
occasions, catching some small bird or lizard " whereas
the homonidae went on to carnivorous life on the ground.
Thereafter male competition for females is said to have
produced sexual taboos and it is quickly concluded that
early social organization occurred round a patriarch.
This speciosity paves the way for a closed mind on group
formations which the author regards as dependent on
early mechanisms and for further beliefs that the group
therapist must occupy an archaic, immature central
position, that his role is that of leader and that the rela-
tions to him can be properly described as " transference
In his easy use of psycho-pathological terms, the author
is of course following the practice of some group thera-
pists but his wisdom may be doubted. It is true that the
mental mechanisms of individuals in the group are
sometimes apparent but it is massively assumptive to
describe complex group phenomena by unmodified
terms borrowed from the study of individual psycho-
pathology.
Groups are not individuals. Group hostility is some-
thing more than "resistance", something more than
the sum of individual transference-relationships to the
therapist, and surely involves, as do all group phenomena,
something of the complex of interpersonal relations
between members. In group therapy, a knowledge of
individual psycho-pathology is a sine qua non but, like
patriotism, is not enough. Perhaps the dangers of
thinking by analogy and using second-hand terms give
warning enough that for a full regarding of group
events we are in great need of fresh concepts, clear vision
and, as important, a new descriptive language.
The author has not yet attempted a study of group
behaviour; rather, as his case histories show, he seems
to be interested in the individual and effect of the group
only insofar as it affects individual treatment. He
does not attempt to analyse and treat relations within
the group but is concerned mainly with the mass applica-
tion of therapy, treatment by the therapist of a number
of individuals collected together for convenience. Group
discussions are well described. Spontaneity is not
allowed to shape them and patients are encouraged to
discuss in order that the therapist may seize further
openings for individual therapy. Treatment is, there-
fore, by the therapist of the individual set in a group
rather than of the individual by the social forces within
the group.
Several procedures are held to be helpful. A course
of lectures on physiology of the nervous system or on
mental illness (such as a P.S.W. has experienced) is
held to be therapeutic " affective re-education Class
discussion of a case history by other patients is recom-
mended and class dissemination and discussion of the
principles of mental hygiene is regarded as valuable; for
the author has a vigorous acceptance of the value of
effecting emotional release by intellectual channels.
MENTAL HEALTH 51
Now didacticism and pedagogy are well known to have
far-reaching effects, and collective explanation and
persuasion is surely a useful procedure; class discussions
have an educative and socially liberating effect and have
behind them authority of centuries of human practice;
and the account of their use in psychiatric practice is
interesting and informative; but it would be unneces-
sarily disappointing if group psycho-therapy could offer
nothing more. The term Group psycho-therapy is too
vague. It may mean psycho-therapy (and that has
meanings enough!) in, of, by, or through groups. All
these possibilities have some value but this book is con-
cerned only with the first.
T.F.M.
