News and Notes
================

F?r Services to Mental Health "
3d^e awarding of a D.B.E. to Miss Evelyn Fox?for
fn *ears Hon. Secretary of the Central Association
str Rental Welfare?is a fitting recognition of out-
Ur? serv'ce given to the mental health movement.
, with all the constituent bodies of the National
ssociation for Mental Health she was closely con-
s cted from the outset and in their final amalgamation
A fred a leading and indispensable part,
her i-^ her heavy responsibilities are now lightened,
j . hnk with the Association's activities is still close and
ls a matter of satisfaction to her fellow-workers that
qJa Member of the Executive Council and of its various
c ^rciittees, her long experience and her wise counsel
Ptipue to be at their disposal.
to tV-S Perhaps worthy of note that the citation attached
health" Wa runs as f?^ows: " f?r services to mental
has h "" *s t^ie ^rst occasi?n on which such a term
a Br P used ? If so, it may surely be taken as indicating
in th?Wlng awareness ?f the contribution which workers
of th mental health movement are making to the welfare
"e community.
^le' Birthday Honours
qJ? ^?r- Norwood East (formerly one of H.M. Prison
41 f0 /H'ssioners) who has been awarded a Knighthood
services to study of criminal psychology to
Univ " ? Henderson, Professor of Psychiatry, Edinburgh
man erfsity> a'so knighted, and to Mr. P. Barter (Chair-
^ould r ?oar(I ?f Control) who becomes a C.B., we
a further offer our warm congratulations.
j^dsor Mental Health Association
The Is Association was formed in September 1946.
best t rga~'zers decided that with a new Group it was
and ? er. something definite to prospective members
fortni^?rdin?'y arranged a programme of thirteen
cover?? y 'ectures throughout the winter. The subjects
Adoip Were Mental Health at Home, at School and in
^arriaCenCe' ^hild Guidance, Family Relationships,
Mental tr Delinquency, the Medical Aspect, and
frorj, ' Health as a Social Service; the final lecture was
introdi Moral and Religious point of view. An
toiy address was given by Dr. Doris Odium.
Other speakers included Dr. Kenneth Soddy, Miss
Norah M. Gibbs, Miss Robina S. Addis, Dr. W. I.
Doherty, Dr. Issac Frost, Dr. Ethel Dukes, Dr. Gerald
Caplan and Professor L. W. Grensted.
Originally the Association was formed for the winter
season only but at its final meeting in April, it was
unanimously decided by the members to put it on a
permanent footing and to elect a Committee. It was
also decided to hold a short Educational Conference
in Windsor which took place during the Whitsun week.
The programme of lectures at the Conference was
mainly designed for teachers and social workers, and
the delegates included a party from Manchester. The
Conference was a great success and it is hoped to repeat
it, as well as to provide a further course of lectures,
during the coming winter.
The Association hopes later to be affiliated to the
National Association for Mental Health with which it
has been in close touch throughout.
This is an example of voluntary enterprise and
initiative which might well be followed by other areas
and we should like to take the opportunity of con-
gratulating the Joint Organizers, Mr. George Foster
and Mr. J. H. Wallis, (a contribution from whom is
published on another page) on their energy and
initiative.
Association of Parents of Backward Children
The founding of this Association and of the News
Letter circulated monthly to its members, is an example
of individual enterprise on the part of an overburdened
but undaunted mother of a defective child, which should
be specially commended.
The venture arose out of correspondence in the
Nursery World which strikingly disclosed the isolation
and helplessness felt by parents of this particular group
of handicapped children and their desperate need of
help and advice, and the number of letters which have
since reached its Founder and Editor is an indication
of the support awaiting her.
The Association is out to champion the cause of
educationally subnormal children (particularly of those
excluded from school) and to promote community
care, Occupation Centres, and other forms of help,
based on "a recognition by all engaged on this work
14 MENTAL HEALTH
[
that these children are not a sub-human species but
have human rights and feelings to be considered
The two roneoed issues of the News Letter so far
published contain?in addition to letters from parents?
items of news, book reviews, and an editorial written
in an interesting and vigorous way. There is, perhaps
not unnaturally, an inadequate appreciation of the
difficulties with which Local Authorities have been
faced during the war years and are still faced, so that
even the most enterprising of them are unable to carry
out plans the need for which they fully accept; and
secondly, no mention has yet been made of the activities
of Local Voluntary Associations for Mental Welfare
who, for many years, have laboured to promote the
welfare of defective children and the opening of
Occupation Centres. Attention might also, it is
suggested, be drawn in a subsequent issue to the willing-
ness of the National Association for Mental Health
to help parents in need of advice about Schools, Homes
or methods of training.
With this one note of criticism, we wish for this
gallant effort, every success, and assure it of our
sympathy.
Further information may be obtained from The
Editor and Founder, 8 Westfield Avenue, Harpenden,
Herts.
Family Service Units
We are glad to publish the following announcement which
has been sent to us by the General Secretary of this new
organization. Many of our readers will' know of the
pioneer work from which it has sprung, through the account
of it given in "Problem Families ", which we reviewed in a
previous issue. Further particulars may be obtained from
the Officer of the Organization, 85 Clarendon Road,
London, W.ll.
Lord Balfour of Burleigh, who had been impressed
with the magnitude and urgency of the problems arising
out of the below-standard family through his work in
Housing, recently contacted Pacifist Service Units,
and after discussion took the initiative in calling together
representatives from London, Liverpool and Manchester
to explore the possibilities of developing the work.
At this meeting it was unanimously felt that the service
pioneered by P.S.U. should be established on a
permanent basis, to do the work on a wider scale,
and under the auspices of a more representative body.
It was decided to call the new body Family Service
Units and a responsible National Committee was
formed with the co-operation of such organizations as
the National?Council of Social Service, the Family
Welfare Association, N.S.P.C.C., the National Associa-
tion for Mental Health, the British Federation of Social
Workers, the Women's Group on Public Welfare and
the Salvation Army. Individual members of the
National Committee include the Archbishop of York;
Cardinal Griffin; Mr. John Watson, Chairman of the
South East London Juvenile Court; Sir Lancelot Keay,
City Architect and the Director of Housing, Liverpool;
Rt. Hon. Margaret Bondfield; Mr. Seebohm Rowntree.
The Honourable David Bowes Lyon was appointed
Chairman of this Committee. The co-operation of
the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Education,
the Home Office and the Assistance Board was promised.
The Committee plan first to take responsibility for the
existing work in Liverpool and Manchester, and then
to establish a new Unit in London as soon as personnel
becomes available. The work of the committee will
continue for some time to be experimental and among
its objects is a comprehensive investigation into the
nature, extent and causes of this form of social
subnormality.
It is estimated that a sum of ?15,000 is needed to
maintain these Units for an initial experimental period
of two years. The financial response is not yet
sufficient to warrant the full establishment of the
scheme.
We believe that with the help of all those interested
in the problem this sum can be raised. There is an
urgent need for the work and we know it has a strong
appeal to the general public.
Community Care of Epileptics
Employment
The Disabled Persons' Employment Corporation
Ltd. set up under the Disabled Persons' (Employment)
Act of 1944, to provide sheltered employment for
severely handicapped workers on the Register, plans
for the establishment of some 50 "Remploy" Factories
within the next twelve months, a small proportion of
which has already been set up.
The experience of one of these?at Salford, Lancashire
?is particularly interesting to those concerned with the
employment needs of epileptics. It was at first deemed
necessary to separate this particular group of handi'
capped workers, from the other employees who, it was
feared, might resent or fear their presence. After a
short trial period, however, these apprehensions were
found to be ungrounded. The dividing partition was
taken down and the six epileptics joined their fellows
and were readily accepted by them. It was found
moreover that fits (of which careful records were kept)
decreased to a remarkable extent as a result of the
occupation and companionship provided by the Factory-
and that there was a notable increase in happiness and
stability.
It should be recorded that during training under this
scheme, workers are paid at the rate of Is. 9d. an hour*
which gradually rises to the ordinary Trade Union rate
if full productivity is attained. Provision is, however
made for the continuance of a lower rate if a norma1
degree of efficiency cannot be reached.
We shall watch with great interest the progress of tne
epileptic group employed in other " Remploy " factories
and shall hope, in a later issue, to give some further
account of the experiment.
Convalescent Home
The National Association for Mental Health hopeS
that its Convalescent Home for epileptics?in AshdoWfl
Forest?will shortly be able to open its doors.
The Association is glad to be able to record a genero^
gift of ?800 received from the King Edward Hospif3
Fund to help to meet capital outlay on the Home, wit11
a promise of possible further help.
National Health Service Act
A circular issued by the Ministry of Health request
Local Health Authorities (County Councils and Count;
Boroughs) to submit proposals not later than Octobe^
31st, for carrying out certain provisions of the new Ac
(which is now to come into force on July 5th, 1948). . .
Included in the relevant Sections is that whic"
empowers such Authorities to provide "care and afte'j
care " for " persons suffering from illness or menta
defectiveness " (Section 28). By definition (Section
" illness " includes " mental illness and any injury 0
disability requiring medical or dental treatment 0
MENTAL HEALTH 15
1 nursing and it has been ascertained that the projected
community care can cover the categories of neurotic
and unstable persons, psychopaths, psychotics and
those who are mentally subnormal, but not certifiable
under the Lunacy, Mental Treatment or Mental Defici-
ency Acts. An opportunity is thus given for the develop-
ment of greatly extended statutory mental health service
of which the After-Scheme for psychiatric casualties
discharged from the Services carried on by the National
Association for Mental Health for the past four years,
ls a Possible prototype. The Association is giving close
'i. attention to this question and is prepared to place its
experience and its available facilities at the disposal of
local authorities and other bodies concerned, if invited
I to do so.
It should be noted that under Section 20(2) of the Act,
Proposals made by local authorities must be submitted
to every voluntary organization in the area which
Provides services of the type concerned, and that within
two months of receiving such proposals, the organiza-
tion may make recommendations for their modification.*
A Circular issued by the Ministry on June 17th,
announces that for the purpose of administering the ,
unctions transferred from the Board of Control, to the
jVJmister, in accordance with Section 49 of the Act, a
Rental Health Division of the Ministry of Health has
een established. To this the members and staff of the
?ard have been assigned, but the Board itself will
' . tin lie to function as before in regard to " quasi-
Judicial functions relating to the liberty of the subject ".
Both the Mental Health Division and the Board will
oP^ate from 32 Rutland Gate, Knightsbridge, London,
o.vv 7
Approved Schools for Maladjusted Children
I ^he National Association for Mental Health has been
;*sked by the Home Office to establish two Approved
chools?one for senior boys and one for senior girls?
p, .^eet the needs of children dealt with under the
' in n and Young Persons Act, 1933, found to be
of special psychological handling and treatment,
th a *nvitation has been accepted by the Council of
"e Association and the work will be begun as soon as
onuses, equipment and staff can be secured.
me felt tflat suc'1 a venture will constitute an experi-
outt m Juvenile Delinquency likely to be of
ablS ^ value, and we hope in our next issue, to be
lyj? to report that substantial progress in the pre-
?nary stages of preparation has been made.
^ School for Speech Defects
treat*6 ^rst School exclusively for the education and
has l1601 ?f children suffering from speech disorders,
Will hn ?Pened in Surrey, where 30 children at a time
tWo c taken for periods varying from two months to
defect6^ accort*'ng to the nature of their particular
toV8 considered that there are four main groups likely
(2) p?? from this provision: (1) Aphasic children,
l Palat Jen wh? have undergone operations for cleft
ularlv tK Children witfl articulation defects (partic-
ment i ^PSe ?t'ue to cerebral palsy) uncomplicated by
Child deficiency or serious physical disability. (4)
djSorien offering from certain other types of speech
i treattn neet^ng full clinical investigation and intensive
The School is approved by the Ministry of Education
and the majority of children are likely to be sent by
Education Authorities. It is being run in conjunction
with the Speech Therapy Department of the West
End Hospital for Nervous Diseases and will provide for
resident students in the subject. The premises have
been given by two generous donors, but an appeal for
donations towards the cost of furnishing and
accommodation is being made.
Further particulars can be obtained from the Hon.
Secretary, Moor House School, Hurst Green, Oxted,
Surrey.
Homes and Hostels for Defectives
The National Association has re-opened at Bognor
Regis, one of the Holiday Homes which, before the
War, were so popular and met such an urgent need.
Accommodation is now fully booked until the middle of
November, and applications for 1948 are already in
hand. Parties can be received from Mental Deficiency
Institutions, Occupation Centres, Agricultural Hostels,
Colonies for Epileptics and Mental Hospitals.
A generous gift of ?600 has been received towards the
expenses of a Hostel for high-grade mentally defective
girls and women who, after a period of institutional
training, are considered suitable for daily domestic
employment. It is hoped that suitable premises may
be secured in Sussex, preferably in an area containing
a hospital in need of domestic help.
Training Centre for Neglectful Mothers
The Elizabeth Fry Training Centre fot Mothers
convicted of Child Neglect, to be opened shortly, is an
experiment which will be watched with great interest
and sympathy by all who are concerned with the pre-
servation of family life.
The Centre will accommodate six mothers on probation
who have agreed to enter voluntarily as an alternative
to a prison sentence. Each applicant for admission
will be given an intelligence test plus a medical and
psychiatric examination before being accepted, in order
to ensure their capability for benefiting from the
training given.
Mothers will be accompanied by their younger
children and will stay at the Centre from 3 to 6 months.
Separate rooms will be allocated to them so that in-
dividual home-making can be taught, and the staff
will consist of a resident warden and wife, an assistant
warden, and a nurse holding a nursery nurse's diploma.
The services of a visiting psychiatrist and psychiatric
social worker will be available, and the latter will
co-operate with the Probation Officer in maintaining
the mothers' ties with husbands and older children.
The scheme, in its experimental stage, must be financed
entirely from voluntary funds, and the ?3,000 collected
up to date can only cover expenses for one year.
Further particulars can be obtained from the Hon.
Secretary, Elizabeth Fry Centenary Fund, 21 Blooms-
bury Street (Room 220), London, W.C.I.
Industrial Neurosis Unit
The attention of our readers is called to the following
information kindly provided by the Medical Superintendent
of the Sutton E.M.S. Hospital.
An industrial neurosis unit comprising one hundred
male beds was opened at Sutton Emergency Hospital,
thei/^AjWe to Press a further Circular (No. 100147) has been issued for the guidance of local authorities in planning
ental Health Services. H.M. Stationery Office, 2d.
16 MENTAL HEALTH
Sutton, Surrey on April 1st, 1947. Patients are admitted
who have a neurosis and employment difficulties;
they come mainly from the Employment Exchanges
having been referred by the Disablement Rehabilitation
Officer (D.R.O.) to a Psychiatrist who, if he thinks fit,
sends a report to the industrial unit requesting admission.
Other patients may be referred by the Ministry of
Pensions or direct from Psychiatric Out-Patient depart-
ments. In the meantime the scheme is limited to the
London and South Eastern district.
The geperal treatment programme is the same as for
neurotic patients in general: individual psychotherapy,
group treatment, educational and social methods, and
physical methods of treatment are all used.
Allied to treatment are occupational therapy and work
therapy. By work therapy we mean occupation while
still in hospital, carried out however, in a normal work
environment (firm, shop, farm, Government Training
Centre, technical institute, etc.). This outside employ-
ment for patients who are still in hospital depends on
enlisting the help of an increasing number of local
employers, and gives us a much bigger range of
occupation that is possible with workshops in the
hospital itself. The patients, who are at their occupation
one to two hours a day, are there to see the conditions
of work, but are in no sense employees: they can lend
a hand as required, but are displacing no one, and are
of course unpaid. An accident is considered as occurring
during the course of treatment, and would be a hospital
responsibility and not the firm's.
Occupational therapy includes all occupations carried
on within the confines of the hospital. We are
developing workshops in hospital to cover some of the
basic trades?e.g. bricklaying, plastering, hairdressing,
tailoring, and gardening, each with its own instructor
taking small classes of 12 men.
The varied range of occupational and work therapy
offers excellent opportunities for vocational selection.
The psychologist uses routine vocational testing, but
of more practical value is the placement in a real work
environment, and a study of the patient's reaction to
this environment. Frequent changes of occupation
are possible and of value in aiding vocational choice.
The patient's stay will probably be limited in most
cases to two months or less. By the end of this time
however, the psychiatrist, psychologist, D.R.O., and
instructor or employer, psychiatrist social worker, and
nursing staff, will have formed collectively a fairly clear
idea as to the man's value on the labour market. Some
men will be ready to go into ordinary jobs and as far as
possible we plan to have these finally arranged before
leaving hospital. Others will be considered fit only
for sheltered employment and here the help of a friendly
employer willing to accept the man despite definite
disability is our aim. Later when more " Remploy "
factories are available for the severely disabled it may
be possible to place some of our patients through this
channel. Finally, there will inevitably be a residue of
patients who are considered unfit for any form of employ-
ment; these should be removed from the books of the
Ministry of Labour and referred to Public Assistance.
In conclusion it must be remembered that we are
dealing with the failures on the labour market, men who
are frequently constitutionally poor material and have
never settled to any job; under these circumstances
we must avoid undue optimism.
Voluntary Social Service Inquiry
Under the Chairmanship of Lord Beveridge with a
Committee of Assessors an inquiry is being conducted
for the purpose of examining the implications of the
principle that "social security must be achieved by
co-operation between the State and the individual "
and to consider methods of putting it into practice.
Part of the Inquiry will, of course, deal with the
changed position of the Friendly Societies when the
National Insurance Act comes into force, but a much
wider field will also be covered. To quote from the
official announcement:?
"7/ is concerned with all the different ways w
which individual citizens may come together freely
for mutual service. It will aim at covering all
forms of Voluntary Social Services; those which
provide for the care of the aged and that of
children; those furnishing opportunities and in-
centives for a fuller use of leisure, whether in
recreation or study; and those whose function
is to promote the sense of neighbourliness and
community. It will also consider how those who
possess the time and means for voluntary social
service can most effectively apply them at the
present time; and will consider what should be
the form and extent of co-ordination between
voluntary service and statutory authorities."
All interested organizations are invited to give their
views and to submit memoranda on future plans and
problems and on any special difficulties which they
anticipate. The National Association hopes to submit
such a Memorandum dealing with the complicated
issues at present confronting workers in the Voluntary
Mental Health Services.
The office of the Inquiry is at Universal House,
58-62 Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.I.
A Changing Concept of Mental Defect
The British Medical Journal of May 17th, 1947,
contains the text of a Memorandum on " Interpreta-
tions of the Definitions -in the Mental Deficiency Act,
1927 ", drawn up by the Committee on Psychiatry and
the Law and approved by the Council of the British
Medical Association.
It is pointed out that the revised definitions of the
1927 Act reflect a new attitude towards mental deficiency
which, in 1913 when the original Act was passed, was
associated exclusively with unchangeable innate and
hereditary factors. Two important changes reveal this
more modern concept: (1) The dropping of the necessity
for proving mental defect "from an early age thus
providing for "cases of temperamental and character
change caused by diseases, such as encephalitis, if they
occur before the age of 18 ". (2) The abandoning of
the condition that the defect must be permanent.
With this increasing understanding of the true nature
of mental defect, the Committee recommend that when
the present Acts are re-drafted, the category of " moral
defectives " as a class apart from the feeble-minded,
should be dropped (the view expressed by Tredgold in
his Mental Deficiency) and that the terminology of the
other definitioni should be revised so as to stress the
importance of social adaptation or social efficiency as
the criteria to be used in diagnosis.
The Memorandum concludes with a discussion on the
question of psychopathic personality and its relationship
with mental defectiveness. If social inefficiency is used
as the main criterion in diagnosing defectiveness, a
contribution to the solution of this difficulty will have
been made, but there will still remain a group of
delinquents coming within the category of psychopathic
personalities for whom nothing can be done under any
I
MENTAL HEALTH 17
'existing legislation. For these individuals it is suggested
there should be a special institution or colony under
jay control, with medical help in organization and
facilities for specialized individual treatment.
Our Contemporaries
Four new Journals, whose advent we cordially
^e'come, have recently been published or will appear
Human Affairs is a scientific quarterly which will
seek to " encourage the development of an integrated
approach in the social sciences " by combining reports
ot original research arising from experience in the field
?r from laboratory work clarifying " real life problems
with theoretical contributions, thus relating social theory
to social practice. A feature of the Journal is that
11s editorship is to be a joint enterprise on the part of the
tavistock Institute of Human Relations in London
and the Research Centre for Group Dynamics of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
^ass., U.S.A. The annual subscription is 35s. (single
?Pies, 10s. each). Orders should be sent to the
^?anaging Editor, Tavistock Institute of Human
elations, 2 Beaumont Street, London, W.l.
Child Care?another new quarterly?seeks " to keep
oluntary Homes throughout the country in touch with
iVe work of the National Council of Associated Children's
omes " in raising standards of child care and voicing
J "5. "eeds of children and staff". The first number,
f in V/t 's attractively printed and produced, appeared
J1 March, its contents include a Foreword by the Home
ecretary, articles by Miss Myra Curtis on " Child
C-iffi *n t^le Voluntary Homes", and by Cardinal
? ?n " ^ew proposals in Child Care, from the
atholic View-Point ", and useful information is given
n the existing Training Colleges for workers in Homes.
wV KnnuaI subscription is 4s. 6d. (single copies, Is.),
mch should be sent to the Business Manager, " Child
L^j"' National Children's Home, Highbury Park,
h N.5.
Social Service. The National Council of Social
Derwr announces the resumption of its pre-war
dur'? t'le Publication of which was suspended
wii/n^ war* ^t will now become a quarterly and
ann appe?r ^rst in July 1947. Subscriptions (10s. per
durir.0 wai. n wu
appear first in July
m, single conies. 26 Bedford Square,
4 1UOI ill JU1JT (JUUJUipUUlW ^ i v/o. pvi
to ,Vm' single copies, 2s. 6d., post free) should be sent
lL5C Editor- ' Social !
London, W.C.I.
r-
The Family. The first number of this quarterly (price
Is. 3d., publishing office: 1 Dorset Buildings, Salisbury
Square, E.C.4), appeared recently, edited by Crystal
Herbert in consultation with the Family Relations
Group. Small in size (resembling Convoy in general
appearance) it has a number of lively articles on various
aspects of family life, with excellent photographs and
other illustrations. A serious-minded effort to provide
a forum for discussion on this all-important topic is
opportune and is an indication of the increasing aware-
ness of the need for preserving family values in a changing
social structure.
For Mental Nurses
A diverting little monthly periodical intended for
those engaged in mental nursing, is published by the
National Mental Health Foundation, Philadelphia,
U.S.A., under the title The Psychiatric Aid*
Whilst essentially designed to raise the standard of
mental nursing, to emphasize the importance of an
intelligent understanding of the patients' needs and to
suggest how they can be met with sympathy and imagina-
tion, the magazine is a lively production and includes
"strips" humorous in drawing, but each illustrating
some particular aspect of treatment in a way not likely
to be quickly forgotten.
It is a matter of consideration by those engaged in our
own mental hospital service whether there is not room
in this country for a periodical similar in aim and tone,
though adapted to suit British mentality.
Great Ormond Street Hospital
The Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond
Street, London, W.C.I, asks us to announce that
"in an endeavour to lessen the time spent waiting in
the Out-Patient Department Out-Patients will, in
future, be seen by members of the Consulting Medical
and Surgical Staff by appointment only. Such appoint-
ments should, if possible, be made by a Doctor acquainted
with the case and preferably by letter. They will be
made between the hours of 9.30 a.m. and 12.30 p.m.
Patients who attend without introductions from a
Doctor will be examined in the Receiving Room and
only when necessary referred to a member of the
Consulting Medical or Surgical Staff.
The Hospital is, of course, open day and night for
urgent cases.
i
bodv?btainable from P.O. Box 7574, Philadelphia 1, U.S.A. Ten cents a copy. The Foundation is a recently established
? whose activities we hope to draw attention in our next issue.
\
I
