A Mental Health Exhibition
===========================

:Author: M. W. HAMILTON
Regional Organizer (Region 2), National Association for Mental Health
How can you best present a Mental Health
Exhibition ?

This difficult question is yet to be answered, but
the Leeds Public Health Department made an
interesting move in this direction with their Mental
Health Fortnight, held last June in central premises,
occupied by the Central Council for Health Education. During previous fortnights, various aspects
of Public Health, for example Maternity and Child
Welfare, Food, Care of Eyes and Teeth, etc. had
been on show.

One main window of a shop and two side ones
needed to be filled in some way and inside one long
Display Board and three small alcoves. Downstairs
, there was a small cinema.

This was the framework within which we had to
work, but otherwise we had a free hand. We did
, not know of anything in the way of recent precedent,
so the Public Health Department along with the
National Association for Mental Health, and the
I University Department of Psychiatry, had to plan
I from their own ingenuity. Preliminary discussions
revealed how short we were of anything that could
be called " show material," and in view of limited
funds how difficult it was to translate ideas into
s effective visual shape in this particular field.
I '

In the end it was decided to concentrate on the
Mental Health of Childhood as the subject for the
main window, with a series of supporting photographs inside, reserving the side-windows and the
three interior bays for displaying the rugs, toys, etc.,
made by the patients at the local Mental Deficiency
Colony and the Mental Hospital. There were
also inside* a series of photographs illustrating life
in the Colony under the heading " Training the
Mentally Handicapped Two posters showing
the incidence of neurosis in ill-health generally and
the incidence of morbid mental states in the population at large, with two posters from the Bureau
of Current Affairs having a bearing on overcrowding
in cities and on neighbourliness, completed the wail
display. By the door was a notice stating that in
any question of Mental Health the following could
be consulted: The Doctor, The Leeds Mental
Health Services, The University Department of
Psychiatry, and the Regional office of the National
Association for Mental Health (addresses given).
The arrangement of the main window proved
rather a teaser. We would have liked something
in dramatic model form to catch the eye, but the
question was what ? In the end, we had to content
ourselves with an arrangement of posters mounted
on supports, at three levels, the first two from the
N.A.M.H. series, " My Goodness what patience
Mothers need " ; the second two specially drawn
for the show?" Children's awkward Questions "
and " How do you appear to your Child ? "?
and the third series, a painted frieze of children
running and playing, which acted as a backcloth,
notices as to the Cinema Show, and times of
. opening, and the series of Parent Guidance booklets
published by the N.A.M.H'. completed the frame.
The contents of the window were covered by the
slogan?" Mental Health begins at Home ".

Inside, this idea was carried a little further by a
series of photographs showing the individual child
at various stages from birth, in the Nursery School
Group, and in adolescence; these had suitable
captions, and' the theme was that " For a good
start he needs breast-feeding, and to move, see,
do and eat in his own time and his own way, in an
atmosphere of affection and security". This
covered the first series of photographs. The
second suggested the theme that " through his play
in the nursery group the child learned his social
skills and his mind grewThe third series
suggested the need for creative and physical outlet
for the adolescent, and in between was inserted a
small group of photographs illustrating treatment
in a Child Guidance Clinic. This, with a small
table for the display of literature together with
the objects made by the Colony and Hospital
patients, completed the show.

The three films chosen finally out of a rather
small available range and shown at hourly intervals
were : " The Children of the City," " Your
Children and You," and "Fear and Peter Brown."*
How successful were we ? 1,500 people attended,
a very great number more halted outside. The
literature sold freely, and the photographs obviously
interested and amused the majority, who were also
surprised and somewhat envious of the high
standard of craft shown by the exhibits from
patients. From what comments we could hear,
the cinema was found interesting, though in the
phrase of one visitor (an ex-foreman engineer),
" It's a bit airy-fairy?you University people don't
know much about what's what ! "

It was felt by all of us that the adult aspect of
mental health was of necessity rather poorly
served, as finding suitable material for this had
defeated us, and it will remain one of the problems
to tackle next time. We also learned that there
is need for more emphatic and more colourful
presentation if the points are really to be punched
home.

Finally the old truth was again exemplified?
that money is the important factor, and that given
adequate funds, really exciting prospects are
opened up (payment of artists, suitable models,
premises, etc.).

One or two additional points for the future seem
to be that it is advisable to have present throughout
the time of exhibition someone who is well
acquainted with mental health problems; another
that there is perhaps scope for a mobile exhibition,
which could visit various parts of the town, or the
rural areas as well; and lastly, there seem indications that there was scope for a Central Health
Exhibition on a much larger scale, where the
different aspects of health could all be shown at
the same time.

* Produced some years ago by the Central Council for Health Education in co-operation with the National Council
for Mental Hygiene.
