International Congress on Mental Health
==========================================

London, August 11th to 21st,
As reported in previous issues of Mental Health,
arrangements are being made to hold, under the auspices
of the National Association for Mental Health and in
co-operation with the International Committee for
Mental Hygiene, an International Congress on Mental
Health in London in August, 1948. The dates originally fixed were August 12th to 21st, but the Committees
responsible for the Child Psychiatry and Medical
Psychotherapy Conferences (within the framework of
the Congress) have decided that an additional session
will be necessary for their discussions, and the opening
date of the Congress has therefore been advanced by
one day; i.e., to August 11th. This will be the third
World Congress on Mental Health under the aegis of
the International Committee for Mental Hygiene?the
first took place in Washington in 1930 and the second
in Paris in 1937.

A number of Committees have been appointed and are
actively engaged in dealing with the detailed and farreaching plans necessary for a Congress of this international character. Dr. J. R. Rees, C.B.E., Chairman
of the Organizing Committee and also President of the
International Committee for Mental Hygiene, has
been elected President of the Congress, an appointment
which we feel will be universally welcomed.
For the first time since the war, representatives of
many nations will be meeting in London in 1948 to
exchange facts and ideas about mental health.
The Congress is to be run along unusual lines. It
will depend for its success upon the thoughtfulness and
active participation beforehand of members of many
professions and students of many sciences. For the
meetings will not consist of listening to and discussing
the learned papers of clinicians on the diagnosis and
treatment of mental illness. Instead, those who hope to
attend the Congress are being asked now to consider
such questions as what they mean by health of the mind,
in what kinds of society and by what means.mental
balance and vigour may be created and fostered. Clearly,
this involves the assembly of knowledge from many
different sciences and of wisdom from many different
professions.

Those who are organizing the Congress believe
that little progress of a fundamental kind can be made
either in the well being of individuals or in the essential
relationships between groups, until there is much more
effective understanding and willingness to work together,
on the part of those who study or treat human beings.
This kind of communication needs practice. The
experiment is therefore being tried of encouraging the
formation of discussion groups or preparatory commissions each representing various sciences and professions?
for example, psychology, anthropology, psychiatry,
social work, sociology and education. Each small
group in many different countries will work on some
aspect of the programme. The results of their labours
will then be brought together at headquarters in London,
and will be used for discussion at the Congress. In
this way it is hoped that the best thinking upon these
important subjects will come in from all over the world.
The countries of Europe are still suffering from the
intellectual isolation brought about by war. The
Congress is eagerly awaited as an opportunity for
discovering and discussing advances in knowledge
and skill.

Important new responsibilities may be added to the
International Congress if, as we have been led to believe,
it becomes a recognized source of information and
guidance for the World Health Organization of the
United Nations.

Preparatory Commissions are already at work in
this country. Outlines of the topics falling within the
main subjects of the Congress on mental hygiene have
been drawn up by the Central Commissions in London,
and have been published in the monthly Bulletins 1-3.
Those responsible for these Commissions are most
anxious for comments upon their outlines or for contributions on any topics suggested.

The time for really valuable international exchange
will be too short unless discussion groups get to work
at once.

It is hoped that other Preparatory Commissions along
the lines suggested will be started as soon as possible.
It is most important that individuals or professional
associations interested in membership of such groups
should write at once to the Programme Secretary,
International Congress on Mental Health, 19 Manchester
Street, London, W.l.

Important Notice. We are asked to state that a
number of members of the National Association for
Mental Health, who were circulated early in May with
the booklet giving particulars of the preliminary arrangements for the Congress, have so far not completed and
sent in the enclosed application form. Members are
reminded that, while the completion of this form does
not bind them to attendance at the Congress, it is
essential that those who are interested should send in
their names without delay in order that they may be kept
informed of developments and also that the Organizers
will be in a position to decide upon the approximate
allocation of tickets. As will be readily understood,
for a World Congress of this magnitude the allocation
will necessarily have to be strictly limited as between the
various countries. Further copies of the booklet and
application form may be obtained from The Organizer,
International Congress on Mental Health. 19 Manchester
Street, London, W.l.
