130 Mental Health
=================

Editorial
The exchange of ideas between America and Great
Britain has always been unrestricted and stimulating?and the fields of medicine and social services
have been particularly fruitful.

Our readers will therefore take especial interest
in the comprehensive survey on the work of the
National Mental Health Foundation by Dr. Pratt,
the Foundation's staff psychiatrist. His revelations
of the backwardness of certain mental hospitals
will come as a surprise to those who tend to look
on America in general and New York in particular,
as the acme of progress: but there can be no excuse
for anyone to overlook the rate at which conditions
in America are now changing. Even if the methods
outlined to rouse the public conscience are perhaps
not directly applicable in this country, the energy,
breadth, and enthusiasm of the work must command
our respect and deserve our emulation. As many
besides the poet have lamented, opportunities to
see ourselves as others see us, are given us all too
rarely, and probably they are taken more rarely
still. Dr. Pratt's comments on the standards of
mental care in Britain are therefore of particular
interest?though we fear politeness has perhaps
dulled his critical sense.

Dr. Pratt's views are naturally views from the
inside. As an interesting comparison, we publish
also a report of an outsider's view of American
:
social work. The authors, Miss Sambrook and
Miss Wollen were recently on a visit to the States
and have written a vivid account of their impressions.
" The first thing that struck them was the ' psychiatric invasion ' of all fields." Some of the
advantages and disadvantages which have resulted
from this will interest those responsible for planning
mental health services in this country ; in particular,
the comment that psychiatrists do not appear to
know what responsibility to delegate and how to
use the services of the psychiatric social worker.
Whether this defect occurs in this country and if so, (
how much it is due to faults in the administration
and how much to inadequate training are questions
on which we invite our readers' views.

Many may also have visited America themselves
and have contributions of their own to make on
their impressions, and in particular as to how best
the two countries can benefit from each other's
development.

Note.?We publish in this number the second of a
series of articles on special problems?that of the
misfit at home and work, by Dr. Skottowe. We regret
that we have had to postpone the first of the articles on
services of value to the social worker until our next
number.
