Residential Schools for Epileptic Children in England
=======================================================

By J. TYLOR FOX, M.D.(Camb.), D.P.M.

Late Medical Superintendent, Ling fie Id Epileptic Colony
This article was included in a symposium on " Epilepsy in Childhood " which appeared in The Nervous Child
{Child Care Publications, Baltimore, U.S.A.) for January, 1947.
We cordially recommend that the whole symposium should be obtained and studied by everyone concerned
with epileptic children. The articles are designed to show how the educational and medical needs of such
children are being met in the States, and an attempt is made to assess the psychological factors in the causa-
tion or maintenance of fits and the personality changes resulting from them or from the social frustration
involved. Further, the symposium seeks to define the scope and methods of psychological treatment and
draws attention to an educational and medical problem too often neglected in current medical textbooks.
It should be noted that Residential Schools for Epileptics are almost unknown in the United States, and the
article which follows was written largely for propaganda purposes.
J.T.F.

At the Lingfield Colony for Epileptics in Surrey,
England, we have 255 children between the ages of
five and sixteen attending our Residential Special
School. They are sent here by Local Education
Authorities from all parts of England, who pay a
weekly fee to cover education, maintenance, medical
treatment and clothing. Only " educable"
children are admitted, or retained, an intelligence
quotient of 60 being taken as the lower limit of
educability. Until April 1945 every child was
certified by a School Medical Officer to be suffering
from epilepsy so frequent or so severe as to render
him unfit for attendance at a public elementary
school; but under the new Education Act the
certificate only states that he requires, on account
of epilepsy, treatment at a Special Residential
School. As residential accommodation of this
type is limited, we tend to receive a rather high
proportion of children whose epilepsy is severe or
who present serious behaviour difficulties. On the
other hand we have always received a fair number
of children who are subject only to pyknoleptic
attacks, and others who have fits only at night,
so that unfitness to attend a day school has been
rather generously interpreted. There are four
homes housing 155 boys, and three homes for 100
girls, classification in the homes being by age.
The school is under the charge of a head master
with ten whole-time assistant teachers, three of
whom (domestic science, woodwork and gardening)
are specialist teachers. In the junior section of the
school, boys and girls work together. Grading
of the scholars presents a difficult problem to which
there is no ideal solution. Age, intelligence,
temperament and attainment have all to be con-
sidered, and the best possible compromise adopted.
In addition to the school children, there are 200
patients in the Colony over the age of sixteen.
These share with the children the use of a large
hall fitted up for cinemas, entertainments, religious
services, dances etc., and a hospital, with trained
nursing staff, where all cases of serious illness, |
including serial fits, are cared for. There are two t
resident Medical Officers, and visiting specialist5' I
for eye, ear, nose, throat and dental troubles. j
As I am now leaving Lingfield after being Medic*}' |
Superintendent for over 28 years, during which
time over 2,000 children have passed through the
Colony, it occurred to me that a few observation5
about the value of Residential School treatment
for epileptic children might be of interest.
Some Advantages of Residential School Treatroe"1

This subject can first be looked at from the poh1'
of view of others with whom the child lives, whether
at home or school. If he has many or sevefe
attacks, if he cannot get on with his parents ?*
brothers and sisters, if he must never go out oi
doors unescorted, if there is no one at home to
give him the supervision, guidance and companioj1'
ship that he needs, it is obvious that his trans#'
to a Residential School is called for in the interest /
of the rest of the household. In many small home I
the presence of an epileptic child is an alm^j
intolerable burden, which ought to be lifteC\
Similarly in the classroom, it is questionable
far it is fair to his schoolfellows to submit theflj
to the distraction and the disturbance of th?
rather unpleasant phenomenon, a major epileptic h' '
Given the right type of teacher, much may be do$ |
to lessen the ill effects and even to develop a fu'^ (
spirit of comradeship arising out of sympathy al1 c
understanding, but this is asking rather much 0
teachers who are in my experience not unsympathe'1
towards epileptics, but would prefer to show the,
sympathy in some other place than a crowd?
classroom. One does not want to multiply ins tit \
tions, and if universal intelligence and understand!^ i
could be assured, there would be much to be s
in favour of the retention of almost all handicapP
children in their homes and at normal scho?
but in an imperfect world it seems clear that,
^nether in home or school, the happiness and well
^ing of others is often prejudiced by the presence
?f an epileptic in their midst.

The paramount advantage to an epileptic child
p admission to a Residential School is a psycho-
ogical one. He at once becomes a normal member
ot the community in which he lives. In the outside
w?rld he has always been regarded as someone
sPecial: often, it is true, as someone meriting
sPecial sympathy, but just as often someone to be
father afraid of, and fear may have degenerated
nto dislike. The common belief that epilepsy is
,nextricably tied UP with mental abnormality may
Jjave led to a quite unwarranted assumption that
is in some ways not quite "all there",

nwittingly, and no doubt unwillingly, society
uuds up in the mind of an epileptic child the
^Pression that he is not wanted, an impression
at becomes a certainty if he is excluded from
tendance at school. The penalties of exclusion
, ay indeed be modified by home instruction, but
?nie instruction is at best a poor thing from the
EJ* of view of education in the narrower sense,
J? n? good at all from the point of view of
Ration in the broader sense. In the Residential
??1 all this is changed. In the classroom or
e playground any sense of inferiority disappears
_ ,?nce. If there are certain restrictions on his
optics, e.g. swimming, climbing ladders or trees
he r e' ^ey aPPty equally to all among whom
lives. He neither receives nor deserves more
?^Pathy or less welcome than any of his fellows.
If .^e makes a fresh start in life as a normal boy.
tj.!t is difficult to overestimate the importance of
^change of outlook on the mind of a growing
Co ri Abnormalities of temperament leading to
^nduct difficulties and definite episodic outbursts
irit rnen^ disorder of varying grades form an
but^ra' part t"ie ePfeptic picture in many cases,
uon the other hand many epileptic children are
mem t0 ac^ust themselves happily to their environ-
ing mere'y because of the frustration and sense of
the n0rity l^at that environment has thrust upon
in d which disappear like snow in sunshine
child s^ential School. Certain it is that many
great*1 w^ose conduct in the past has caused a
rea deal of trouble settle down quickly as
here0?^16 an<^ amenable members of society, and
So too we may find at any rate one reason why
Scho^n^ cases' on admission to a Residential
cj0m f start off with a considerable period of free-
Persi !ron? ^tS" a sma^ minority the freedom
\veek ' 'n most cases it is temporary, lasting for
Cont-S ?r Perhaps months. In removing long
We 'nued anxiety or unhappiness or just boredom,
tatinre Undoubtedly removing a powerful precipi-
ePile^ cause of fits in many cases of established
factoPs^' or it may be that there has been some
c?ndVln ^orne environment which has become
rare]y 10rned as a starter. Epilepsy is very
but th Relieve, a disease of psychogenic origin,
ne course of the complaint as well as the
ability of the patient to live in harmony with those
about him may be profoundly influenced by his
environment. In this connection, I must record
my belief that an undue proportion of* our children
come from broken homes, or from a family life
marred by disharmony and strain, but there are
no control figures for the population generally
wherewith to substantiate this belief.

Over the common denominator of a liability to
fits, a large group of children is assembled varying,
not only in the number and type of their attacks
and the pathological conditions underlying those
attacks, but also in intelligence, attainment,
temperament, social adaptability and home training.
Generalizations about epilepsy therefore, are almost
always misleading, or need very careful qualifica-
tion, and effective treatment presupposes effective
study and understanding of the individual case.
It is only in a Residential School that this individual
study becomes possible. The information gained
by interview and personal observation by the
medical officer can be amplified by discussion with
the school teacher and house attendant or nurse.
In building up a picture of his personality, there
will be added to serial intelligence tests and records
of school progress, an account of the child's reaction
to class discipline and, most important of all, of1
his ability to mix with his fellows in his leisure
time, his powers of self employment and of creating
and following up interests of his own choice.
Assuming that he has in addition a fairly complete
pre-admission history from parent, school teacher
and doctor, the medical officer of the institution is
surely in a very strong position to give, where it is
needed, such counsel to the individual boy or to
others as will give him the best possible chance of
being set on the road towards social efficiency.
Periods of irritability and awkwardness can, often
with the help of the fit chart, be predicted, and steps
taken to avoid or mitigate them, right friendships
encouraged, leisure time occupations suggested
and, in a word, common sense psychotherapy
carried out more effectively than would be possible
in any out-patient clinic.

So much for the drive towards giving the child
social efficiency, a matter at least as important in
most cases as medical treatment in the narrower
sense. In the latter field too the Residential School
gives unique opportunity for observation of the
individual case. The time of each fit, whether
by day or night, can be accurately recorded, and
first hand fit descriptions by experienced observers
are available. The localizing value of the aura
is supplemented by precise observation of how and
where the attack starts. These records, taken in
conjunction with the personal and family history,
enable the medical officer to decide which cases call
for electro-encephalography or for the more serious
procedure of air encephalography. The number
of cases, whether due to local scarring or space-
filling lesions, which will ultimately come into the
hands of the neurosurgeon will be very small, but
they can be more certainly sorted out in a Residential
School than elsewhere. The electro-encephalo-
graph, will also help in cases of doubtful diagnosis,
but in my experience few cases other than those of
genuine epilepsy (essential or symptomatic) find
their way to a Residential School, and where
hysterical or even deliberately assumed attacks
occur, they more often than not prove to be super-
imposed on a true epilepsy. Hystero-epilepsy is a
term to be avoided. Epilepsy plus hysteria is a
diagnosis that will cover most of the halfway cases.

For effective drug treatment, correct and complete
fit records are a sine qua non, but the observation
of side effects of drugs is also of great importance.
The irritability occasionally set up by phenobarbital
may be missed unless trained observers, who see
the child when he is off guard, watch for it. The
correlation of acne or of more serious bromide
rashes with bromide medication may easily be
overlooked. But it is with phenytoin that this
type of observation is of really first class importance,
because there is often little or no margin between
the anticonvulsant and the toxic dose, and the
manifestations of toxicity are so manifold. Nausea,
dizziness and rashes, with or without pyrexia,
usually, it is true, make their appearance within
the first few days, but in our experience ataxia,
sufficient to cause staggering, may appear suddenly
when the patient has been taking the same dose of
phenytoin for months or even years. It is always
accompanied and usually preceded by nystagmus.

Gum hypertrophy is a common and troublesome
symptom but, in our experience, scraping off the
hypertrophied tissue is a satisfactory procedure
in the more severe cases and is usually followed
only by slow and moderate recurrence. One must
always be on the lookout for other signs of phenytoin
toxicity. We have seen patients with periodic
severe abdominal pain with pyrexia, sleepiness,
sleeplessness and various personality changes that
have appeared long after medication had been
started, and which disappeared rapidly on its
cessation. One is driven to the conclusion that,
except in small doses and with frequent visits to
the doctor, phenytoin is best avoided outside
residential institutions, or at any rate should not
be pushed.

But it is not only in the treatment of the individual
child that the Residential School could and should
be more effective. It provides also scope for
observation and research along certain lines that
cannot be found elsewhere. Accurate fit recording
forms the basis for a fascinating study of periodicity,
whether long term, measured in days, months or
seasons, or short term, measured by the clock
through the twenty-four hours. The establishment
of peak times, which may be seriously upset by
drugs especially phenobarbital, suggest electro-
encephalographic and biochemical enquiry as to
what is happening at and between those times.
The effect on fit incidence of emotional or
intellectual stress can be noted, as also the effect
of fit incidence on the temperament and intelligence.
These and other lines of investigation that readily
spring to mind would not be carried out, as most |
institutional investigations have been carried out, i
on a group of older patients with firmly established (
epilepsy and progressive mental deterioration,
but on children whose epilepsy would often be of
recent origin, and many of whom would possess
intelligence up to the normal.

Some Drawbacks of Residential School Treatment I
The most common parental objection to a /
Residential School is that seeing other children in |
fits will make their child worse. Experience shows
that there is no foundation for this belief. Rather
is he reassured by the entire absence of upset caused
by a fit at an epileptic school. Indeed if only the
general public would learn to take epileptic attacks
in their stride as we do, the lot of epileptics in the
community would be immeasurably lightened. A
more serious objection is the loss of family life
and the limitation of social contacts to the little
world of school. This may be partly met by
encouraging visitors?at Lingfield we have no set
visiting days, and on fine weekends the Colony
looks like a general picnic ground. Holidays at
home are a more difficult problem. Setbacks j11 r ,
behaviour or in fit incidence have, perhaps, dis* j
couraged us too much, and generally speaking '
have tried to limit holidays to one period a year-
Shops in a nearby village, and not an institution
store, should be used for the purchase of sweets
and toys, and frequent games matches should he
arranged with neighbouring schools. Outings to
the seaside are a help. The fight against institution-
alization is a particularly important one for children
of good intelligence and low fit incidence, who can \
reasonably be expected to take a full place in the
community when they grow up; and early discharge
of such children should be carefully considered-
so that they may take up a job from home and da;
school, rather than direct from a special Resident^1
School with the epileptic label attached to l?-
Everything must be done that will ease the transiti011
from institution to community. When children ,
remain at the school to the age of sixteen or beyond) j
it is fair to introduce a vocational element into tn?
curriculum for the last year or two, and epileptlC
children need, perhaps as much as any othef
handicapped group, close and systematic follo^
up by sympathetic and experienced workers. It1
no exaggeration to say that upon the efficiency of th
after-care service the value of the work done at **
Residential School will ultimately depend. Afferj
care reports should be submitted to the Medi^
Superintendent, whose advice should always ^
available. A further objection that may be raise
to Residential School treatment is that of expense-
Our present inclusive weekly charge is 46s. of'
which is considerably less than that commons
made for the blind or crippled.

Some Suggestions about Organization
Experience can be my only excuse for offe^
a few observations about organization. ^
necessity for brevity must be the excuse for
apparent dogmatism. The school should be a
complete unit, not part of a larger institution for
epileptics. Older patients in institutions are mostly
chronic cases, going downhill mentally, and children
should have no contact with them.

. It is well to remember that 25 hours are spent
in school each week, and 143 out of school. It is
?ut of school that provides the greater scope for
character building. Co-operation in games, music,
dancing and acting, the discovery of individual
mterest or talent in art, craft or hobby?these are
the things that will destroy the feeling of inferiority
and enable the epileptic to regain a place in the
community.

About three places will be needed for boys, to
every two for girls. Girls, with or without fits,
Can be tolerated and made useful at home; boys
are just a nuisance !

A. lower limit of intelligence at an I.Q. of 70 or
'5 would make for increased educational efficiency
and social harmony, but the school needs of the
|oyver grade would then arise. In this country
meducable " children (I.Q. 60 or less) are provided
.0r, under the Mental Deficiency Acts. Certain
jt is that the more low grade children admitted,
he fewer high grade children will come, and the
^igh grade epileptic who needs a Residential
chool should be our first concern.

The question of admitting very difficult or
I inquent children needs careful consideration.
England admission to "Approved Schools"
p .rrnerly known as reformatories) is denied to
. Pneptics. Application on behalf of delinquents
ls> therefore, made to Residential Special Schools
Uch as Lingfield. Some of these applications we
j^ept, some we turn down. Of those accepted,
any, perhaps the majority, mix in well with our
other children, but some show no improvement
are definitely detrimental to their fellows.
t e can request their removal, but to return them
0 their homes is a grave social mistake. The
most common types are the dangerously aggressive
and the chronic absconder; the petty pilferer or
thief takes a fairly low third place; and the sex
offender is a very long way behind. In fairness to
others these children should be kept out of an
ordinary Residential School for epileptics. The
numbers may be small, but are probably large
enough to merit special provision. In this country
plans are being considered, with the encouragement
of the Ministry of Education, for starting an
experimental school for from forty to sixty
" maladjusted epileptic " boys.

The family, as opposed to the institution, atmos-
phere is best maintained by small houses, say of
fifteen or twenty children. But these are more
expensive, especially in staff. A night nurse can
supervise sixty beds as easily as twenty. A hospital
or sick bay with fully trained nursing staff' is
essential, but full hospital training is not necessary
for the staff in the children's homes. The elements
of child care and management can be taught on
the premises and supplemented by simple talks on
epilepsy from a Medical Officer. A sense of
vocation is generally more valuable than elaborate
training. If the vocation has a religious basis so
much the better. Epileptics will not fail to respond
to it. The existence of the right spirit among the
staff is all important. This is a platitude, but it
is as true as it is hard to achieve and maintain.

Summary
--------D
On the basis of experience an attempt has been
made to define some of the advantages of Residential
School treatment for epileptic children. Removal
from home or day school, indeed, may lift a burden
that it is unfair to ask others to bear. For the
child himself, the roads to social efficiency and to
effective medical investigation and treatments are
more easily traversed at a boarding school than
elsewhere. Certain drawbacks to this method of
dealing with epileptic children are discussed, and
a few suggestions about organization submitted.
