Child Health
=============

:Author: A. Moncrieff, M.D.. F.R.C.P.
Eyre & Spottiswoode (Practitioner Handbooks).
14s.

This book arrives in time to foreshadow many develop-
ments in Child Health Services likely to eventuate under
the National Health Service. It also directs attention
to the already wide extent of State Services available
in the medical care of children.

With a foreword by Sir Leonard Parsons, each section
deals with an aspect in which the particular author is an
expert, although the book is in no sense one for
specialists. Rather is the reverse true, that here is
ordinary practical advice covering the whole field now
available. Thus the indications for residential schools
are considered generally in one section, while in another
on the handicap of deafness, practical advice is given
as to how and where a deaf child can be examined for
entrance to such a school.

On the whole vague generalities are avoided, and where
clinical advice is given, as in the chapter on breast
feeding, it is precise and easy to follow. A certain
amount of repetition is inevitable, as for instance in the
chapter on the care of the new born child, that on
breast feeding, and on problems at a child welfare clinic.
Obviously all these will deal with certain aspects of
breast feeding. It adds to rather than detracts from
the value of the book to have the same problem viewed
from rather different angles, and the duplication is
never tedious.

In a book such as this, where skilful editing has
succeeded in keeping the range wide, and yet at a con-
sistent level, it is. invidious to select individual chapters
for mention; but it is impossible to overlook the small
masterpiece on " The Deaf Child " by A. H. Gale.
Here and there is a tendency to quote figures which
appear to be somewhat misleading. For example, one
toddlers' clinic is prepared to examine 18 children in
2 hours and goes on to describe a large number of
observations collected presumably in this way, including
126 cases " in which there was backward mental develop-
ment Presumably this was not assessed on a six-
minutes' interview, but the somewhat alarming im-
plication is that it was.

Inevitably, while there is a warning note sounded as
to the dangers of grouping large numbers of small
children in Day and Residential Nurseries, the emphasis
is on physical disadvantages rather than on psychological.
But it could not be said that the book as a whole fails
to do justice to the psychological aspect of the care of
children, and there is an excellent chapter on psycho-
logical problems at a child welfare centre, which is
expanded and amplified by another author in the
section on Child Guidance Clinics.

This book should be studied both as a survey of
existing facilities, which already cover so much useful
ground, and as a reference book of clinical and
administrative methods in child health.
E.M.C.
