The Prevention of Misfits at Home and at Work
=============================================

:Author: Ian Skottowe M.D., D.P.M.
Physician-in-Charge, Department of Nervous hncl Mental Diseases, Royal Buckinghamshire Hospital,

Aylesbury
The Psychiatric Approach
Psychiatry has something?but only something,
not everything?to contribute to some instances,
not every instance, of problems which involve the
management of personal inter-relationships. It
is from this moderate viewpoint that I venture to
approach the subject of misfits at home and at
work. I approach it, as it were, from the frankly
abnormal to the more nearly normal, from the ill
to the well; to see whether, as has often happened
in other aspects of medicine besides psychiatry,
the study of the sick reveals events or principles
that are relevant to improving still further the lot
of those who are well, and so leads to the prevention
of more illness.

It is a common experience in clinical psychiatry,
especially in the less severe disorders?the neuroses,
and the inadequate though not grossly defective per-
sonalities, that are seen in out-patient practice?to
find that a personal misfit of some kind is a potent
cause or a persistent aggravator of the symptoms.
It is an essential part of clinical technique to take
a careful biography?often an autobiography?
of the patient. In most cases, his defences come
down sooner or later; he reaches a stage where
frankness born of despair is imperative to him for
the relief of his emotional distress; cupboards
yield up their skeletons; secretly nurtured hostilities,
jealousies, resentments, disappointments and frus-
trations come into the arena of dispassionate
discussion. Some are remediable, some are not;
but at least we get to know what they are. Many
of them result from personal misfits; and we can
see how they arise. None are more bitter than those
directed primarily, not against others, but against
the self; although they usually become projected,
secondarily, against others.

Types of Misfit and their Genesis
------------------------------------

(i) At Work
The examples that I am about to give are
anecdotal, necessarily anonymous and disguised
in some respects; but none of them are fictitious,
they are all based on actual cases, typical of many.
They all bear the common feature of a discrepancy
between the aptitudes and attributes of the individual
on the one hand, and those needed for the job he
is in, or to which he aspires, on the other. But
they build up into some curious patterns so that
the fundamental discrepancy is sometimes hidden
and much effort is wasted in following the false
scent of the secondary reaction.

The man who, comfortable enough economically,
sets his heart on a professional career in say medicine,
the law, architecture, or engineering and who
just lacks the mental equipment to make the grade
has indeed a bitter pill to swallow; but he may just
manage to " take it " if he gains insight into his
limitations early enough; and this is more likely
to happen if he has a frank neurotic breakdown and
so comes under medical care for the relief of the
symptoms that distress him. If he does not do
this, he is likely to have a lasting grudge, first against
the professional body that rejects him, then against t
an ever widening range of concrete society, then
against religious conceptions; and so, in an extreme '
case he becomes a world-hostile irreligious anti-
social psychopath, a frothy reformer, full of specious
excuses for his own ineptitude; he does not recognize
that he is ill in any way, and indeed it is open to
question whether he is, but he is nevertheless a
nuisance, if not an actual danger to society, a
hanger-on to the fringe of freakish cults, a preacher
of seditious nonsense, a quack, an exploiter of
weaknesses and frailties in other less aggressive
and even less well endowed individuals than he
himself.

A similar chain of events can be seen in simpler
walks of life. The moderately skilled workman,
or woman, not quite skilled enough, yet with
aggressive ambition that precludes acceptance
of a more humble position better attuned to his
aptitudes, is liable to find all kinds of evasions and
excuses for his lack of satisfactory work; first
in his health?we are all familiar with multiform
but vague diagnoses such as anaemia, debility,
nervous exhaustion, rheumatism, gastritis, back-
strain and so on that so characteristically bespatter
his medical card in the space of a few months?
then in working conditions, such as excessive hours, 1
unreasonable orders, bullying foremen, bad ventila-
tion, and that never-failing source of contention,
bad food in the canteen. Such a one, seldom very
particular about the accuracy of his facts, is prone
to make noisy sweeping generalizations that, for i
indefinite reasons, he can seldom support by chapter '
and verse; and he will soon be ranting about
victimization, exploitation and?a favourite one, .
this?lack of discipline and control, which he himself v
would be the first to resent. If such an individual
happens to have the gift of the gab, he may collect,
about him?or her?a number of under-occupied
* Address given at meeting of National Association for Mental Health held in Reading, April 23rd, 1947.

and thoughtless, though otherwise contented
individuals who will go with him as much for the
sake of a minor thrill or a change from routine,
as for any real or critical belief in the Tightness of
his rantings. And such a " cell ", besides being
most uncomfortable for other more thoughtful
and stable workers to live with, can hinder or stop
the entire work of a factory?though not for long?
to the despair of the management, the orthodox
and properly accredited representatives of the
workers and the public. Individuals such as I have
described have a characteristic lack of discrimina-
tion and fairness and they are really irrational;
they neither know nor care, nor try to find out
who is for them," who against them; they are as
deaf to entreaties and advice of those whose business
it is to.help them (and whom they pay to do so) as
they are to the ultimatum of those with whom they
are in conflict. It is peculiar that wherever they go,
in whatever setting, the story is always similar,
and they are never in the wrong; they are entirely
different from the prudent, thoughtful, skillful man
who knows his job and its faults as well as his own,
and who seeks patiently to remedy them by proper
and generally accepted methods.

A certain proportion of men, or women, who are
examples of misfits in either kind of setting that I
have described do come into psychiatric hands
sooner or later. Those who do, are often of cyclo-
thymic temperament in addition to lacking some
aptitude or skill, or other quality that is essential
for the occupation to which they aspire. Thus
they have phases of mild depression and mild
exaltation with aggressiveness. And that the
evolution of a misfit in the way that I have just
described is not a mere theoretical psychological
fiction, is abundantly demonstrated by what one
actually sees in the consulting room, every now and
then. Aggressive, bombastic, world-hostile men
break down, sooner or later, and describe them-
selves?usually correctly, not as a delusion?in
self-condemnatory terms, express a surprisingly
clear realization of their limitations and a know-
ledge at last that what they need is help to find
their feet in a world that seems to offer them very
little, not so much because there is something
wrong with the world as because there is something
Wrong with them and there is very little they can
offer in return. They come at last to recognize
that there are two sides to a bargain. Again, in
further support of the factual nature of this account
of misfits, it is not an exceptional experience to see,
or hear from, a patient, perhaps several years
after the initial consultation and to learn thkt
after accepting advice to eschew a professional
career and accept something much humbler, he has
found a way of living that leads to contentment and
freedom from symptoms, even if it does mean
running a small retail business, or a kennel, or being
a comparatively humble technician instead of
aspiring fruitlessly to high places in one of the
professions, or in commerce.

Something must be said of another, though much
rarer, kind of occupational misfit, namely the man
whose aptitudes and skills are far beyond the
demands of his actual occupation, or who, without
being exceptionally able, has no outlet for his
interests or aptitudes, as instanced by the case of a
young man who entered railway service because
he wanted to do poster publicity work and who
found himself instead doling out excursion tickets
and handbills to exasperated queuers. Such a man
is likely to find his job boring and monotonous,
to suffer therefore from disproportionate fatigue,
to feel uncertain, frustrated and insecure, and he is
thus liable to develop morbid anxiety or other
psychiatric symptoms and to come into psychiatric
hands on that account. He too, though for quite
different and much more valid reasons may have a
grudge against' society; and clearly it is much
more easily remedied than that of the man whose
grudge is founded on his own inadequacy, for
unless advancing years or imprudent family com-
mitments are a millstone about his neck, he can still
be given his chance; and since he is often, by
definition, of superior intelligence he is more likely
to benefit by explanatory psychotherapy and be
more ready to adjust his attitude to the world
than is his less well endowed counterpart. But
if this adjustment is not effected, and if his social
circumstances cannot be modified to remedy his
position, he is capable of becoming, and sometimes
does become, a most disruptive social force, the
more so because of his superior intelligence.
I think there has been a tendency to over-estimate
the frequency of this kind of misfit, and to take
over-elaborate, though not always effectual measures
to prevent its occurrence. The trend of scholastic
and post-scholastic education, sponsored alike by
public authorities, private benefactors and industrial
concerns that offer substantial opportunities to
promising pupils, is to give a chance to everybody.
Desirable and right though this principle is, it can
be pushed too far in the direction of giving too many
chances to too many people without regard to their
inherent limitations, thus tending in some cases
to emphasize the very misfits of one kind or the
other that it seeks to avert. This fault is liable to
arise from excessive preoccupation with the value
of technical skills without consideration of the social
aptitudes?the capacity to deal with and get on with
people that is such an essential quality in the higher
ranks of most professions and occupations. One
sees this in medicine, in engineering and in science
certainly, and I have no doubt, in other professions
too. Over and over again one is faced with the
problems of the individual who gains promotion
because of his technical skill but who, organization
and administration being what they are, finds that,
as the ladder is ascended?as the nurse passes from
the ward to the assistant matron's office, as the
doctor passes from the bedside to the medical
administrator's chair, as the teacher passes from
the classroom to the office of the educational
director, the scientist from the laboratory to the
board room?the limiting factor to efficiency,
achievement and personal contentment lies not in
the development of technical skill itself, but in
the capacity to exercise that skill in a human
setting of inter-related but diversely opinionated
people. And so, there is sometimes a peculiarly
difficult type of misfit to be found at or near the
top; and he is a kind of misfit that is liable to have
rumbling repercussions throughout the structure
and functions of the organization that he is trying
to direct. In a word, what he lacks, however
good he may be technically, is a capacity for leader-
ship; and since leadership is an essential factor in
maintaining good morale, the whole organization
suffers. Unfortunately, whereas it is relatively
easy by tests and examination to predict the develop-
ment of intelligence and special skills in an
individual, it is exceedingly difficult to predict how
he will react to and inter-act with other people
once he attains a position of practically undisputed
authority and responsibility. For power always
tends to be, in the end, a corrupting influence
unless it be balanced and controlled from without
by some organized arrangement of committees?
(always liable to develop into restrictive red-tapism)
?or from within by a proper spirit of humility
which is a comparatively rare and certainly im-
ponderable virtue that needs, like friendship, to
be kept in constant repair, by the exercise of personal
disciplines fundamentally of a religious or spiritual
nature, by whatever names one may call them.

(ii) At Home

Misfits at home which we in clinical psychiatry
see far more frequently than we see misfits at work?
(that is to say they are more often causes of illness,
not necessarily more frequently absolutely) are of
three main kinds?ill-matched spouses, badly
brought-up children and intrusive interlopers,
whether '' in-laws'' or not. All of these may interact
to some extent. The last?the interloper?is in
principle the easiest kind of misfit to remedy. It
is not so much that they are inherent misfits, but
rather that they create a set of interpersonal con-
ditions that brings to the surface any latent
tendencies to quarrelling that there may be; and
at best their continued presence makes exacting
demands upon even the most saintly, well-
nourished and well housed families. They are
therefore more noticeable in times of social
stringency such as the present. Clearly their
remedy lies in the social and economic spheres;
but it should be remembered that even in better
times, a proportion of those who are favourably
situated in these respects are prone, if they are
of lazy disposition, to hang up their hats, blind
apparently to the comfort of everyone except
themselves. The application of the economic
spur, even at the expense of a frank family row is
usually a sound investment in such cases, and in
the end it benefits the interloper, if he is worth his
salt, as much as the family team whose home ground
has been invaded.

Few things are more pitiful than the unruly,
noisy, boastful ill-mannered child who is a misfit
in his own home, the more so because to begin
with, it is seldom or never his fault that he is so ;
and what is more pitiful still is that, in the fullest
sense, it is often not very much the fault of either
parent individually. It is simply that the parents I
are so ill-matched and are themselves misfits
vis-a-vis one another, although not necessarily
in the world at large, that they cannot create the
harmonious and congenial atmosphere that is
essential for the proper development of the plastic
personality of the child. One parent is the stronger
character, usually?I venture this opinion with the
greatest diffidence?the father. We are all familiar
with the problem child, brought to the clinic by
his mother with the history that he was perfectly
all right until his father went to the war; then he
began behaving badly; and now he seems to resent
the return of his father and in spite of beatings,
scenes, tears and entreaties from the mother and ,
threats from the father, the difficulty continues so '
that, as is often said, " my husband wishes he was
back in the army again?and my nerves won't
stand it much longer In short, the child who
is a misfit is usually in every sense the product
of parents who are themselves misfitted to one
another; and in many cases it is the separation of
war time, after a brief spell of married life in prob-
ably highly artificial conditions, that has brought
the misfit to light. In severe cases of this kind,
the home becomes an uncongenial place for any
of its members; father may well find the " local "
or the dog-track, a more attractive retreat after the
day's work; the child prowls the streets, the cafes,
the fun fairs, when he should be in bed; the
dispirited, discouraged mother no longer even tries
to provide an appetising supper?difficult enough
in these days?nor to plan the occasional family
outing with high tea and the pictures, no longer
bothers even to try to look, or make the home look,
attractive; and so the home is broken in spirit and
in morale, if not materially and it is held together in
the latter respect only by the arid and biting bonds
of sheer economic necessity and perhaps by fear of
what the neighbours will think and say.

This sad and common train of events is by no
means confined to one particular social stratum;
in its essentials it is, I believe, as frequent, relatively,
in the setting of the so-called luxury flat, and the
suburban villa, as it is in that of the working class
tenement. But my impression, from working with
a population that is evenly divided between urban
and rural elements, is that it is much less likely
to progress to its most severe manifestations such
as I have outlined, in the village, than in the town,
mainly I think, because there is in the village a
larger social grouping, beyond that of the family
itself, that acts as a kind of outer haven for distressed
or misfitting individuals who have been pushed out
from their berths in the inner harbour. Even if
they cannot find a fit in the immediate family circle,
they can still do so in a small rural community,
where everybody knows everybody and everything
about everybody else. In the town and more so in
the suburbs, a family may live cheek by jowl with
another for years and be on no more than nodding
terms; and if anyone gets, so to speak, pushed
out of the inner berth there, he finds himself straight-
away tossed purposely hither and thither on an
indiscriminating sea of social insecurity. There
is no haven in between, such as there is in a
village.

Clearly, all these domestic misfits interact with
misfittings at work, in either direction. Resent-
ment at an unjust foreman is projected on to the
hapless wife, no less than irritation by the nagging
wife and noisy child is projected in criticism of the
factory management.

I make only passing reference to the misfits that are
constituted by the so called " problem family ".
These are really special instances of persons so
inherently handicapped, although seldom recognized
legally as frankly defective, so irresponsible,
improvident and lacking in foresight as to be incap-
able of accepting successfully the liberties, rights,%
duties and responsibilities of the ordinary citizen,
and of managing their lives in a proper and self-
supporting way, however favourable their external
circumstances may be at the start. Provided that
they are not grossly unstable emotionally in addition
to being intellectually defective, they are not as
difficult a problem as they seem, for their occupa-
tional capacity is extremely limited, and it is evident
) to most people who come in contact with them
that they are weak-minded. As a consequence,
they are unlikely to be much of a socially disruptive
force, or to interfere much with the quiet enjoy-
ment of other citizens. They tend to gravitate
together in slums, or to create them; and we have
been told from several authoritative sources in
recent months how fertile they are. Most of them
just go on being quietly and contentedly parasitic,
and will I suppose, continue to do so until the sheer
social and economic burden of them compels the
people as a whole to lend a more sympathetic ear
to the shy voice of the psychiatrists and others
who, from the days of the Wood Report (1929),
through those of that masterly survey, " Our
Towns " (1942) to the current startling conclusion
that the national average intelligence level is slowly
falling on account of the fecundity of the less well
endowed, have-timidly suggested that it might be
in the better interests of these poor folk as well
as of the people as a whole, to recognize them for
what they are and to deal with them appropriately
before they entangle themselves in commitments
that they have, from the start, no chance whatever
of fulfilling.

Principles of Prevention
-------------------------

Although all the examples of misfits that I have
cited are those that have, in fact, had a direct bearing
upon the onset or aggravation of psychiatric illness,
I have no doubt there are many other similar
misfits, similarly built up, that a psychiatrist never
sees, because their occurrence does not result in
actual illness either in themselves or in their associ-
ates. They just drag on, unhappy, sullen, sulky,
difficult to live with, unreliable, relatively nothing
like as efficient as they might be, and carrying with
them a rather contagious aura of restlessness and
discontent especially bad for young people at home,
at school or at work. I am not going to suggest
that it is the psychiatrist's business to put them
right, but at least he may properly offer some
suggestions about the principles for preventing
their occurrence. This I now venture to do; and
I lay special accent on prevention rather than
remedy, because it is so much easier. As to
remedy, I think this is possible in only a proportion
of instances. You can remove the intruder from
the family circle, sometimes; or you can re-select
the occupation of a faultily placed artist or artisan,
if his economic circumstances permit it?there is
an "if" or a "but" in the attempt to remedy
most established cases of misfit. You cannot
however effect a real and complete remedy for the
wrong man being married to the wrong woman,
especially if there are children; the best you can
hope for is to patch things up at a workable, day-to-
day, matter-of-fact level; you can never hope to
give them the fullness of the family and marital
relationship at its best if their inherent qualities
are ill-matched. Nor can you do much to remedy
the managerial type of misfit?the able technician
who lacks the capacity for leadership?without
incurring legal risks, or severe personal hardship
for him, for something that is, when all is said
and done, not altogether his fault?after all he
didn't make his own appointment.

On what lines then, and by whom may preventive
measures be taken ?

I would place first in importance the marriage
relationship,?the selection of a spouse,?and I
would emphasize that it is quite impracticable to
suppose that anyone else is going to make the
choice except the two people themselves who are
concerned. They are more likely to make the right
choice if they are taught to think for themselves
about these matters before they become involved
in them. They may receive guidance, either
through a body. organized for that purpose such
as we have to-day, or through their general education
and experience of the world, or through their parents,
or all of these; but in the end the decision must
be theirs and theirs alone. It is desirable that
guidance, should be given while each is heart-
whole. Those who are already bethrothed are.
nearly beyond guidance, specially about each other,
and if unalterable but ill-matched traits are present,
nothing can be done about it, except to point out
that care will be needed in this or that respect; in
any case, two people in love are seldom in a condi-
tion to exercise clear judgement about themselves,
at any rate to begin with. I have no wish to intrude
into fields that others have made their own, but I
would venture the opinion that the essential
principles of successful mating are to be found
in the recognition and satisfactory matching of
certain traits, attributes and circumstances, rather
than in any conception of matching personality
types.

Briefly, a matching of intellectual status,
interests, social class, cultural standards, spiritual
values and sex needs should be the aim; and
serious disparity in any of these respects should
give pause to even the most ardent suitor or the
most insecure spinster. Over all, it cannot be too
strongly impressed on young people?and some
not so young?that marriage is not completed,
only begun, with the signing of the register; it is
not a static, but a fluid relationship, needing con-
stant adaptability, sympathy and courage to make
it and keep it as it should be. Unless the approach
to it includes a consideration of its spiritual aspects
it is not likely to be a very satisfactory affair. If
the marriage relationship is right, it will go a very
long way towards preventing misfits in that genera-
tion, and in the next; for fundamentally, although,
as I have indicated, there are other causes, the most
potent and most widespread are those that live
in the very structure of the family circle itself.
The next set of preventive measures lies mainly
in the educational field; and I will go so far as to
say I think they are primarily matters for the educa-
tional psychologist rather than for the doctor or
psychiatrist. Group testing at appropriate ages
will reveal those who are poorly endowed or
have special disabilities. Some will benefit by
special educational measures, some will need
psychiatric or other medical attention. But all
this group should be retested individually at intervals
and those who, despite special tuition, do not come
up to a level that will enable them to stand on their
feet in competition with their fellows should not
be allowed to drift merely because they have
reached school-leaving age. Perhaps the most
difficult of all tasks for the educational psychologist
is to select and guide that small top fifth percentile
of brilliant, gifted pupils as they approach school
leaving age; and it is a matter for wider educational
activities than his to see that too much accent is
not laid on intellectual prowess, and that the
foundations of proper character-training and the
capacity to deal with people are laid no less surely
than are fostered and evoked the exam-passing
aptitudes. It is here I think that the recommenda-
tions of the Fleming Committee are likely to achieve
their greatest value. But in any case, some kind of
liaison between schools and the Ministry of Labour
or employing authorities?an extension of that
which exists at present?with a view to occupational
guidance, is imperative; and I should like to see
properly organized selection procedures throughout
industry, commerce and professional life.

As for the child who is already something of a
misfit in an incompetently managed or unhappy
home, I am sure that although something can be
done by psychotherapy and social service for some
such children and their parents, its value is pretty
limited; and there is in my experience a hard core
of such cases for whcm the only real hope is a
boarding school. I do not mean a special residen-
tial school, for although such places are of
considerable value, they are more suited to the
backward, the handicapped or the grossly mal-
adjusted child who needs special tuition as well
as removal from his customary environment, than
to the kind of case I am thinking of, which is the
inherently normal child who is being persistently
badly brought up. One sees him in the more
fortunate classes of society, as well as the more
humble, and every-one is familiar with the awkward
difficult boy, or the flouncing, sulky girl who is
improved out of all recognition after two or three
terms at a good school. They even manage eventu-
ally, to get on .quite amicably with the most difficult
and stupid of parents in the holidays and in the end
become " good types "; but left at home, a good
many of them become real and irremediable misfits
in later life?they never learn to behave and are
always selfish, they never make good parents, and
.so it goes on. I should like to see similar facilities
afforded to similar children from more humble
homes. They should not be sent to special resi-
dential schools, which try as one may to avoid it,
do carry with them an aura of abnormality faintly
comparable with that of a mental hospital, and they
have the peculiar distinction of not having any
regular holiday periods. I should like to see
ordinary boarding schools set up for these children,
fundamentally similar in their aims of character
training to the public schools but attuning their
cultural standards to something that does not differ
too sharply from the accepted cultural standards
of the homes from which the children come and
the way of living to which they will eventually go.
An important factor in many misfits is that they r
lack proper character training and so are handi-
capped in dealing with ill-fitting occupational or
domestic situations that they may encounter later.
If their homes are unsatisfactory, I know of no way
they can get sound character training except at
a good boarding school; and their removal to such
an establishment sometimes has a most salutary
effect upon exhausted, apparently irresponsible
and inefficient parents.

All these people then, the parent, the teacher, the
educational psychologist, the family doctor, the
psychiatrist, the industrialist, various ministries
and the legislature itself, have something to con-
tribute to the prevention of misfits; none has an
exclusive lien upon this work, and all must play
their parts. I have ventured to give only an individ-
ual psychiatrist's point of view of their respective
roles without in any way implying that all this work
is primarily a psychiatrist's business?only some of
it, in some cases.

I have left till last what is I think, one of the most
important, yet one of the least discussed aspects
of the whole matter. I refer to the effort that the
individual himself can and should make to adapt
himself to his environment and to people, but
seldom does, mainly I think, because he is not
taught to do so and because there is little in the
peacetime social evolution of the present century
that is designed to evoke a sense of personal responsi-
bility, and much that leads to a demand for rights
and benefits with little reference to the need for a
corresponding in-put of duties and obligations.
But most people have an inherent sense of fair
play, and in the end if they are properly guided it
becomes dominant in their way of living, so there
is no need for despair. The material is there if
we can only evoke it. In healthy people this is
ultimately a matter of self-examination and of
conscience; it cannot be considered in its entirety
only on a materialistic economic plane; -it is
inseparable from fundamental conceptions of right
and wrong. And somehow it seems from the
evidence, that the churches?whose part in this is
surely obvious?and the people, have got pretty
far apart in many ways. It is not for me to
intrude upon their ground; but that the churches
have a part to play, and in my view an indispensable
one, in the interpersonal relationships of people
and so in the prevention of misfits there can be no
possible doubt.
