The Psychological Problems of the Returned Ex-Serviceman
========================================================

:Author: T. A. RATCLIFFE, M.B., D.P.M., D.C.H., late Lt.-Col., R.A.M.C.
Consulting Regional Neuro-psychiatrist to the Ministry of Pensions.
" Then Pallas moved Ulysses to appeal
To every suitor for a dole of bread
. . . they pitied him and gave, but giving asked
The ancient swineherd who the stranger was.

And when he answered, thus Antinous spake:
Why did you bring another beggar here ?
Have we not vagabonds and rogues enough ? "
The Odyssey has told us the story of Ulysses
returned from the Trojan War, and his long
wanderings; we know the difficulties that he met,
his bitterness and his disillusionment. But there
is a modern counterpart. The problem of Ulysses
is the problem of the many thousands of Displaced
Persons in Europe to-day, of the returned Prisoner
of War, and, to a lesser but still very significant
degree, of every ex-Serviceman and woman after
release.

It is difficult to estimate the exact size of this
problem. The psychiatrist may only see the
grossly maladjusted few, though he will see the
difficulties amongst his friends and colleagues-
We will see the side effects in the Marriage Guidance
Clinics, in Child Guidance Centres, and in th?
delinquency statistics. The social worker w1' /
meet it in her histories and it will have its influence
on industrial and man-management problems and
in the wide field of politics, too. It is certainly
a very big problem and one we have all got to face
UP to; it remains one of the major problems of
Present day preventive psychiatry.
What exactly is this problem, and how does it
arise ?

There are many factors, some superficial and
obvious, and others of deeper significance. First
?f all, four, five or six years is a long time out of
a serviceman's life?and out of his families' life
too. The youth of 18 comes back as a mature
young man?and a man who has seen much, and
known much, that he could not otherwise have done.
**e has lived, and got entirely used to, a strange
new environment, an environment quite unlike that
?f his everyday life?and quite unlike the environ-
ment in which his family has remained. The
Vputh, training for his profession or just started in
his career, comes back a grown man, and perhaps
parried and with new commitments, but still at
the same stage of knowledge of his civilian duties.
What of the economic factor this entails, as well as
he psychological one ?

The married, older man, too, has his problems,
will find a wife older than she was, perhaps a
htle less attractive to look at after the strain of the
^ar years; certainly she will be of necessity more
independent?and he may or may not like that.
^ls children will have changed a great deal; they
may not even recognize him-?or he, them; they
jhay even resent the intrusion of this new stranger
nto their environment.

There is the difference of environment too. He
j*hd they have been interested in such different
hings all these years. He knows, of course, there
ave been difficulties for the housewife, but does
e really realize what these have been ? And will
he really understand that affection which even the
?st joyfully released serviceman feels for the
ervice he has left ? Will she be willing or able to
nderstand the service viewpoint he still has ?
^ st as they both found it difficult to adjust when he
as' called up, so will the release period bring the
?d for readjustment too.

to returning serviceman, though he would hate
fe ia^m^ ft, does feel something of a hero. He
tell f6 ^as d?ne a good job of work; he wants to
to k ^as seen anc^ done. In short he wants
shoot a bit of a line. But does he always
5^ ember that his family have their own line to
^ ?ot too ? Just as the serviceman is apt to look
civT1 a httle on the " mere civilian so is the
ser an a httte on his guard towards the ex-
Ia VJCernan. People " who don't speak the same
nt, 8uaSe " are always rather suspicious of each
Wh ke ll?at.-

o hen he is in the service, and particularly if he is
r.s.eas> the serviceman will tend to paint an
r0sa d picture of his home?tend to stress the
def.es round the cottage door and forget the
reaof C sanftation. That is a perfectly natural
^ith n' an^ ^nevfta^'e- ?ut supposing that home,
Co lts realities, its queues, its shortages, does not
e UP to that dream picture. That will lead to
disappointment?and uncontrolled disappointment
can only lead to bitterness, to resentment, to
blaming everyone from the Government to one's
wife, for everything that is not up to the standards
of the idealized dream picture. And that resent-
ment can be very deep and wide; in the unstable it
can lead to political anarchy or delinquency?in
others to domestic bickering or to a complete
withdrawal from the realities of life. It can produce
its own anxieties.

There are other factors too numerous to mention.
One cannot train a man for six years to kill and
destroy without profound psychological changes;
nor can one switch him back to his normal social
status and responsibilities by the mere machinery
of release. For these years, too, he, and for that
matter his family, have been in danger of death,
sudden and terrifying. He has learned to live
dangerously. The fighter pilot must return to
his routine work as a bank clerk, where his greatest
adventure will be the risk of missing the 8.15 train
to town. The shy, reserved man who found in
the monastic comradeship of the Mess a new way
to mix, must return to his own old social problems
and difficulties. The hen-pecked husband who
found new freedom?and with it his own self-
confidence?must return to the former situation
and its resulting conflict.

We are apt to regard the Services as the natural
stifling ground of initiative and responsibility,
but many men have found the power of leadership
and quick responsible decision during their service.
How will such a man react if he must return to a
pre-war job which, by reason of his age when he
left it, is a very subordinate post. Many of us
have heard of the young police constable who
returned as a Wing Commander?there are many
such cases in lesser degree.

The major domestic and marital problems play
their part too. Most of us who served overseas
have met the man who has deferred his release
rather then come home and face up to the situation
of an unfaithful wife. But sooner or later the
problem will confront him. Many of us know
from experience the numerical size of this problem,
for just as the V.D. rate rises, as readjustment
problems increase and morale falls with longer
service overseas, so does the number of com-
passionate domestic problems sharply mount when
the period away exceeds two years. This is only
one facet of the civilian side of the problem of
readjustment?but it is a mutual need for re-
adjustment, and each side of the picture must
deeply concern the other.

Here is a composite picture of repatriation and
release as it affected one specific group of Army
officers with whom I had very close personal
contact; it may help to emphasize some aspects
of the problem, and show how easy it is to set
up difficulties and how best we can help, to combat
them.

The initial stage dates from the first announce-
ment of one's release programme and is a progressive
"couldn't care less" attitude towards one's work
and towards the army generally?a very natural
reaction but one which has its obvious dangers.
Then comes the first stage of release, the transit
camp?the first reaction is one of enthusiasm and
expectancy, but, as the days go by, there is a realiza-
tion that one is shortly leaving one's friends and
familiar surroundings behind, and an increasing
tendency to talk of the difficulties and shortages at
home and the advantages of life in a land of plenty.
Quite seriously some begin to wonder if it would not
have been better if they had found a job overseas.
It is interesting to see, too, the quickness with which
any disappointment or discomfort in the camp
is magnified by resentment and projection.
The voyage home is a replica of this transit
camp experience, with the mood varying from
excitement and expectancy to dread and fore-
bodings. You will see the same mixture of moods
on the actual day of arrival in England.
There is the same tendency to dramatize delays
and difficulties; but equally the official welcome
and the slick efficiency and friendliness of the
Release Centre, produce a good effect far beyond
that normally expected, though tinged by surprise
that people are really glad to see one back.
At the actual homecoming it is the small details
of the idealized dream picture that count, with
an intensity of disappointment if they fail far out
of proportion to their apparent significance. If
we had always visualized our reunion taking place
on the front doorstep, it is disconcerting to be met
at the railway station, but then, of course, the family
may always have thought of that meeting as on the
platform, and that is equally important.
What signs shall we expect to see of this re-
adjustment problem ?

Perhaps the commonest of all, so common as to
be almost universal even in those who adjust
quickly and well, is a feeling of restlessness; it is
difficult to settle down to the old job and the old
routine, no matter how suitable or congenial these
may be. Carried one stage further there comes
dissatisfaction with one's employment?or home?
and a change of job, perhaps the first of many.
Disappointment, bitterness and resentment are
common too. We do not need to stress the
difficulties and shortages of a post-war world,
but often our readjustment problem results only
in bitterness and projected resentment over these
difficulties, rather than in an attempt to cope with
them, or try and improve the situation within our
limitations. How much of the industrial disputes,
of the extremist political views and of the increase
of anti-social offences which invariably follow
a major war, can be traced back to these factors ?
Faced by a difficult readjustment problem,
many will find their defence in a withdrawal from
it; sometimes this is to a gross pathological degree
but often there will be a difficulty in mixing, an
increased shyness, a slighter withdrawal from
social contacts and the difficulties of life. The
mood may become one of apathy, but rather more
frequently there will be suspicion and guarding
against any who try to pass through the wall of
withdrawal that has been built up in an attempt
at self-protection. There will be the old feeling
that the civilian cannot?or perhaps will notr-
understand the serviceman. And, as this suspicion
feeds upon itself, a wider barrier of resentment
and disgruntlement will form.

These are the characteristic signs that this period
of readjustment may show. But just as other >
forms of psychological stress will produce individual
reactions in each individual personality, so we shall
see the results of this problem sometimes as anxiety,
sometimes as an hysterical reaction and sometimes
even as a psychotic breakdown. It may form part
or all of the aetiological background of any
psychiatric illness of this period.

Since the causative factors are so complex and
numerous, so is the solution of this problem a
many-sided one.

First there is the preventive aspect, and the most
important single factor here is the preknowledge
of the problem, the realization that the difficulties
occur and the frank acceptance of the causes
involved. This is a problem both for the civilian
and the serviceman, a problem for the Service
authorities and for the family too.

. For the Services, the problem is relatively easy-
Men awaiting the time of release are grouped
together and readily accessible. They can be given
all the available information on resettlement
programmes, on retraining for industry, on the
methods of release. Above all they can?and
should?be given a clear picture of the special
problems that await them, of the difficulties and
disappointments they may have to face, and of
the need for careful readjustment. This can best |
be done by giving brief informal talks to each group
of men as they come up for release. The speaker,
of course, must be enthusiastic and well briefed-"
and above all capable and willing to discuss the
many queries that will be raised; he must, in short,
have a very clear picture of the difficulties to h?
faced, and of the problem. I can only speak wit/1 j
experience of one major overseas theatre where this j
was done, but the results did justify the effort, and
it was interesting to watch the men's own outlook
change from an attitude of " this is only some
more eyewash to cover up the Army's failures
to one of interest, discussion and, often, gratitude-
We were fortunate, too, to have in this theatre an
enthusiastic liaison officer from the Ministry ot
Labour who was able to arrange talks on the more
specific aspects of the home problems.

It is equally important that the family and cird6
to which the serviceman is returning should kno^
of this problem. They, too, will have idealiz^
the home-coming in their imagination; they, to",
will resent any differences in. him, unless they hav6 \
been forewarned. They, too, must know of th?
need for gradual readjustment on both sides.
think that we could, and should, do much more }?
spread this knowledge, for disappointment, with its
resulting resentment and bitterness, on the families'
s,de can only increase the vicious circle of
Maladjustment.

Then there is the importance of the welcome
back. The serviceman returns with a mixture of
Pnde in himself and his achievements, and a fear
that he may not be wanted. Both can be helped
we let him see we are glad to have him back;
but let the welcome be sincere and not effusive.
wants. to feel secure in the knowledge that we
^ant him back and that he has a part to play in
the new world to which he returns.
, I recently came across two employers; one had
J^d many personnel disputes and problems since
be war, whilst the other had a happy, contented,
bd therefore efficient, staff. It was not a co-
ncidence that one had made his returning service
biployees feel genuinely welcome, whilst the other
egarded them as " these so-and-so soldiers who
orrie back and demand everything "?and treated
irrf01 acc?rdingly. Good man-management is as
Portant in industry as ever it was in the services,
bd doubly important at this time.

is the first few weeks after release that are the
?st important for readjustment, for resentment
r suspicion once engendered will make the problem
any times more difficult. It is during that time
^Pecially that both serviceman and family must
Prepared to make allowances for each other, to
difReCt eac^ other's periods of withdrawal and
'?hculty and, above all, to get to know each other
?wly and afresh. It is a phase that cannot and
ust not be hurried, and any auxiliary help that
,Vlronment can give will be valuable. It is for
jsls reason that a sort of "second honeymoon "
thS<H-?ften a use^ul aid?though children may be
r.e difficulty here for they too need their period of
, ^Justment.

ah i ^ay re'ease, 56 days of leave stretch
ent as an a^rnost unbelievably long period
?ne either to a vegetable life of doing
to ln8, or, according to temperament, to planning
0 all the things one has dreamt of doing into
that period. Both are understandable and valuable
in moderation, but both have their obvious dangers.
Hasten slowly is the best motto here as elsewhere
in this phase.

Just in the same way the ex-serviceman may feel
?or is it perhaps his wife who more often has the
thought ??that he should visit all his friends and
relations during that leave period. Here, too, it is
wise to go slowly and to dictate one's visits by
genuine desire and not purely by a sense of duty.
Just as a child must adjust to a slowly widening
ring of contacts as it passes from infancy to child-
hood, so should the new contacts of the ex-service-
man be -slowly broadened, each readjustment
being firmly founded before the next is reached.

Anyone who has interviewed a repatriated
prisoner of war who has had severe readjustment
difficulties, will know how difficult that interview
may be; how each word must be weighed carefully,
and how each word may be weighed by the recipient.
He will know the difficulty of gaining support
and confidence, and that the gaining of that con-
fidence is an absolute necessity for any success.
He will have experienced the gradual build up
of contact until the patient accepts the efforts to
help him as genuine and worthwhile.

The problem of the released serviceman is of the
same kind, though usually of lesser degree.
Genuineness of feeling and intention, tact, under-
standing, the avoidance of fuss, patience, the ability
to gain confidence and, above all, a real knowledge
of the difficulties are the essentials. Given these,
confidence will be gained and with it readjust-
ment. The process is, and must be, slow
but it is practicable. With that success of re-
adjustment we shall avoid much psychiatric disaster
and domestic unhappiness and gain full value from
the experiences of the war years. Without it we
shall have resentment, bitterness and the foundations
of future quarrels; its loss will affect not only
individual happiness, but may even influence
national and international conduct. It is a problem
for serviceman and civilian alike.
