Psychiatric Social Work among Children in New York and Neighbouring States
==========================================================================

:Author: LESLEY SAMBROOK and CLARENCE A. WOLLEN
General Trends
The first thing that strikes the English visitor,
examining post-war social work in the U.S.A., is
the " psychiatric invasion " of all fields. In work
among children this has led to a de-centralizing of
the functions of the Child Guidance Clinic and to
the establishment of a psychiatric case-work
section within each agency or department con-
cerned with child welfare. This is true of schools,
the Juvenile Courts, Family Agencies, Child
Placement Agencies and Institutions serving children
(both Residential Schools and Homes). More
details 'of the functioning of these schemes will be
given later.

Child Guidance Clinics proper may function in
their own right like the Judge Baker Clinic at Boston
and the Philadelphia Clinic, or may be part of the
Mental Hygiene Clinic of a Psychiatric Hospital,
like Bellevue, New York, or attached to a Children's
Hospital like the " Harriet Lane " at Baltimore.

Training of Workers
--------------------

Case-work has swept the country and in practice
the term " case-worker " covers the psychiatric
as well as the general social worker. Far more
men in America than in England go into this field
and this was felt to be a healthy trend, contributing
robustness and balance to the profession. Modern
psychological theories have strongly influenced the
training and a good deal of psychiatric knowledge
is incorporated in training schemes for all case-
workers.

There is no special course for psychiatric social
workers as such; they merely take a further series
of psychiatric lectures (which are optional for the
case-worker going into other fields), and have their
practical work in a psychiatric clinic.

All candidates for training in social work take an
18 months to 2 years' course in a post-graduate
School of Social Work, ending in a " Mastership
of Social Science Great stress is laid on having
a college degree, and possession of this academic
qualification seems to be considered more important
than previous experience or personal suitability.
Owing to the different educational systems in
the two countries, a degree does not mean quite
the same in the U.S.A. as it does in England?but the
insistence on it as a pre-requisite for admission to
a School of Social Work, does constitute a difficulty
for English students desiring further training in
the States. It would be well therefore if some
evaluation of English training could be made which
would satisfy the authorities there.

Further In-Service Training
-----------------------------

On completing the post-graduate course in a
Social Work School, the worker may get further
specialized in-service training within the Clinic or
Agency in which she is thus employed.' An out-
standing example of this is the Jewish Board of
Guardians which uses case-workers for therapy,
both with parents and children in its Child Guidance
Service. Workers entering the service have during
their first year, weekly seminars on diagnosis
conducted by a psychiatrist. In the second year
there are similar seminars on treatment, and for
workers going in for group therapy, seminars in
this branch of work also. There is also an efficient
system of control by the psychiatrist, in part
exercised direct by means of conferences with
individual workers and in part exercised through
the supervisors. These supervisors have a reason-
able number of case-workers attached to them for
frequent discussion and supervision of cases.
The conferences with the psychiatrist are at less
frequent, though regular, intervals. In case of
difficulty the psychiatrist is always available to the
worker for direct consultation.

In many other clinics and agencies, somewhat
similar though much less complete arrangements
are made for continuing the instruction of workers
in their function.

The Role of the Psychiatric Social Worker
From a position of great responsibility and scope
such as that given to the case-worker in the Jewish
Board of Guardians, there are varying degrees
in the use made of P.S.W.s reaching the other
extreme in some clinics attached to hospitals where
their work is at a minimum. This occurs in hospitals
primarily concerned with training psychiatrists
where to the young doctors is given much of the
work ordinarily the province of the P.S.W. In
the end this has an unfavourable repercussion on
psychiatric social work as psychiatrists trained in
this way do not appear to know what responsibility
to delegate, and how to use the services of P.S.W.s
in clinics where they ultimately work.

Between these two extremes there are many
clinics and hospitals working with the usual team,
though there is a growing tendency to allow more
elasticity in the respective roles in treatment,
between psychiatrist and P.S.W. For example
where suitable the child may be allocated to the
P.S.W. and the psychiatrist may take the parent.
The extensive use of case-workers for therapy
made by the Jewish Board of Guardians is open to
criticism, but it is an attempt to meet the need for
treatment which is an urgent problem in the U.S.A.
as it is in England. This need is so widespread
that it is impossible to meet it through treatment
given direct by psychiatrists only. Therefore this
attempt is being made in using the psychiatrist
as a remote control for other psychiatric personnel
in the field of psycho-therapy.

Social Work in Public and Private Agencies
The emphasis between these two types of work
varies very much in different states. In New York
and the Atlantic sea-board, although there are
State Schemes for the care of dependant and
delinquent children, there is a tendency for much
of the work to be done by private Agencies. These
are a development of old Charitable - Societies .
which have grown and modified to keep pace with
modern needs. In line with the very strong feeling
in America in favour of private enterprise as against
any State Schemes, these Agencies handle a great
deal of the social and psychiatric work amongst
children and often fill gaps for which the State
has made no provision.

De-centralizing Psychiatric Work
----------------------------------

While in England the P.S.W. usually functions
within the setting of the Child-Guidance Service,
in the U.S.A. she has moved out of this specific
field, and, under the title of " case-worker " is
making her contribution in all areas of child care.
The following are examples:

(a) Child Guidance, or Counselling Service within the
Educational System
This operates slightly differently in different
localities, but the general principle is that schools
have facilities for handling their educational and '
some of their psychological problems themselves.
In New York, Child Guidance Units under the
Board of Education operate in different centres,
each of which is located in a school, and serves a
certain number of schools in that area.

In Philadelphia and other places, the Board of >
Education appoints " counsellors" (sometimes
called visiting teachers). These are teachers con-
sidered suitable for a psychiatric training. This
is given as an in-service training course and the
counsellors then deal with children individually
in school, in consultation when necessary with
a psychiatrist. They also do home visits and
interview parents. Referals must come through
the head teacher.

This means that a number of problems arising
from low intelligence and the more superficial
behaviour problems are dealt with, without refer-
ence to a separate psychiatric clinic.

(b) Child Guidance Services attached to the Juvenile
Courts

The Juvenile Court in New York maintains its
own clinic and children are referred by the Magis-
trate (" Judge ") for diagnosis, and for treatment.
Case-workers under the supervision of the psychia-
trist give treatment in selected cases, and at present
an experiment is being made in group-therapy
among some children on probation.

In New York, there is also a psychiatric service
attached to the Remand Home?Youth House.

This is operated by case-workers under the guidance
of supervisors and in consultation with a
psychiatrist.

In Boston, the Juvenile Court uses the Judge
Baker Clinic for seriously disturbed children.
For less serious cases there is a " Citizen Training
Department " which is really a compulsory evening
club for boys on probation. This is in charge of
two case-workers?one of whom (a man), is also a
group-worker (recreational officer).
(c) Psychiatric Case-work departments attached to
Children's Aid, Child Placing Agencies (Foster-
care), Family Agencies, and State Welfare
Departments

All these maintain a staff of case-workers, super-
visors and psychiatrists for consultation. TTiey
have definite schemes for orienting their case-
workers to their special function and policy. This
is done by frequent conferences and seminars.
As far as possible they deal with problems arising
in their own work. All boarding out in private
foster homes and all adoptions are done by case-
workers and this child-placement is considered a
very skilled job.

(d) Psychiatric Services attached to Institutions
serving Children

A very important development is the setting up
of psychiatric case-work departments in almost
all institutions for children. As far as possible all
normal dependent children are placed in private
foster Homes, and the Institutions cater for children
who are disturbed or delinquent.

The emphasis has shifted from custodial care,
through an educational phase, to a therapeutic goal.
This means that the Director may be a psychiatrist,
or a psychiatrically trained case-worker, not
necessarily an educationalist. In most institutions
the Board of Education sends in daily a school unit
and this operates independently, the only liaison
with the institution staff being a friendly relation-
ship. It has certain advantages now that the main
aim of institutions is therapeutic, not educational,
but it means that the Director has no official control
of the educational programme. Most institutions
are known as " schools " because of this included
educational unit, and the children prefer this name.
Case-workers -attached to a school may be
resident, or visit daily or at intervals. They not
only collect Social Histories and do after-care, but
each has a certain number of children allocated
to her (or him) for regular interviews during their
stay in the institutions.

The frequency and nature of these interviews
varies in different institutions and also with the needs
of the particular child. They may be merely a
friendly contact and a bridge between home and
school, or they may be of a definitely therapeutic
nature.

The amount of supervision given to a case-
Worker and the frequency of consultation with a
psychiatrist varies from institution to institution.
This development would seem to be one of great
significance. It recognizes the need of the institu-
tion child, whether he be there for long or short
term placement, for an individual contact. To be
able to count on the undivided attention of a
sympathetic individual is a great help, but if he
is to make progress this person must be a skilled
worker with whom he can discuss his problems
and who can help him resolve his difficulties whether
in connection with the home situation or the school.
The case-worker should also be of great service
to the parent-substitute in discussing and mediating
the child's difficulties as they impact on the living
situation. In actual fact this relationship is one
demanding great tact from the worker if a jealousy
situation is to be avoided.

In the best institutions great care is taken that the
case-worker who first contacts the child should carry
through with him, visiting his home, interviewing
him while in the institution and undertaking his
after-care when he has left. If he is transferred to
another institution or foster home, the worker
personally introduces him to the new case-worker?
and this is also done if for practical reasons there
has to be a change of personnel. In some institu-
tions visited this valuable principle of continuity
was not adhered to and the child might have to make
several adjustments to different workers?on
admission, during residence and again on leaving.
In these cases, much of value, i.e. continuity of
relationship, was felt to be lost. This development
of case-work can be a powerful factor in making
placement in an institution part of a constructive
treatment plan, not the last resort of desperation.
There is one danger, however, which was noted
in some institutions visited, viz. case-work must
never be allowed to replace good child-care in the
living situation. In some institutions where
groups in cottages were too large and parent-
substitutes inadequate, there was a disposition to
try to patch up poor child-care with case-work.
This can never be satisfactory.

General Conclusions
-------------------

All these ways in which psychiatric work is de-
centralized, does mean that the bottle-neck of the
local Child Guidance Clinic is avoided and that
treatment, at any rate on a case-work level is
available to many more children. It inevitably
places a heavy responsibility on workers to which
in some cases it was felt they were not equal, but,
those Agencies demanding the most from their
workers have a very thorough system of in-service
training and a close liaison maintained between
case-worker, supervisor (a more experienced P.S.W.)
and psychiatrist. The success and even safety
of any such scheme depends on the effectiveness of
this liaison and of the psychiatrists' ultimate control.
It was felt that these trends should be closely
watched and methods of working examined, both
with a view to guarding against what may prove
to be pitfalls and to applying what proves to be
useful in the reconstruction and development of
psychiatric social work serving children in this
country.
Correspondence on this article is invited.?Ed.
