Deep Analysis
==============

By Charles Berg, M.D. London.
oeorge/\nen anu unwin. i>t/. rp. zoi. us. uu.
Contrary to the usual custom the publisher's note
printed on the dust cover of this book is less a laudatory
puff than an intelligible explanation of the reason the
book came to be written. Apparently the author,
who has already published a collection of short case-
histories, found himself dissatisfied with this method
of popularizing psychotherapy, and sought to remedy
its defects by giving a detailed account of a single case
in which a complete analysis was carried out. His
book, therefore, deserves attention for two reasons,
first, that the " complete " analysis of any case is a
somewhat rare event, and second, that the author has
chosen the difficult course of trying to popularize
psychotherapy by giving an intimate and detailed account
of an analytical situation. The task is a difficult one,
not only because it calls for skill in presentation,?in
particular a sense of balance and an eye for essential
details?but because even a dictaphone record of an
analysis cannot convey to the lay reader the emotional
nuances of that unusual type of human relationship
which exists in the " therapeutic group of two
Nevertheless, although Dr. Berg makes perfectly
clear what he means by the term " deep "?namely
an analysis of unconscious motivations and conflicts?
the title he has chosen may give rise to some misunder-
standings. From time to time, even in official analytical
circles, the word " deep " has been used to suggest
that some particular form of analytical technique, or
particular set of interpretations has been regarded,
mostly it is true by their sponsor, as going " deeper "
than those of less fortunate or less gifted colleagues.
Apart from the fact that this usage smacks of self-
satisfaction, it is based on a misunderstanding of the
nature and function of the unconscious and, after some
rather acrimonious discussions, the consensus of
analytical opinion was that the term should be discreetly
dropped. The psycho-therapeutist may rest assured that
if his analysis has ventilated the unconscious sources of
conflict and has resolved his patient's unconscious trans-
ference, both positive and negative, he has in the meta-
psychological sense been deep enough in all conscience.
It remains to consider how far the author has achieved
his main aims; how far the method he has chosen
will succeed in conveying the nature of analytical processes
to the unoriented reader; how far the technique he has
described can be regarded as representative of the
Freudian approach. As to the first point, a great deal
depends on the reader. Dr. Berg has obviously tried
hard to create the necessary atmosphere, and to convey
it to his reader in an interesting way, but, with the best
will in the world, he can scarcely avoid shocking the
innocents and inflicting some tedium on the oriented.
Actually the case he describes is that of a rather tedious
young man, presumably American to judge from his
outlook, without any of the' symptomatic features
calculated to attract the reader with an appetite for
psychoneurotic sensations. Indeed it would be fair
to say that the most useful aspects of Dr. Berg's record
depend not so much on his detailed and spontaneous
presentation, or on the emphasis he lays on the trans-
ference, as on the author's capacity to give a systematic
outline of the case. This in turn depends on his
secondary elaboration of the process of analysis. All
case histories are as much records of the analyst's mental
approach as of the patient's material. And if Dr-
Berg's outline appears at times a little too diagrammatic,
if the phases appears to run a little too much " according
fo plan " there's no great harm in that.
Some comments here and there, especially on the
" wisdom " of the Id and on the racial content of
the Universal Unconscious, may have been due to the
author's deSire to give literary expression to tendencies
that are notoriously hard to particularize. But in describ-
ing the derivatives of this Universal Unconscious he does
create the impression that he is a little more thorough-
paced and more Jungian than Jung. These lapses from
Freudian outlook do not, however, obtrude themselves,
and it is abundantly clear that Dr. Berg has a sincere
belief in and a good understanding of Freudian technique-
Whether the reader will be satisfied with or cavil at his
aim and methods, he must admit that the author has
a flair for case presentation and an obvious zest for this
form of literary expression. And since the former
accomplishment is by no means common amongst
psycho-therapeutists, we must be grateful to him both
for his efforts and for his example. E. G.
