Christian Psychology
=====================

a new Translation of Swedenborg's
Tractate " de Commercio Animaj et Corporis," with Preface and Illus-
trative Notes. By T. M. Gorman, M.A., Hertford College, Oxford.
London: Longman, Green, Reader, & Dyer, Paternoster Row,
1875.
Swedenborg's tractate forms but a small portion of this'work.
Three-fourths of it are occupied with a voluminous appendix and
notes, which reflect great credit on the editor's learning and research.
The appearance of the book has given rise to a great deal of sharp
CHRISTIAN PSYCHOLOGY. 167
criticism. Some have denounced Swedenborg as an impostor ; others
have regarded him as a madman. Impostor he was not; but that
there were times when his overwrought mind made him the subject
of hallucinations, Ave cannot doubt. But this may be said of many
;i genius?liobert Hall, Cowper, and Charles Lamb. There were
periods when the brightness of their intellects was obscured by mental
aberrations, but who would desire to make their morbid imaginings the
subject of special and lengthened comment ! It is with the operations
of Swedenborg's mind, in its healthy action and in its greatest vigour,
that we desire now to speak. He was not a mere visionary, as some
would have us believe, but a man of high scientific attainments, and
he possessed in a remarkable degree that " clear-judging tact which
anticipates experience." The Saturday Review, in an article of the
11th May, 1867, from which we give the following extract, fully cor-
roborates this view of his mental powers :?" In his grasp of philo-
sophical principles, and his insight into the leading truths of physics,
Swedenborg was clearly in advance of most men of his time. And
in certain special departments, especially that of metallurgy, his prac-
tical knowledge has scarcely been surpassed in our own day. The
chapters on the conversion of iron into steel were incorporated into the
magnificent ' Description des Arts et Metiers ' as having been spoken
of by Cramer and Dr. Percy as forming a landmark in the history of
metallurgy It was in his views of magnetism that he came
nearest to the conceptions of our day. It was already clear to him that
heat, light, and electricity were bitt modifications of one element?the
magnetic?which filled all space, and was the impelling principle
resident in all costnical bodies."
We entirely agree with Mr. Gorman, that Swedenborg Avas an
earnest and truthful man; but few will probably go the length he does,
in believing that Swedenborg possessed the power of direct communi-
cation with the unseen world.
Long before Mr. Gorman's book was published, the character and
writings of Swedenborg had been fully discussed in this journal. The
following remarks'appeared in the Journal of Psychological Medicine,
in the number for October, 18G1 :?
" In the whole range of modern biography there is no life of
greater interest to the medico-psychologist than that of Emanuel
Swedenborg. His writings constitute a splendid monument of the
extraordinary intellectual powers, the untiring assiduity, and (apart
from all considerations of the ultimate results to which this fervour
led him) the lofty religious fervour of the man. As a philosopher he
will always occupy a conspicuous and honourable position in the history
of modern philosophy ; and as a theologian, he gaA'e birth to one of
the most remarkable developments of Christianity in recent times.
From the beginning, his religious feelings entered largely into his
philosophical speculations, and constituted an essential portion of them.
He held, indeed, that religion was necessary to the perfection of philo-
sophy, and that philosophy divorced from religion was a dead letter.
With him philosophy and revelation were fundamentally one and
the same.
1G8 OVERWORK AND PREMATURE MENTAL DECAY.
" To say that Swedenborg was a lunatic, is to use a term which
conveys to a vast majority of persons the notion of entire lack of
reason, and, so far as applied to Swedenborg, would give rise to a false
impression. Swedenborg was subject to hallucinations, and these
hallucinations influenced his thoughts and governed his conduct for
many years. Hallucinations which are not recognised as such are
incompatible with sound reason ; but it does not follow that this defect
of reason should be manifested except in connection with the hallucina-
tions with which it is allied, or the train of thought immediately
dependent upon or arising out of the hallucinations."
We cannot but admire Mr. Gorman's manly defence of Swedenborg's
character against the aspersions which have been thrown on his
honesty, and the petty ridicule with which his speculations have been
treated by his materialistic opponents.
