On the Pathology and Treatment Of Cerebral Disease
=====================================================

238
2)
\ j
Art. III.?
No. III.
BY ROBERT HUNTER SEMPLE, M.D.
Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of London.
In treating of so many-sided a subject as the pathology of
cerebral disease it is impossible to adopt any definite systematic
arrangement, or to adhere to one particular plan of discussing
the questions which present themselves to notice. The morbid
phenomena of the brain involve so many derangements in other
organs and tissues of the body, and, vice versa, the derangements
of the latter so often induce serious cerebral symptoms, that
remarks become necessarily discursive, and nosological classi-
fication is practically impossible. As in many other branches
of medical inquiry, too, so especially in that relating to cerebral
disease, opinions are continually changing, although clinical
facts and pathological appearances remain the same, and the
interpretation of the two latter is varied almost to infinity
according to the light in which the same conditions are viewed
by different minds. Although the faculties of observation may
be equal in many observers, and the opportunities of investi-
gation be ample in all, yet the refinements of modern science
may discover changes in the cerebral mass, which, though some
may describe, others are unwilling or unable to admit, while in
some cases the zeal for new discovery or for framing new theories
or hypotheses will perhaps carry investigators beyond the limits
of strict scientific demonstration and of logical deduction, and
thus lead to the entire rejection of propositions which may
contain many elements of truth. Besides this result, it is by
no means infrequent to find acute and diligent workers in the
field of cerebral pathology renouncing the opinions which they
in former times strenuously advocated, and calling upon their
disciples to join them in the repudiation of the doctrines which
they themselves had inculcated.
It is difficult enough to lay down any intelligible rules for
the determination of what may be called the rough pathology
of the cranial contents: to distinguish, for instance, the existence
of inflammation of the membranes of the brain as contra-
distinguished from that of the substance of the organ; to draw
the line of demarcation between simple functional disorder of
it. v-rv iff
PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 239
the brain and the effects of organic disease; to determine the
indications which denote an excessive supply of blood to the
cerebral mass, and those which point to the opposite condition.
But it is infinitely more difficult to map out the brain, as it
were, into different limited regions, to assign to those special
regions certain invariable functions, and to deduce from the
details of symptoms the exact position of a given pathological
lesion.
Some general propositions as to the functions of the different
parts of the encephalic mass are admitted, but it is extraordinary
how few there are which are not even now the subjects of ani-
mated controversy. As the thinking principle of man is con-
nected with the outer world by the means of the senses, or, in
medical language, by the media of the nerves of special sense,
of motion, and of sensibility, so the impairment or disease of
any of these nerves will necessarily lead to corresponding dis-
turbances or derangements of the functions which they perform.
Disease of the optic nerves, for instance, will impair the function
of sight, that of the auditory nerve will interfere with or
abolish the sense of hearing, and other equally trite examples
might be adduced; but when an attempt is made to trace
the nerves of special sense, of motion, or of sensibility beyond
the pons Varolii and to follow their fibres as they diverge
into or converge from the cerebral or cerebellar fibres or con-
volutions, the difficulties of investigation begin to thicken, and
the region of speculation and hypothesis often replaces that of
demonstration and safe deduction. It is not many years since
that the doctrines of Grail and Spurzheim, although never gene-
rally received by the medical profession in their full extent,
were so far recognised to be true as to lead to the belief that
certain regions of the brain were more or less connected with
special mental attributes; and it was generally admitted that
the intellectual functions had their seat in the anterior part of
the brain, the moral qualities in the vertical part, and the
animal propensities and passions in the posterior portions. But
as the mock physician in Moliere's Medecin malgre lui " says,
" Nous avons change tout cela," and it is now commonly asserted
that while the anterior lobes of the brain preside over the
functions of intelligence, the middle lobes, comprising the cen-
tral and upper lobes, are the portions connected with the motor
powers, and the posterior part of the brain is especially con-
nected with sensation. This view is, however, by no means
universally admitted.
In order to understand correctly the divisions of the brain
as defined by the modern school of psychological anatomists, it
is necessary to examine the organ in a different manner to that
240 PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE.
which was until recently taught in the dissecting room. Every
student and practitioner of medicine is of course aware of the
obvious division of the cerebrum into two lateral hemispheres ;
the subdivision of each hemisphere into two unequal parts by
the fissure of Sylvius; the union of the two hemispheres by
the corpus callosum; the separation of the cerebrum from the
cerebellum by the tentorium; and the union of these two brains
by means of the pons Varolii and the crura cerebri and cerebelli.
But modern research points out other marks of division which
would escape the notice of the superficial observer, and which
were certainly never taught in former years in the schools of
medicine. Thus, for instance, the division between the anterior
and middle lobes, formerly described as being only imperfectly
established by the fissure of Sylvius, is now said to be completed
by a furrow proceeding upwards in an oblique direction from
the above-mentioned fissure to the vertex, and named the fissure
of Rolando, while the division between the middle and posterior
lobes, formerly regarded as merely nominal, is said to be estab-
lished by another furrow, which has not, however, received a
distinct appellation. Moreover, the convolutions of the anterior
lobe, which were not formerly regarded as admitting of any
distinct classification or definite arrangement, are now grouped
in three series, from before backwards, or from behind forwards,
from the anterior part of the longitudinal fissure to the fissure of
Sylvius, or vice versa, and named respectively the first, second,
and third frontal convolutions ; and the parietal, temporal, and
occipital convolutions are likewise divided into numerically
distinguished groups.
The significance and importance of these anatomical divisions
have been recently greatly enhanced by some striking observa-
tions on the pathology of aphasia, first recorded by M. Broca,
and by the still more recent and more striking and even start-
ling researches and experiments, made especially on monkeys,
by Dr. Ferrier. It is pretty generally known that M. Broca,
from the examination of two brains in the Bicetre Hospital in
Paris, was led to localise the function of speech in the third
frontal convolution of the left side, and many subsequent inves-
tigations on the clinical history and morbid anatomy of aphasia
have more or less confirmed his opinion. It is perhaps even
more generally known that Dr. Ferrier, in a most interesting
series of inquiries, has demonstrated the fact that stimulation
of certain portions of the cortical substance of the brain was
followed in his hands by definite movements on the part of the
animal experimented upon, those portions being chiefly situated
in the anterior part of the organ. Dr. Ferrier, indeed, makes a
rough division of the brain into a sensory and motor part, by
PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 241
drawing a line through the fissure of Sylvius obliquely back-
wards and upwards to the extreme termination of the parieto-
occipital fissure, all the motor region being placed by him above
and in front of this line, and all the sensory region being behind
and below it.*
Adhuc sub judice lis est; and notwithstanding the high
authority of M. Broca, and the scientific skill and trust-
worthiness of Dr. Ferrier, it would be, perhaps, premature to
receive the results obtained by either of these distinguished
physiologists into the category of acknowledged truths; and,
indeed, as I write, a formidable antagonist has presented himself
from the very ranks which might have been expected to corro-
borate the statements and confirm the deductions of their
French and their British confrere. No less an authority than
Dr. Brown-Sequard, who has, perhaps, done more than any living
investigator to localise the functions of the brain, now publicly
announces, in his "Lectures" before the Royal College of Physi-
cians of London, that his own previous results are fallacious, and
that the brain acts as a whole, and not by the separate agency
of its individual parts.
Dr. Brown-Sequard has at present only developed the out-
lines of his recent views, and there may be some risk of mistak-
ing his meaning; but, in order to avoid error, I copy almost
literally from his own acknowledged writings,f and I find him
stating that there is no necessary relation between the seat, the
extent, the kind of a cerebral lesion, and the symptoms that may
appear from its influence. He proceeds, in the same published
lecture, to enunciate in a categorical form a series of proposi-
tions which are founded on experience, and the truth of many
of which must at once be acknowledged. Thus, for instance,
he says: (1) That a lesion in one half of the brain may pro-
duce symptoms either on the opposite or on the corresponding
side; (2) That a very small lesion, whatever be its seat, may
produce most violent and extensive symptoms; (3) That a
lesion occupying the same extent on the two sides of the middle
line of the brain may produce symptoms only, or chiefly, on one
side of the body ; (4) That symptoms may proceed slowly from
a suddenly produced lesion ; (5) That symptoms may appear
suddenly from a slowly and gradually developing lesion; (6)
That the greatest variety of symptoms may proceed from a
lesion in the same part of the brain; (7) That the lesions of
the most various parts of the brain may give rise to the same
symptoms ; (8) That permanent lesions may produce symptoms
* " On the Localisation of the Functions of the Brain," by Dr. Ferrier.
British Medical Journal, December 19, 1874.
t "Lectures," by Dr. Brown-Sequard. Lancet, July 15, 1876.
242 PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE.
by attacks just as they produce epileptiform seizures; (9) That
symptoms may cease suddenly or rapidly, notwithstanding the
persistence of the lesion; (10) That symptoms of brain disease
may appear from irritation of visceral and other peripheric
nerves; and (11) That considerable lesions anywhere in the
brain may exist without the appearance of any symptoms.
In some former papers I have adduced cases and post-
mortem examinations from my own personal experience, which
remarkably confirm some of the above propositions, and I now
adduce some others which more or less illustrate the truth of
the views here and elsewhere expressed.
The following is a good illustration of the statement that
permanent disease affecting the brain may produce symptoms
which are in their nature essentially intermittent. It is, in
fact, a typical case of epilepsy, caused by thickening of the
internal table of the skull and exostoses of its processes; and
it will be observed that the patient was watched for several
years during life, and that the morbid parts were accurately
examined after death.
Case.?M. Y., set. 46, formerly a servant, was obliged to
leave her place many years ago in consequence of frequent
attacks of epilepsy. She was an inmate of an infirmary which I
attended, and I saw her repeatedly during many years, as she
was under constant medical treatment; the fits were frequent,
occurring at irregular intervals, and of a very violent character.
In the intermissions between the fits her health was tolerably
good, with the exception of occasional headache ; her intel-
lectual faculties were quite unimpaired. As she always derived
benefit from the local abstraction of blood, her disease was con-
sidered to be of a congestive character, and a strict antiphlo-
gistic regimen was adopted and maintained. She was on
several occasions cupped between the shoulders, blisters were
applied and kept open in the same situation, and occasional
purgatives were administered. Her diet was of the lightest
character; no solid food or beer was allowed, and she derived
her sustenance entirely from milk, eggs, bread, and thin broth
or beef tea. This treatment was continued, as I have mentioned,
for several years and with some advantage, but no decided im-
provement in preventing the fits. These at last became more
frequent and severe, symptoms of low fever supervened, and she
sank.
It should be mentioned that she was in all respects a well-
conducted woman, had never been addicted to drink or any
other vice, and indeed had been a domestic servant of perfectly
good character, until she was attacked with illness.
The post-mortem examination was made forty-three hours
PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 243
after death, and the body was found to be plump and well-
formed, and there was a layer of fat beneath the skin, about
three-quarters of an inch in thickness : certainly a remarkable
fact, considering the tenuity of her diet, which had been always
strictly regulated.
The scalp was natural. The skull externally presented no
peculiar appearance, and I had no difficulty in sawing it through.
On removing and examining it, however, it was found that
there existed a remarkable want of uniformity between the two
surfaces of the cranium in some parts, owing to thickening of
the osseous structure, particularly of the internal table, which,
instead of being, as usual, thin and brittle, was thick and solid.
Along the line of the circular incision, made as usual by the
saw, the skull was of about the average thickness. The os fron-
tis was then sawn through immediately in front of and in a line
corresponding with the coronal suture. Along the circular
line of incision made by the saw in the first instance in re-
moving the calvarium, the skull had a uniform thickness of one
line and a half; but the part corresponding to the right frontal
eminence was half an inch thick, and the same part on the left
side was five lines in thickness. All the prominent bony pro-
cesses were much increased in thickness and asperity, as the
crista galli, the posterior clinoid processes, the bony ridge of
the petrous portion of the temporal bone, the ridges on the in-
ternal surface of the occipital, etc. The dura mater was con-
gested ; the vessels of the arachnoid membrane were also
congested, and the membrane itself was opaque and thickened;
beneath the arachnoid there were two or three fluid drachms of
bloody serum. The brain was flattened in front, the depression
exactly corresponding to the thickness of the internal table of
the skull. The substance of the brain was very firm in its
consistence, and the grey part was of an unusually dark colour,
but otherwise it presented no peculiar appearance or alteration
of character. The other organs of the body were examined in
order to make the investigation complete, but no remarkable
appearances were anywhere detected.
The above case is a remarkable one, and, after long reflec-
tion, I can come to no other conclusion than that the pathology
was as I have stated it to be. It is, of course, remarkable that
the morbid condition being the same, the attacks were inter-
mittent, but the fact is in accordance with the eighth proposi-
tion laid down by Dr. Brown-Sequard and quoted in a previous
page. I may also remark, en passant, that the treatment was
probably the best that could have been pursued, and that any
experimental therapeutics, either in the way of specifics or of
great depletion, or of undue stimulation, would have been not
only useless but very likely might have been very mischievous.
244 PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OP CEREBRAL DISEASE.
The following very curious but successful case, which I
watched myself daily and almost hourly, and of which I made
careful notes, is an instance of local disease of the brain, the
seat being indicated by the symptoms, and the treatment being
justified by the recovery of the patient. I may also state that I
knew the condition of the patient long before and long after
the attack, so that the features of the case are complete. The
malady evidently affected the fifth pair of cerebral nerves on
the right side.
Case.?E. B., set. 54, a healthy looking woman, has gene-
rally enjoyed good health, with the exception of suffering
occasionally from indigestion, and once, two years ago, from
an attack of pneumonia. About six weeks from the date of the
present report, she first experienced slight dimness of sight in
the right eye, which, however, on examination did not present
any peculiar appearance. At that time she also complained
of a pricking, shooting pain in the same eye, together with
pain in her forehead, face, and right ear. As no morbid appear-
ance could be detected and no distinct derangement of health
was apparent, she was merely recommended to bathe the eye
with cold water, which, however, did not afford any relief. Since
that time the pain has become gradually worse, and her health
has been much impaired.
The sufferings becoming now very much aggravated, a care-
ful examination was made of the symptoms and the appearances,
which were as follow : She complains of a shooting, throbbing,
burning pain in the right eye, and a sensation, as she expresses
it, as if the eyeball were too large for its socket. The same kind
of pain extends to the forehead as far as the vertex, backwards
to the ear and occiput, and down the neck; to the right side of
the nose as far as the external aperture of the right nostril, and
to the upper maxillary bone, the pain originating at the situa-
tion of the infra-orbital foramen. The upper eyelid is completely
drawn over the ball of the right eye, so as completely to obstruct
vision. She has no power to lift it up, and the attempt made
by me to draw up the lid causes excruciating pain and violent
action of the orbicularis palpebrarum which immediately draws
down the lid again. The falling of the lid, therefore, is not owing
to palsy of the levator palpebrae superioris, but to spasmodic con-
traction of the orbicularis palpebrarum. When the lid is
elevated, although this is done with great difficulty, she is able
to see very distinctly. There is, therefore, no disease of the optic
nerve, or of any of the internal structures of the eye-ball, the
only peculiar appearance presented by the eye being that the
pupillary aperture is oval instead of round. This last appearance
is no doubt due to some sympathetic affection of the lenticular
PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 245
ganglion, which supplies the iris with nerves, and which, as is
well known, receives a small nervous thread from the nasal
branch of the first or ophthalmic division of the fifth pair.
She says that since her illness her hearing on the right side
has been impaired?a circumstance due, no doubt, to sympathetic
affection of the auricular branches of the third division of the
fifth pair, or of the chorda tympani which joins the gustatory
nerve. The power of smelling and of taste are, however, quite
perfect. The pain in the parts above described is not constant,
but subject to violent exacerbations and remissions, and is
much increased by pressure on the affected regions. She
complains of derangement of her general health, has a sour
taste in the mouth, has no thirst, nor any desire for food ; she
has vomited several times this morning (day of examination);
bowels moderately open ; urine scanty and high-coloured; tongue
covered with a white thick fur ; pulse 84, regular. At first I
thought the case to be one compounded of neuralgia, dyspepsia,
and perhaps hysteria, but its progress soon convinced me that
the disease was definitely seated in some part of the brain, and
that it affected the origin, and not the extremities of the nerves.
Acting on my first impression at the commencement, I ordered
a blister to be applied to the right temple, and some alterative
and aperient medicine to be administered. Oct. 15 (two
days after this treatment was adopted) : Feels rather better, and
on the whole the pain is somewhat diminished. She can lift the
right upper eyelid to the extent of about a quarter of an inch,
but with pain and great effort. The eyelid is very tender to the
touch. The general health is much improved ; tongue much
cleaner, but still slightly furred; vomiting has ceased ; bowels
open ; no sour taste in the mouth ; pulse 84, regular.
Oct. 16.?Feels much worse; has had no sleep the whole of
last night in consequence of excessive pain in the parts above
described. As I now believed that there was some inflammatory
or congestive affection within the brain affecting the origin or
the course of the fifth pair of nerves, I ordered five grains of
pilula hydrargyri to be taken twice a day, and an aperient
draught every four hours containing some tartrated antimony.
7 p.m. same day.?She has taken two doses of the medicine:
the first produced no marked effect; the second excited copious
vomiting, followed by a violent convulsive fit, attended with
foaming at the mouth. On my visiting her soon after this
attack, she was lying in a state of torpor, and could not answer
the questions put to her. I could now lift up the right eyelid
without apparently exciting any pain, but the eyeball was drawn
in different directions by the convulsive action of the recti and
obliqui muscles. The pupil contracted and dilated, but its
246 PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OP CEREBRAL DISEASE.
margin was irregular, assuming a somewhat triangular shape;
pulse 100, strong and incompressible. I now bled her, and
while the blood was being drawn she was seized with violent
attacks of rigidity of all the muscles, but they ceased after last-
ing a few minutes. She appeared now to be only partially
sensible, groaned occasionally, and drew her breath heavily and
laboriously. 11 p.m. same day.?Breathing now hardly per-
ceptible, except at intervals, when she takes two or three deep
inspirations. There is constant rigidity of both lower extremities;
the upper extremities are also rigidly fixed, although they are
now and then relaxed for a short time. The lower jaw is firmly
closed, and any attempt to draw it down is opposed by the
violent contraction of its muscles. The muscles of the face are
not rigid, and both the lips and eyelids can be freely drawn in
any direction. The pupil of the right eye varies very much
in figure, but is never round. There is not much spasm of the
muscles of the back or abdomen, although both appear slightly
rigid when pressed upon; pulse 80, soft and compressible.
Oct. 17.?The rigidity of the muscles has continued with
intermissions throughout the night, during a part of which she
was delirious. Blood drawn yesterday, not buffed nor cupped ;
pulse 80, soft. Since 7 o'clock this morning she has been
sensible ; and she now answers questions quite rationally. She
has now perfect power over all the voluntary muscles, except
that she is still unable to raise the right eyelid. The pain
caused by the attempt to draw it up with my finger is more
intense than formerly: tongue dry, and covered with fur; no
thirst; skin dry ; bowels not relieved since six o'clock last night;
lias passed no urine for twenty-four hours; breathing natural.
The following plan was now adopted: a solution of the extract
of belladonna (gr. v. to sj of water) was dropped into the eye,
poured upon the blistered surface on the right temple, and
applied to the whole of the right eyelid and adjacent parts by
means of a linen rag. She was also ordered to take every four
hours a pill containing three grains of blue pill and two of
calomel. In three minutes after the application of the solution
of belladonna, as above described, the pain in the eyeball ceased,
and she expressed it as being benumbed.
Oct. 18.?Feels rather better. The fits of spasmodic ri-
gidity occurred last night nearly every ten minutes, but they
ceased at 1 a.m., and after that time she had some tranquil
sleep. She is now quite sensible, and has passed about a pint
of urine, which has deposited a copious white sediment. The
pain in the eyeball is less: she says it is benumbed, but expo-
sure to light gives considerable pain; there is pain in the left
lumbar region; bowels confined; pulse 7 6, rather hard. To
PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 247
have half an ounce of castor oil immediately, and to continue
the pills of calomel and blue pill.
8 p.m. same day.?Feels much better, and the pains are
much relieved. The right eyelid can be lifted up without much
suffering, but she cannot raise it by her own exertions. The
bowels have been opened, and the stools are copious; she has
passed urine ; pulse 80, soft and compressible ; she is now quite
sensible. She has had three spasmodic fits since the morning,
but they lasted a very short time.
Oct. 19.?Improving; has had no spasms since the last
visit; has slept from two till six o'clock this morning; the pain
in the right eyeball and eyelid is diminished, and these parts
are less tender on pressure: the attempt to raise the lid by the
finger is also less opposed by the action of the muscle, but she
is still unable to raise it herself; pulse 80, soft and full; gams
rather tender. The solution of belladonna was again applied to
the blistered surface of the right temple. To continue the pills.
Oct. 20.?Considerably improved; she has had no spasms
during the night; the pain is relieved, and she does not now
suffer any inconvenience in any part of the body ; the eyelid is
still drawn down, and the tenderness of the eyeball remains, but
not so remarkably as before. As her gums were sore she was
now directed to discontinue the pills, and to take some aperient
and diuretic medicine.
Under this treatment she rapidly improved; the secretions
became natural, the tenderness of the eyeball wholly disap-
peared, and she regained the perfect power of raising the lid.
?Shewas discharged cured on the 26th November; and although
I had frequent opportunities of seeing her for many months
afterwards, she had no return of her complaint, and went on
pursuing her ordinary avocations.
I think there can be very little doubt that the above case
was one of local disease of the brain, the locality being denoted
by the symptoms. Whatever the malady may have been, it
appears to have involved the origin of the fifth pair of nerves
on the right side. It will be observed that all the parts sup-
plied by the ophthalmic branch of this nerve were acutely
painful, and that the pain was also traced to the parts supplied
by the superior maxillary nerve; the motor part of the inferior
maxillary nerve was also affected, as was proved at one period
of the disease by the spasmodic closure of the jaws. The pain
and spasm in other parts of the body are, of course, explicable
by the reflex action of the spinal cord and medulla oblongata.
That it was not mere neuralgia is, I think, proved by the
incessant pain and tenderness of the parts supplied by the
ophthalmic nerve, by the general course of the symptom?, and
PART II. VOL. II.?NEW SERIES. li
248 PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OP CEREBRAL DISEASE.
by the decided benefit afforded by antiphlogistic measures. It
could not have been a case of hysteria, the patient exhibiting
no indications whatever of that complaint, and the malady
both coming on and going off gradually. Again, it is evident
that the symptoms were not caused by any organic disease of
the brain, or by any tumour or spiculum of bone, for the cure
was complete, and I saw her for months before and after the
attack. Nor could they be due to inflammation of the brain,
for the state of the pulse, the absence of heat in the head, and
other obvious considerations, preclude that supposition. On
the whole, I am inclined to believe that it was a case of local
congestion, which yielded to the treatment adopted.
The ultimate aim and object of medicine being to relieve
the sufferings of the patient, and not merely to discuss the nature
of the disease under which he is labouring, I now offer some ge-
neral observations on the treatment of cases such as those above
detailed. I do not at present refer to the treatment of inflam-
mation of the brain, or of those various conditions to which
the term apoplexy is usually applied. To the pathology and
treatment of the latter class of cases I have already briefly
referred in former papers.
There are a great number of cases more or less obscure in
their pathology, which point to some morbid condition in the
intracranial structures, but to which no general designation can
be attached, and which are often remediable by careful and
judicious treatment. To take only the two cases recorded in the
present paper, one was an instance of hypertrophy of the
cranial bones, especially of the internal table of the skull and
of the bony processes, and the other was in all probability an
example of local congestion, but producing the most serious
general as well as local symptoms. Such cases might, of course,
be due to, and might often be mistaken for, organic diseases of
the brain, which are in their nature incurable; and, on the
other hand, they might, with equal probability, be attributed,
until the features of each case were thoroughly known, ex-
amined and compared, to mere transient functional derange-
ment, which would give way to any treatment or to no treat-
ment at all. Hence the utmost caution is necessary, in the first
place, in order to ascertain, if possible, the nature of the affec-
tion ; and it is better to wait for some time watching the course
of the malady before beginning any decided mode of treatment,
because the symptoms may possibly give way of themselves, and
premature medication might unjustly arrogate to itself the be-
neficial results which are really due to the operations of nature.
PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 249
This rule, it will be seen, was observed by me in the second case
recorded in this paper, for the patient was carefully watched for
six weeks, and decisive treatment was not commenced until the
symptoms were so severe and so well marked as to call im-
peratively for active interference.
The theory of localisation of function in the brain, whether
true or false, does not throw much light upon, or lead to much
practical benefit in, the treatment of cerebral diseases. In ma-
naging such affections the organ must be considered as a whole,
and remedial measures must be calculated to act upon it
through the general system. Even when the disease is local-
ised, as it very often is, it must be combated, as is frequently
done very successfully, by specific or general therapeutical
measures acting upon the whole of the cerebral structures.
A very careful enquiry must always be made, in any given case,
as to the antecedents of the patient and as to the family history.
Putting aside, for the present, the consideration of inflam-
mation of the brain or its membranes, and of the various con-
ditions giving rise to apoplectic extravasations and to softenings,
there is little doubt that many, if not most, of the other morbid
states of the organ are due to, or connected with, some constitu-
tional or hereditary predisposition; and that gout, rheumatism,
scrofula, syphilis, and cancer, lie at the root of many of the
obscure cerebral maladies with which the physician has to
deal. Sometimes one or other of the constitutional affections
just referred to has openly manifested itself during the patient's
life, and then the diagnosis is very materially assisted; but in
other cases the fons et origo mail perhaps remains in a latent
state during the whole of life, and the real nature of the case is
detected only on a post-mortem examination. How often does
it happen, however, that a new and unexpected light is thrown
upon an obscure cerebral disease of long standing by the sudden
appearance of some gouty affection of the smaller joints; and
how often, too,does the persevering administration of some specific
remedy cause the disappearance of perplexing cerebral pheno-
mena. Modern pathology has shown in a very satisfactory
manner that most diseases (omitting, however, fevers and other
so-called zymotic maladies) are due not to accidental or avoid-
able causes, but to constitutional predisposition or to the
operation of some poison latent in the system. In some cases
the materies morbi has been acquired by the habits of the
patient himself, but in many others it has been inherited by
him from his ancestors, even a generation sometimes intervening
between the original taint and its repetition in the person of
the grandchild.
Without going to the extreme lengths advocated by some
K 2
250 PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE.
specialists, it is lamentably true that the syphilitic poison, for
instance, may develop itself in an active form, and even go so far
as the destruction of the bony tissues, in adults who have never
themselves suffered from syphilis; and I have myself seen too
many such cases to doubt the reality of their existence. It is
true that in persons of 20 years of age or thereabouts, of either
sex, it is exceedingly difficult to prove a negative in such
matters, but by tracing cases, as I have done, at various ages,
from early infancy to adult age, and by observing and compar-
ing the very same phenomena in the young child, in the elder
child, and in the adult, and giving a certain weight (as is only
fair) to moral considerations, it is, I think, unquestionable that
syphilitic disease may and often does develop itself in many
persons who are quite innocent themselves of having ever run
the risk of acquiring the malady. Of course I here allude to
what are called the constitutional phenomena of syphilis, and
not to the primary manifestations.
These observations are made in connexion with the treat-
ment of several obscure diseases of the brain characterised by
anomalous symptoms ; and probably in the cases where decided
benefit has resulted from the long-continued and liberal ad-
ministration of the iodide of potassium, or . of small doses of the
perchloride of mercury, either taken together or separately,
the origin of the case has been of a syphilitic nature. I re-
member one remarkable case which I attended, in which very
severe cerebral symptoms, apparently pointing to some pres-
sure upon the brain, gave way to the long-continued use, in
large doses, of the iodide of potassium. I recollect another,
where the same salt caused the disappearance of some conges-
tion about the root of the third nerve (as indicated by para-
lysis of the levator palpebrse superioris of one eye) and restored
the patient to health. Another very good illustration is, I
think, afforded by the result of the treatment in the second
case recorded at full length by me in the present paper, and in
which there was evident congestion about the root or the
course of the fifth pair of nerves.
I do not, however, for a moment allege or suppose that all
such cases have a syphilitic origin; all I contend for is that the
possibility of such connexion should be borne in mind in the
study of doubtful cases, and, especially where other means have
failed, that the efficacy of specific treatment should be tested.
I may remark that the effects of constitutional syphilis on the
brain or the cranium might consist of exostoses of the cranial
bones, or of gummatous formations in the brain itself, and
experience teaches that these conditions may be remedied by
the use of iodine and mercury.
PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 251
But there are other maladies, besides syphilis, which may
give rise to cerebral disturbance, and perhaps one of the most
prominent of these is gout, an affection which, like syphilis,
may be acquired or inherited, and which is also alike
amenable to medical treatment. As in the case of syphilis,
the origin of the gouty affection may be obscure, in the absence
of all the usual local manifestations, and perhaps the only light
thrown upon the case may be in consequence of the successful
use of appropriate remedies. As general hints in the diagnosis
of such cases, however, I may observe, in the first place, that
gout is far more common in the rich and well-to-do classes
than among the poor, and hence cerebral disease of a gouty
origin is not often observed among the latter; and, secondly,
that a careful examination, chemical and microscopical, of the
urine ought always to be made, when the undue acidity of the
fluid or the presence of uric acid crystals will afford valuable
assistance in diagnosis. Supposing, then, that the history or
the circumstances of the case point towards gout, it will be
advisable to administer colchicum in moderate and repeated
doses, together with alkalies, more especially potash and lithia,
as these are the solvents of uric acid; and to prescribe change
of air and exercise for the patient, and to enjoin a strict system
of diet.
Of the treatment of the cerebral diseases due to the strumous
or the cancerous cachexia there is but little to be said. The
former category of cases would derive benefit from such well-known
remedies as are known to modify in a favourable direction the
strumous diathesis, such as cod-liver oil, iron, quinine, generous
diet, fresh air, sea-bathing, marine travelling. The category of
cancerous affections affords but little hope as to the success of any
remedial measures. But it is to be remembered, as I have before
observed, that the actual existence of malignant disease in the
brain can in most cases, in the living body, be only a matter of
conjecture, and it may always be hoped that the malady is of a
less formidable character. Hence the treatment should be
directed towards the other constitutional ailments to which I
have adverted, and there are few observant practitioners who
have not found in many cases that the most serious symptoms
have given way to therapeutic measures, and the fears of the
existence of malignant disease have been happily dissipated.
The very circumstance of the doubtful character of many
cerebral diseases gives reason to hope for a favourable result,
and this result is by no means so rare as is sometimes imagined.
